ITINERARIVM TOTIUS Sacrae Scripturae: OR, THE TRAVELS OF THE Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Judges, Kings, Our Savior CHRIST and his Apostles, as they are
related in the OLD and NEW TESTAMENTS. WITH A Description of the Towns and
Places to which they traveled, and how many English miles they stood from
Jerusalem.

Also, a short Treatise of the Weights, Moneys, and Measures mentioned in the
Scriptures, reduced to our English Valuations, Quantity, and Weight.

Collected out of the Works of HENRY BVNTING, and done into English by R. B.

LONDON, Printed by I. Harefinch, for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street,
near St. Dunstan's Church, MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable Sr. Hen. Mountague KNIGHT, Lord Chief Justice of the
KINGS Majesty's BENCH.
IT is a true Saying of the Philosopher (Right Honorable, and my very good
Lord) That there is nothing wherein there is Life, but it has either Motion or
Action; and such is the condition of Man, that a greater measure of both is
imposed upon him, to humble him, than upon many other Creatures: The whole
course of his Life being compared unto a Pilgrimage, in which state a man can
presume upon no certain Continuance. For, as a Traveller that intends to
finish his Journey, stays not in his Inn, but desires more to be upon his Way
than in his Bed; so it is with Man, who cannot possess himself in rest, from
the time of his Birth until his Death, and oftentimes is troubled with needless
and unprofitable Labors, to attain unto his Ends; which got, both they and he
perish. Let Alexander, that great Emperor, be a president of this; who with
much Labor, having got a great Estate, enjoyed it but a short time: and you
may read in this Treatise, with what intolerable pains Antigonus Epiphanes
endeavored to establish his Kingdom to him; and yet in the end purchased
little but a lamentable Death. There is none of the Patriarchs, Princes,
Judges, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, or others mentioned in the Scriptures, that
could make evident in the whole course of their Life, any better than a
laborious and tedious Pilgrimage. With what pains did Abraham wander from
Chaldea into the Land of Canaan? How was Moses tormented in the Wilderness,
almost to the loss of his Soul? but absolutely never to come into the promised
Land. And for David, how miserably lived he, when he could not trust his own
Friends? This is the state of man; and to say truth, he differs in little
(beside Reason) from other Creatures; and that either locked up in silence, or
not expressed in some memorable Action, makes him so much the more capable of
Misery; being only able to distinguish of Joy and Fear.

Now that these things may be the more apparent, I have endeavored to collect,
out of the Works of others, this Treatise; wherein is briefly described the
Travels of all the Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, Prophets, Princes, etc. together
with the condition of Cities, Countries, Islands, and other memorable places,
as they are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments. All which, that I might
express that Duty which has a long time lain concealed, I have wholly
dedicated to your Lordships Service; humbly entreating your favorable
Acceptance of my Pains; that so being shrouded under your Honor's Protection,
they may the better withstand the adverse Opinions of such as please to censure
them.

At your Honor's Service, R. B.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT has always been held a matter worth note (gentle Reader) even to the best
Divines, to have the Typographical description of the Towns and Places, as they
are mentioned in the Scriptures; and so much the rather, because by comparing
the Actions of Men with the beginnings and endings of Cities, they might the
better understand the Prophets, and perceive the wonderful Providence of God;
who by his Omnipotency so disposes of Estates, that such Cities and Nations
which have been mighty, and ruled upon the Earth with great Power,
notwithstanding on a sudden, and by unexpected Events, have been utterly
subverted and overthrown. Now, that these things might be more apparent, I
have, in as good and brief a method as I can, gathered out of sundry Authors,
the particular Description of the Cities, Towns, and places, as they are
mentioned in the Scriptures, where they stood, under whose command, at what
time they grew mighty, and how lost and decayed.

To this also I have added a particular Narration of the Travels of all the
holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Princes, Judges, Kings, Emperors, our blessed
Savior and his Apostles: to what Towns they traveled, what memorable Actions
they did in those places; with a short Chronology of the times: that so by
comparing this discourse with any Text of Scripture, you may perceive the time
when those Accidents happened. All which things (I am persuaded) will prove no
less pleasant than profitable, and will give a great light to the understanding
of the Bible. But if you question with me, How it is possible that I should
come to the knowledge of those things, considering that Babylon, Niniveh,
Jerusalem, and most of the Cities of the Holy Land, are long since wasted and
decayed? To this I answer; therein consists the greatness of the Travel,
because I have been constrained to use the help of many Authors, who, amongst
other long and learned discourses, have here and there glanced at the Actions
that were done in the Land of Judaea: amongst which are Strabo, Jerome, de Locis
Hebraicis, Pliny, Livie, Plutarch, and many others, who have described in the
Actions of the Persians, Chaldeans, Graecians and Romans, the State of the Jews
as it stood in those times, with the Description of the Cities and Towns. And
Saint Jerome, who lived in that Country, took a great deal of pains to rectify
these imperfect discourses, which more obscure Authors have labored in, and
left to future ages; that so those which would, might by their diligence and
care, make them useful to inform their understanding, both concerning the State
of the. Jews, and of the obscure meaning of some of the Prophecies.

Also the situation and Destruction of Jerusalem, a thing pleasant and
profitable to know, and no whit unworthy your consideration. How all or the
most part of the Towns, Cities, Countries, Nations, Islands, Seas, Deserts,
Mountains, and most memorable places, are situated from it; how many miles
English they stand distant, what memorable actions have been done in them, and
for the most part where they stood, and how they are at this day.

Besides (to make this a perfect work) you will find after the end of the Old
Testament, and before the beginning of the New; the Discourse concerning the
Weights, Measures, and Moneys which are mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced
unto our Valuation, how they were Current among the Jews, how with other
People, Nations, and Countries: by which means that necessity of commutative
Justice, for which Moneys were principally invented, will be apparent; and by
this means you shall perceive what equality there is and has been used
amongst Nations, for the ordaining of Measures and Moneys; by which you may
perceive, that this Universe being compared together, seems but one large and
spacious Empire, howsoever under diverse Governments.

Again, the Peregrination of our Savior, the manner of his wonderful Nativity,
his long and Tedious Iourneys, the condition of his estate whiles he was upon
the Earth, and (as near as can be guest) at what time he did most of his
Miracles; how he behaved himself when he was betrayed, with a description of
the manner of his death: and the Travels of Peter, Paul, and many other of his
Apostles after his death. All which things I have with much labor compiled
together for your profit, and expect nothing in recompense for my pains, but
your Love. And so I commit you to God.

Yours, R. B.

A BRIEF DECLARATION OF GEOMETRICAL MEASVRES.
A Degree of the Heavens is fifteen German or Dutch miles; one minute is one
quarter of a Dutch mile: so that four minutes make a Dutch mile.

Diversity of miles.
A Dutch mile is four thousand paces: the Spanish miles be very near so long as
the Dutch. A French mile is two thousand paces: a Walloon, or Italian mile is a
thousand paces; so that four Walloon miles make a Dutch mile.

The word Mile is derived from the Latin word Mill; for one thousand paces
make a Walloon mile, as Gualtherus H. Revius writes.

Of Stades or Furlongs.
THE word Stadium in Latin, in English a Furlong, is a measure of ground,
whereof there be three sorts, Italicum, Olympicum, Pyth^cum: That of Italy
contained 625 Feet, which is 125 Paces, half a quarter of an Italian mile. The
second sort was of the Hill Olympus in Greece, where was a Game or Prize kept
by the Princes and Cities of Greece every fifth year, in the Honor of
Hercules, who first began it. This measure of ground, Stadium Olympicum,
contained 600 Feet, that is, 120 paces. The third kind of Stade or Furlong
contained 1000 Feet, which is 200 Paces; whereof happily arose the difference of
Pliny and Diodorus Siculus in describing Sicily.

What a Furlong is.
Fifteen Dutch miles make a Degree, and a Degree of the Heavens answers to
480 Furlongs upon Earth; whereby it is manifest, that 32 Furlongs is a German,
or common Dutch mile.

One Minute equalleth eight Furlongs, which make an Italian or Walloon mile,
the fourth part of a Dutch mile. Two Minutes of the Heavens, or sixteen
Furlongs, make a Dutch mile. Four, half of a Dutch mile. Three minutes equal 24
Stades or Furlongs, which make three quarters of a Dutch mile. Four minutes
equal 32 Furlongs, that is to say, a German or Dutch mile.

The Holy Evangelists, S. Luke, cap. 24 ver. 13. and S. John, c. 11. ver. 8.
reckon the way by Furlongs. S. Luke says, the Town Emaus was distant from
Jerusalem sixty Furlongs: and St. John says, Bethania was fifteen Furlongs
distant from Jerusalem. Whence it appears, that Emaus was distant from
Jerusalem almost two Dutch miles, seven Walloon miles and a half; and Bethania
almost half a Dutch mile, which is a mile, a half, and half a quarter.

Josephus writes, That Mount Olivet was distant from Jerusalem five Furlongs,
that is a little more than half a quarter of a Dutch mile, which is half an
Italian mile and half a quarter. The same Josephus says, That the circuit of
the City of Jerusalem was thirty three Furlongs, a Dutch mile and half a
quarter. Others say it was four miles in Compass, which being understood of
Italian or Walloon miles, make little or no difference, ^eeing it is but the
half of a half quarter of a Dutch mile.

Strabo writes, That the City of Babylon was 380 Furlongs in Circuit, that is
twelve Dutch miles. The Circuit of Samaria was twenty Furlongs, that is half a
Dutch and half a quarter, which is two Italian miles and a half.

How the Romans measured their Miles.
THE Romans measured their miles by Paces, which they call Passus, and that
kind of measuring is done after this manner; Four Barley-corns laid long-ways,
one by the other, make the breadth of a Finger, four Fingers broad make the
breadth of an Hand, four Hands broad make the length of a Foot, which measure
is now extant; five feet make a Geometrical or great Pace; one hundred twenty
five such Paces are a Furlong; eight Furlongs are one thousand Paces or Walloon
mile; two thousand Paces are a French mile.

Ex granis quatuor formabitur unus.
Est quater in palmo digitus, quater in pede palmus.
Quinque pedes passum faciunt, passus quoque centum
Viginti quinque stadium dant: Sed milliare
Octo dabunt stadia; duplicatum sit tibi Leuca.
Four thousand Paces are a Dutch mile, I mean a common Dutch mile, whereof
fifteen are reckoned to a Degree of the Heavens; for the Switzer miles are
commonly a quarter of a Dutch mile longer than common Dutch miles. But through
this Book, by miles we understand common Dutch miles, whereof four thousand
Paces make a mile.

Whosoever will understand St. Ierom. well, de locis Hebraicis, must mark
whether he reckons by Miles or by Stones: The miles specified by him are
Walloon miles, whereof four make a Dutch mile as aforesaid: the Stone whereof
he writes (whereby also they did measure and divide the way) are reckoned six
to a Dutch mile.

To the end that all men that have any little Understanding in Geometry and
Cosmography may make the Tables, and cast them, and at their Pleasure enlarge
or diminish them; I have here for their direction set down the Longitude and
Latitude of the most principal Towns: the former Numbers show the degrees and
minutes of the Longitude, the later Numbers declare the degrees and minutes of
the Latitude.

Long. Latit. SIdon 67.51 33.30 Tyrus 67.00 33.20 Zarepta 67.10 33.28 Kedes
67.14 33.00 Chabul 67.04 33.04 Rechob 67.13 33.14 Abela Betha macha 67.20 32.59
Senim Vallis 97.01 32.58 Carmel 66.35 32.50 Cana major 67.13 33.24 Cana minor
67.52 32.48 Nazareth 66.56 32.42 Tabor 66.45 32.38 Capernaum 66.53 32.29
Bethsaida 66.51 32.29 Corazim 66.53 32.29 Tiberias 66.44 32.27 Magdalum 66.48
32.28 Dora 66.25 32.08 Caesarea Stratonis 66.19 32.25 Lydda 65.43 32.06 Joppen
65.40 32.05 Messada castellum 66.21 31.47 Maerum lacus 66.36 32.25 Sunem 66.33
32.33 Naim 66.35 32.33 Napthalis 67.06 32.57 Bethoron superior 66.00 32.14
Bethoron inferior 65.54 32.00 Gazar 66.10 32.20 Beth^an 66.41 32.23 Endor 66.26
32.27 Megiddo 66.02 32.32 Thebe^z 66.30 32.25 Aphec 66.28 32.32 Gilim 66.25
32.22 Alexandrium 66.23 32.11 Thirzo 66.20 32.13 Zilo 65.58 31.58 Beseck 66.34
32.24 M^chmas 66.06 32.04 Samaria 66.22 32.19 Nobe 65.45 32.03 Gazeron 65.45
31.59 Emmahus 65.54 32.01 Jericho 66.10 31.56 Aialon 65.56 31.57 Anathot 66.01
31.55 Gibea Saulis 66.57 31.55 Kiriath-jearim 65.58 31.55 Jerusalem 66.00 31.55
Bahurim 66.03 31.56 Ephraim 66.08 32.00 Gilgal 66.12 32.01 Esthaol 65.36 31.54
Timnah 65.48 32.03 Zarea 65.51 31.55 Gedor 65.14 31.59 Modin 65.45 32.01
Bethan^a 66.01 31.54 Bethlehem 65.55 31.51 Debir 66.10 31.58 Jarmouth 65.37
31.51 Azecha 65.51 31.54 Lachis 65.51 31.49 Eglon 65.50 31.48 Makeda 65.49
31.52 Libna 95.49 31.50 Debir 65.32 31.46 Bethsur 65.47 31.48 K^chila 65.38
31.47 Mare^a 65.42 31.54 Maon 65.38 31.41 Carmel 65.40 31.44 Ziph 65.38 31.43
Arah 65.45 31.37 Hebron 65.33 31.45 Gerer 65.37 31.42 Kades barnea 65.22 31.29
Adar 65.12 31.32 Carcaha 65.06 31.30 Hasmona 65.00 31.30 Bethsemes 65.55 31.55
Beersabah 65.31 31.40 Siclag 65.15 31.37 Ecron 65.40 31.58 Azotus 65.35 31.00
Astalon 65.24 31.52 Gath 65.23 31.48 Gaza 65.11 31.40 The Towns lying on this
side of the River Jordan.
Dan 67.25 33.08 Jor sons 67.31 33.07 Caesarea Philippi 67.30 32.05 Seleucia
67.17 33.50 Eruptio fluvii ex Samachoniride palude. 67.11 32.44 Capernaum 66.53
31.29 Eruptio fluvii e mare Genezareth 66.43 32.21 Ephion 66.42 32.20 Ennon
66.40 32.16 Gamala 66.55 32.25 Salem 66.37 32.18 Chrit torrens 66.16 31.57
Ostia Jordanis 66.17 31.54 Engedi 66.22 31.43 Zoar vel Sagor 66.17 31.38
Eruptio Zered 66.19 31.34 Towns standing beyond Jordan.
Mirba 66.50 32.20 Astharoth 67.00 32.26 Astaroth 66.57 32.23 Gadara 66.48
32.23 Machanaim 66.44 32.19 Jaezar 66.39 32.12 Hesbon 66.28 32.05 Jabes 66.55
32.21 Ramah 66.51 32.20 Nobach 66.38 32.16 Jachsa 66.28 32.02 Aroer 66.30 32.00
Macherus 66.23 31.56 Minith 66.36 32.66 Midian 66.30 31.55 Didon 66.32 32.06
Punuel 66.39 31.18 Edrei 66.15 32.21 Abela Vinearum 67.00 32.23 Philadelphia
67.10 32.22 Pella 67.03 32.20 Phiala fons 67.43 33.05 Betharan 67.30 32.08
Pisgamons 66.26 32.01 Abarim montes 66.29 31.58 Towns in Egypt.
Memphis 61.50 29.50 Heliopolis 62.15 29.59 Tanis 63.30 29.50 Taphnis 62.30
31.00 Any 60.30 30.10 Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Mercurii civitas magna 61.40 28.55
Mercurii civitas parva 61.00 30.50 Delta magnum 62.00 30.00 Xois 62.30 30.45
Busitis 62.30 30.15 Hes^oe 63.20 29.10 Solis ^ons 58.15 28.00 Iourneys out of
Egypt.
Raemses 63.00 30.05 Pihachiroth 62.50 29.40 Mara 63.35 29.50 Elim 63.45 29.50
Juxt^ mare 63.55 29.45 Paran Promontorium 65.00 29.00 Daphea 64.14 29.46 Alus
64.30 29.46 Raphiddim 64.40 29.53 Sinai mons 65.00 30.00 Hazeroth 65.50 30.14
Zephor mons 65.54 30.50 Mozeroth 64.18 39.04 Hasmona 65.09 31.30 Gidgad mons
65.30 30.20 Jothabatha 65.30 26.40 Habrona 65.30 29.40 Hesion Gaber 65.30 29.20
Sin 66.00 29.56 Hor mons 66.00 30.25 Salmona 66.25 30.40 Phunon 66.30 30.54
Oboth 66.50 31.04 Jeabarim 67.00 31.18 Zered torrens and vallis 66.44 21.20
Didon Gad 66.48 31.32 Almon diblathaim 66.48 31.24 Chedemoth solitudo 66.56
32.00 Beer puteus 66.50 23.00 Marthana Solitudo 66.49 23.00 Nathaleel 66.40
00.23 Bamoth vallis 66.30 32.00 Towns in Arabia Petraea.
Petra 65.40 31.18 Paran 94.30 30.04 Midian 65.30 29.15 Hesion gebar 65.35
29.^0 Elana villa harla vel elath 95.35 29.15 Ostia Nili.
Canopicum 66.50 31.05 Bolbithinum 61.30 31.05 Sibenniticum 61.45 31.05
Pathmiticum 92.35 31.10 Mendesium 62.45 31.10 Pelusiacum 63.15 31.15 Thou 63.00
31.30 Sirbonis lacus eruptio 65.45 31.50 Sirbonis lacus 63.30 31.10 Idem 63.45
31.10 Civitas Pelusium 36.25 31.20 Rhinocorura 94.40 31.10 Some other great
Towns.
Babylon 76.00 35.00 Antiochia 60.30 33.35 Damas^us 68.^5 33.00 Palmira 72.40
35.10 Ur chaldeorum 78.00 39.40 E^bathana 88.00 37.47 Rages in Media 93.40
36.04 Sula in Per^a 83.00 34.15 Persepolis 91.00 33.20 Heccatompilon in Parthia
96.00 37.50 Zaba in Arabia foelix 97.00 13.00 Meroe 61.30 16.25 Haram in
Mesopotania 75.15 36.10 Hircania 98.30 40.00 Ciraenae 50.00 31.20

The Description of the City of Jerusalem, as it was before Titus Vespasian
destroyed it.
THE most holy and beautiful City of Jerusalem was twice destroyed; first by
Nebuchadnezzar the most puissant King of Babylon, who did utterly beat down and
overthrow the City, burning the costly Temple which King Solo^on had built.
After that, Zorobabel and the High Priest Joshua, when they returned from the
Captivity of Babylon, re-edified and built again both the City and the Temple,
in the Year before the Birth of Christ, 535. But the second Temple, which was
built after their Return, was neither so fair nor so great as the first; for it
was twenty Cubitus is a Foot and an half, six Hand breadths, four and twenty
Fingers broad, being in former times the fourth part of the he^ght of a Man:
Cubitus a cubando, the Arm that men use to lean upon, from the Elbow to the
Hand, Victru. lib. 3. Col. Lexicon.
Cubits lowe^ than the former. After that, King Herod, seventeen years before
the Birth of Christ caused the said T^^ple to be broken down again (as Josephus
says) and ^^ected another new Temple in Place thereof, which nev^rtheless, was
not like the first Temple that S^lomon built, as touching the Greatness; but it
was exceeding fairly decked and ador^^^ (...) Gold and Silver; so that in
regard of the Beautifulness ^^^reof, it was a Wonder unto all that came to
Jerusalem. Which Temple (forty Years after Christ's Death and (...)) was also
utterly destroyed by T^tus, the Son of (...) the ^mperour.

I will (...) form of the City Jerusalem, as it was before it was defaced by
(...) of Vesp^^an; and therewithal, I will show how the costly (...) Solomon
placed therein, stood: for, seeing that the two (...) great Molten Sea were not
therein, when our Lord (...) Earth, being broken down by Nebuchadnezzar's (...)
necessary and very requisite to be known how they (...) that the Reader may be
fully satisfied, I will also first (...) of Jerusalem as it was in those Days,
with the chiefest Places (...) Towers, Gates, Houses, Castles, Fountains,
Hills, Valleys, (...) things therein.

How the City Jerusalem is situate, (...) from Germany.
THE (...) is situate in the middle of (...) thereabouts, and Jerusalem is
(...) five hundred Which make (...)
miles: but if you will travel to (...) from thence to Jerusalem, it is five
hundred and ^ifty Which make 2200. Miles.
Miles.

The Situation of Jerusalem, and the Mountains whereon it stood.
JErusalem was four square, and situated upon four Mountains, viz. Mount Sion,
Mount Moriah, Mount Acra, and Mount Bezetha.

Mount Sion was the highest of all, and lay within the City of Jerusalem
toward the South, whereon stood King David's House, or the Castle of Sion, and
the uppermost Town.

Mount Moriah, whereon the Temple stood, with other excellent Buildings and
Towers, was on the East side of the City, within the Walls.

Mount Acra, whereon the lower Town was built, stood Westward in the City,
where Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, Herod, Agrip^a, Bernice, Helena, and other Kings
and great Princes dwelt.

The holy City of Jerusalem may in this manner be briefly described.
THE most holy and beautiful City of Jerusalem (if any would consider the three
principal parts of the World, Europe, Asia, and Africa) stood in the midst of
the World, upon most high Mountains and Rocks, like an earthly Paradise, a
lively Figure of the everlasting City of God. This City being the Metropolitan
or principallest City of the Jews, stood in the Tribe of Benjamin; at the first
it was called Salem, that is, Peaceable: when Melchisedech, the Priest of God,
reigned therein, which he also built after the Deluge (as Josephus and
Egisippus write.) But at that time it was not very great; for it stood only
upon Mount Sion. Mount Moriah, where Abraham would have offered his Son Isaac,
stood without the City, and after that they took it into the City, as when time
serves it shall be declared.

After the Death of Melchisedech, unto whom Abraham paid the Tithes of all his
Goods, the Iebusites dwelt in the City of Jerusalem, and had the dominion of
it, and all the Land thereabouts in their Subjection, called the City Iebus
after their Name; which Name was held a long time, as we read in Josh. 10. Iud.
10. and 2 Samuel 1. But at last Ioab, King David's General of his Army, won it,
and drove the Jebusites out of it, and called it Jerusalem, that is, A Sight or
Vision of Peace. It has also other Names in the holy Scripture; for, in Esaias
29. it is called Ariel, that is, God's ^yon, and Mount Libanus Because it was
made of the Cedar Trees which came out of Mount Libanus.
. The Prophet, Ezechiel 23. calls it Ahaliba, my fixed Pavillion or Tent,
that is, a City wherein God had placed his own Habitation.

The Circuit and Bigness of the City Jerusalem.
THE City of Jerusalem was apiece, and in circumference three and thirty
Which make four English Miles, and a Furlong.
Furlongs, as Josephus writes, which three and thirty Furlongs, make somewhat
more than a Dutch mile. Some write, that it was four miles Compass about, yet
these were not Dutch miles, but Walloon or Italian miles: for four such Italian
miles are a Dutch mile.

Of Mount Sion, the higher City.
MOunt Sion stood Northwards in the City Jerusalem, and was much higher than
all the other Hills that were therein; therefore it was called Sion, that is, a
watch Tower; because from thence one might see the Holy Land, and all the
Countries thereabout: upon this Hill, the upper City was built, which in the
Scripture is called the City of David, because David won it from the Iebusites,
and beautified it with many goodly Houses and fair and costly buildings: but
especially with his house of Cedar-wood, which he termed the Castle of Sion,
which stood Westwards at the corner of the Hill, looking into Bethlehem
Southwards. In that house David dwelt, and therein committed Adultery with
Berseba the Wife of Vriah the Hittite; whose House also with the place of
diverse Privy Counselors and Officers, stood upon the Hill, not far from the
King's Palace, as Josephus writes.

Beneath King David's House, upon Mount Sion, within a Rock, there was to be
seen the Sepulcher or Vault, wherein King David, Solomon his Son, and other
succeeding Kings of Judah, were entombed and buried.

Upon Mount Sion also (toward the East) King Herod had a Garden of Pleasure,
not far from the Fountain called Silo, Nehemiah 3. and there also stood the
Tower of Silo, whereof Luke in the 13 chapter makes mention.

Josephus (in the Wars of the Jews, his first Book, and sixteenth Chapter)
says, That King Herod, under whom Christ Jesus was born, had two fair and
strong Houses or Towers, which he set and made in the upper part of the City
Jerusalem, upon Mount Sion, which were in a manner comparable with the Temple
for Beautifulness, which he called after the Name of his Friends; the one
Caesarea, for Caesar the Emperor's sake, and the other Agrippa, acording to the
name of the noble Roman Marcus Agrippa, that married the Daughter of Augustus
Caesar.

This may suffice to declare the Situation of the upper City, which stood upon
mount Sion, and contained in Circuit fifteen Furlongs, which is about half a
mile. This uppermost City, in the sacred Scripture is called the City of David;
it was also called Millo, that is, Fullness or Plenty, for in it there was no
Want, but Abundance of all things.

Of the Steps which descended down from the City of David* unto the lower City.
MOunt Sion, whereon the upper City of Jerusalem did stand, was such a high
hard Hill, and so steep, that no man could climb or ascend unto it by any way
or means but only one, that is, by steps; for in the middle thereof there was a
great pair of stairs made, which descended from David's City unto the lower
City, into the Valley or Dale of Gates, called Thyroreion, which stairs were
780 Foot That is 206 yards in height.
high, as Johannes Heydonius writes; and beneath, in the Valley of Thyroreion,
over against the Valley of Cedron, at the foot of the stairs stood a Gate,
which was called the Gate of Sion; and they which went up to Mount Sion must
pass through that Gate, and so up those Stairs: but it is thought,
nevertheless, that in some other part of the Hill there was some winding or
other oblique way made, by which, Horses and Chariots, by little and little
might ascend.

Allegorical or Spiritual Significations of Mount Sion.
SIon in Hebrew signifies a sure hold or goodly Aspect; for that from the top
thereof a man might have seen all the Land lying thereabouts; and was a type of
the highest Heavens, or Habitation of Almighty God, from whence he beholds
all things upon Earth; from which Throne and Heavenly Habitation he descended
into this lower Jerusalem, and became our Redeemer and Savior, that so we
being purged by his Blood, from all our Sins and Imperfections, he might bring
us into that heavenly Jerusalem which is eternal Glory.

Of Mount Moriah on which the Temple stood.
MOunt Moriah stood Eastward within Jerusalem, which was a most hard stoney
Hill, from whence, toward the rising of the Sun, men by stairs might easily
descend; but round about on the other three sides it was steep and
unapprochable, like a Stone wall: yet it was not so high as Mount Sion, howbeit
it was exceeding high, extending and reaching 600 Foot in height: and on the
top thereof was a very fair Plain, like unto that of Mount Sion, whereon in
times past Abraham built an Altar and would have offered his Son Isaac for a
Sacrifice, Genesis 22.

At which time, when Abraham obeyed the Commandment of God, intending to have
offered his Son Isaac upon the Hill, and thereon had made an Altar, then the
said Hill lay without the City: but long time after, about the space of 850
Years, when King David had conquered Jerusalem, and driven thence the
Iebusites; to enlarge the City, he compassed in Mount Moriah and Mount Acr^
with a Wall, upon which there stood many goodly Buildings. And amongst other
things worthy Observation, upon this Mount stood the Barn or Threshing floor of
Or Ara^^a.
Araf^a the Iebusite, wherein King David built an Altar, offered burnt
Offerings, and besought the Lord that the Angel of God (whose hand was
stretched over Jerusalem, holding a bloody Sword, and had smitten the City with
the Pestilence) might cease from punishing the same, and the Plague ceased. On
the same place where the Barn of Araf^a the Jebusite stood, King Solomon also
did build the Temple, 1 Paral. 23. 24. Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 23. 24.

An Allegorical or Spiritual Interpretation of Mount Moriah.
MOriah is as much as to say, the Lord's Mirrh, and signifies our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is the true Mirrh and sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God; a
steadfast Rock, an immovable Foundation, whereon God's Church, and the Members
thereof are built, Esaias 28. Matthew. 16. Upon this Rock will I build my Church,
and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Moriah is also expounded to
be Cultus and tim^r Domini, the worship and fear of God; and that in the same
place the figurative Service of God should begin, and continue until the coming
of Christ.

The Description of the Temple of Jerusalem.
THE Temple stood upon Mount Moriah, was fairly built, and artificially
contrived, of white Marble Stones, which were so well conjoined or closed
together, that a man could not see or perceive the Junctures or Crests of them:
and the inner Walls of it were made all of Cedar wood, carved with the
similitude of Angels, Cherubims, roots of Palmtrees, and with flowers of diverse
kinds, gilt all over with pure Gold, and set with precious Stones; insomuch,
that all parts of the upper Roof within the Temple, did shine with the luster
of it. The pavement thereof also was plated all over with fine Gold; so that
all the Temple within, both above, under foot, and on every side and corner
thereof, was gilt clean over: but without, it was of smooth polished white
Marble Stone, excellently beautiful and fair to the Eye, much resembling That
is, an 100 Cubits, which make 50 yards English; so that the Temple was 50 yards
long, 50 broad, and 60 high.
the color of any Pearl, Unit, or Margaret. It was in length an hundred Else,
in breadth an hundred Else, and in height an hundred and twenty Else, as
Josephus writes, in the old Acts and Wars of the Jews, in his fifteenth Book
and fourteenth Chapter.

The Roof thereof was made of thin planks of Olive-wood, all covered over with
Plates of Gold: it was adorned with sharp and plain spikes of Gold, left Birds
should defile it with their Dung. When any man traveled to Jerusalem, and saw
the Temple far off when the Sun shined thereon, the white marble Stones and the
golden Roof thereof, did cast such a Light and reflexing Brightness from them,
that it did make the Beholders Eyes dark and blind with looking upon it.

Within the Temple there was the most sacr^d Quire, which stood at the West end
thereof, the which Quire, was formed four square, that is, twenty Else broad,
long, and high. This Quire was called the Holy of Holies, wherein it was lawful
for no man to enter but the High Priest, and he also but once in a year, which
was on the Feast day of the Propitiatory Sacrifice, to appease God's wrath. In
the middle part of the Quire there stood two Cherubims, made of Olive-wood,
covered all over with fine Gold, whose Faces and Forms were like unto young
Children; the height of them was ten Else; each of them had two Wings, which
were five Else broad; they stood one right against the other, so that with the
innermost Wings they touched together, and the uttermost sides of the Wings
touched the sides of the Quire: their Faces looked toward the East: in the
middle, under the Wings of the Cherubims, was placed the Ark of the Covenant;
but after the Babylonian Captivity, the Ark of the Covenant stood no more
there; for then the Holy of Holies was empty, and nothing seen in the second
Temple but the two Cherubims, as is aforesaid. The Wall of this Quire was of
pure Gold, excellent fair and curiously graven: In this Wall of the most holy
Quire there was a Gate made all of Gold, which had two Leaves or little doors
that opened and shut, very curiously embossed; through which doors men went
into the most holy Quire, where the Lord did answer by Vrim and Thummim; there
the Cherubims stood, and before that Gate there did hang a rich Vail or
Curtain, which was made of fine Silk, woven very artificially, wherein there
was wrought the picture of the Cherubims, with Needle Work of diverse colors.
This was the same Vail which at the Passion of Christ did rent in sunder from
the top to the bottom, to show that then Aaron's Levitical Sacrifices were
abolished, and now every man may freely approach (thorough the mercy of his
dearly beloved Son) unto the Presence of God's heavenly Throne.

Before the most sacred Quire there was builded toward the East, a place
within the Temple containing forty Else in length, twenty in breadth, and
thirty in height, closed up on both sides with golden Walls, which was called
the holy place or Sanctuary of the Temple, wherein no man might enter but only
the Priest, when he offered Incense, and prayed unto God. In the middle of that
holy place there stood an Altar, covered with plates of Gold; near unto which,
the Angel Gabriel appeared unto Zacharias, and brought him the glad Tidings,
That Elizabeth his Wife should bear him a Son whose Name should be John, who
should prepare the way of Christ. At the South end of this Altar, upon the one
side stood the holy Candle-sticks, and at the other end on the other side,
stood a golden Table, whereupon the Shewbread was set. And in this holy place
there stood ten Tables more for the meat Offerings, and ten golden
Candle-sticks more, which were beautified with Lamps, Lillies, and other fair
Flowers. The opening doors whereby men went into the holy place, were also very
rich and costly, made of Gold, with carved Cherubims, Palm Trees, and broad
Flowers thereupon. And before those doors also there were hanging Vails or
Curtains, very curiously wrought. On both sides of the Temple there were
certain Walks or Galleries, which were three Stories high one above another,
and on the right side there stood a pair of turning Stairs, by the which, men
went up to the Chamber of the Temple, and there all the small Vessels, and
other things belonging to the Temple, were kept. The Roofs of these Galleries
were all plated over with Gold, but that part was somewhat lower than the
principal part of the Temple. The Windows of the Temple were wide within and
narrow without. The Gates of the Temple were made of pure Gold, five and twenty
Else high, and sixteen Else broad; but especially the Gate that stood Eastward
in the Temple, was exceeding high, which in the second Book of Kings, chap. 25.
is called the high Gate: and as Josephus says, the said Gate was ninety Else
high, the Doors whereof, were forty Else long and twenty Else broad, gilt all
over, and richly embossed, beautified with Cherubims and precious Stones. The
Wall before this Gate, toward the East, was pure Gold, embossed and curiously
engraven in manner of Vines, with great golden Leaves as big as the stature of
a Man, whereon there did hang the picture and form of Grapes, which were made
of fine Crystal. Within that high Gate also there did hang a Vail or Curtain
as long and broad as the Gate within: This Vail was made of a piece of
Babylonian Tapistry, wonderfully wrought, and made of Silk, beautified with
diverse Colors, of Scarlet, Purple, and Velvet; and as Josephus writes, the
Sphere of the Heavens was wrought therein, but the twelve Signs were not; and
when the Wind blew, the Vail did move like a Vane.

Of the Porches or open Courts of the Temple.
BEfore the high Gate of the Temple, toward the East, there were three Porches
or Courts open, without Roofs, which were made all of polished Stone, with fair
marble Pillars, beautified with all kind of Colors, in which Porches, men
praised and served God.

The first was called the upper Porch, where none but the Priest might enter
when he offered and served God; which Porch stood next unto the high Quire. The
second was called Solomon's Hall or Porch; there the People used to pray, and
in that Court our Savior Christ preached, Ioh. 10. The third Porch King Herod
built, adding that thereto for the Heathen People, which also came unto
Jerusalem to pray.

These three Porches went four square round about the Temple, as the Temple it
self was, and between these Porches there were also spaces left, supported with
pillars of Marble, and close above the head, for men to walk under when it
rained, which were all made of Cedar and Cypress-wood, and of marble stone,
beautified with Gold. But toward the East, right over against the high Quire
of the Temple, there the Porches were broadest and greatest.

Here gentle Reader you may note, that as often as in the Description of the
Temple I speak of certain Else, you must not understand such Else as we use
here in our Country, but only of the Geometrical Else or Elbows, which are
called Cubits, being the length of one foot and a half, or six hands in
breadth, and two such Else or Cubits do contain three foot, which make a yard
of our measure.

The first Temple, which King Solomon built, had but two Porches, as also the
second Temple which Z^r^babel and Ios^uah, or Jesus the Son of Iozedeck made
after the Captivity in Babylon; but that was twenty cubits lower, and enclosed
about with two Porches also. But King Herod Ascalonita, the great King of the
Jews, Son of (...) Idum^^^, sixteen years before the Birth of Christ, pulled
down that Temple, and built a new Temple up from the ground, which was like to
Solom^n's Temple, but that it had three Porches: for Herod built the third
Porch, to the intent that the Heathen People might pray therein, as a Sanctuary
for Pilgrims and Strangers, as Josephus writes, An^iq. (...) 21. ca. 14. and
de Bello Iu^deo, lib. 6. ca. 6. Item Egisi^pus, lib. 1. cap. 35, 36. But some
do think, which is more likely, that the said Herod did but repair and add
Buildings to the second Temple.

And where Josephus, lib. 2 contra Appionem, writes of four Porches whereas
principally there were but three; it is to be understood, that Solomon* Porch
was made with a Wall in the middle thereof, wherein, on the Northside, the
Jewish Women that were unspotted and undefiled, used to pray; and on the other
side (being South) the Jewish Women, who also according to the Law, were
unspotted, prayed; as Josephus says, lib. 6. cap. 6. de Bello Iudaeo.

A particular description of the three several Porches or Courts belonging to
the Temple.
IN the upper Porch, which stood right over against the high Quire in the
Temple, there was an Altar of Brass proportioned four square, consisting of 20
Cubits in length, and 20 Cubits in breadth, extending to ten Cubits in height,
beautified with golden horns, whereon they used to offer burnt Sacrifices of
Oxen, Sheep, Turtle Doves, Calves, and other things. Also, in times past, there
stood the great molten Sea, made by King Solomon, and the two brazen Pillars
which were made with Knobs, Pomegranates, and Lillies, very costly, and most
artificially done; and ten Kettles upon Tre^^^; but those Kettles and Pillars
with Knobs and Pomgranates, and the great molten Sea made by King Solomon, were
carried away by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and broken in pieces: after
which Captivity, they were never seen more in the Temple, for there were no
more made. But the Altar of ^rass with the great horns, whereon they offered
Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, was made again and stood there, as I said before, by
which there stood diverse Tables, whereon they killed their Offerings. In this
Court also there was a goodly Fountain, with the Water whereof, they used to
wash the Blood of the Beasts out of the Temple. For there were certain holes
and gutters between the marble Stones, whereby the Water ran under the Earth,
and through the Earth was conveyed in a Pipe into the Lake Kidron. In this
Court, Zacharias the Son of Barachias was killed, between the Temple and the
Altar, Mat. 23. And Zacharias the High Priest, the Son of Ioiadah, was stoned
to death, 2 Chronicles. 24. It was compassed about with a great Wall, made of marble
stone of diverse colors, wherein there were diverse doors to go out and in,
decked with lofty Towers and pleasant Walks made of Cedar-wood, resembling our
ancient Cloisters. But principally toward the East it had a great Gate of 70
Else or Cubits high, and 25 broad, all covered over with gold, (as Josephus
writes) standing always open, without any doors to shut, that every man might
look into it when the Priest served God. If any man offered any thing, he
brought it to the Priest before the Gate, but might not go in himself. Iere^y,
cha. 26. and 36. calls it the New Gate. Here also was the Chapel of Gemaria
the Son of Saphan, in which Chapel, B^ru^h read the book of the Prophet Jeremy
to the People, Ier. 36. And when the Sun was in Capricorn, it shone right in at
that Gate, and through the high Quire of the Temple to the Holy of Holies (as
Josephus writes.)

Of the second or middle Court, called Solomon's Porch.
THis Court was something lower than the other; for from it to the u^permost,
they went by certain steps, and in John 10. is called S^lomon's Porch; which
(as Josephus writes) was parted in the middle with a Wall, wherein on the
North side, the Jewish Women that were clean and undefiled used to pray, and on
the South the Men, according to the Law Mas^uli eni^n ab (...) one domin^m
in^ocarunt.
: But no unclean person, or Stranger, or Heathen, might enter therein; for, on
the East side thereof, before the steps whereon men ascended into the said
Porch, there stood a Portal curiously made of marble stone, and between it
stood Pillars of Marble, whereon was engraven in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and
Idumaean Tongues, this Sentence, O^nis aliemnigena accide^s ad habitaculum
Domini moriatur; That is, If any Stranger go into the House of God, he shall
surely die. And Herod also caused to be hanged over the Eastern Gate, by which
they came into this Court, a golden Sword, with this Inscription, Peregrinus si
fuerit ingressus moriatur; that is, If a Stranger be so bold to enter, let him
die. So as no Stranger or Heathen might go into Solomon's Porch under danger of
his Life. Here Simeon took the Child Jesus in his Arms, and said, Lord, let now
thy Servant depart in Peace according to thy Word, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation, etc. At the same time also the Prophetess Ann^ the Daughter of
Phanuel, of the Tribe of Ashur, made a notable Prophecy of the Child Jesus to
all the People of Israel, Luke 2. and after Jesus was baptized, in this place
he taught, wrought Miracles, and did many worthy and memorable Actions. The
Apostles also commonly met together in this Court, and here the Holy Ghost
descended upon them. Here stood the Treasury which Heliodorus thought to have
robbed, but was prevented by the Angel of God, 2 Mac. 3. This was the same
Treasury wherein the poor Widow cast the two Mites, whom Christ commended for
the same, as appears, Mark 12. Upon which, St. Ambrose says, Deny not to cast
two Mites into this Treasury, that is, Faith and Grace, since by them thou
shall be made capable of a ce^estial Kingdom; neither flatter thy self with thy
Riches, because thou can give more than the Poor, for God respects not how
much, but with what Devotion thou give thy Reward, Amb. li. de Viduo, and
Epist. li. 9. Ep. 76. And here Christ absolved the Adulteress that was accused
to him, being sorry for her offense; saying, I came not to condemn, but to save
Sinners that repent. Upon which, St. Chrysostom says, Although thou art a
Publican, yet thou may be made an Evangelist; though a Persecuter of the
Church, yet an Apostle; though a Thief, yet of the City of Paradise; though a
Magician, yet thou may worship God; for there is no Sin so dangerous, but
Repentance may obtain Pardon. Not far from this Treasury there stood certain
Galleries, curiously adorned with marble Pillars, the root whereof was plated
with Silver and Gold, and was close above the Head, that when it rained, men
might walk under them dry, and indeed, did much resemble our ancient
Monasteries. The doors of these Walks were covered over with Gold and Silver;
so also was that high Gate whereby men went Eastward into Solomon's Porch, and
was fifty Cubits high, and the doors forty, as Josephus writes.

Of the third Court or Porch, wherein the Heathens used to pray, commonly
called the Hall of the Gentiles, or outward Court.
THis Court was not built by the Kings of Israel, but by Herod, when the rest
of the Temple was re-edified, some sixteen years before the Birth of Christ,
and about six and forty before he began to preach, John 4. It was so spacious,
and sumptuously built, that it amazed the Beholders, containing an hundred
Cubits in breath, and seven hundred and twenty Cubits in length, lying Eastward
toward the Brook Kidron: the Pavement was of Marble of diverse colors, like
the other Courts; the Walls, with the marble Pillars, were five and twenty
Cubits high; and the Walks about it very curiously made, were thirty Cubits
broad. This was called Vestabulum Gentium, where the Heathens as well as the
Jews, might enter and pray. Out of this place Christ drove the Buyers and
Sellers, overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, and the seats of those
that sold Doves, Io. 2. Mat. 21. And it stood something lower than Solomon's
Porch.

All these three Courts were enclosed within high Walls and Walks resembling
our Cloisters, where round about the Temple, at every corner of which, stood
very high Towers, whereon, when the Sabbath day came, one of the Priests over
night went and sounded a Trumpet, to signify that the next day was the Sabbath
(for then there were no Bells.) The Wall of this uttermost Court (as Josephus
writes) was in height (reckoning from the bottom to the Valley of Kidron) four
hundred Cubits, and adorned with goodly Towers, upon the Pinnacles of which,
were built Summer houses and fair Walks, from whence we might see into the
Temple, and clean over the Town. These were called the Pinnacles of the Temple,
and were so high, that when one looked down from them into the Valley, their
eyes dazzled in such manner, that they could not see; as Josephus writes li.
Antiq. 15. ca 14. Upon one of these Pinnacles the Devil carried our Savior
Christ saying, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, etc. Mat. 14. And
James the son of Alphaeus, by the Commandment of Annas the High Priest, was
from thence thrown into the Valley of Cedron, and falling upon a Fullers
instrument died, Ios. Ant. 20. ca. 8. etc. The Gate toward the East was thirty
cubits high, and had doors opening two ways 15 cubits broad (as Ios. writes)
made of pure brass that shone like pure gold and silver, artificially made and
cunningly embossed, insomuch as it was called the beautiful Gate of the Temple:
as Peter and John was going into the Temple by this Gate, they healed a man
that had been born lame from his Mothers Womb, Acts. 3.

When a man went Eastward, the Gates were one higher than another. The first
Gate, or the Gate of the Heathens Court, was thirty Cubits high. The second
that entered into Solomon's Porch, was fifty cubits: the third which went into
the highest and last Court was seventy cubits, and the great high Gate of the
Temple was ninety Cubits high, so that every Gate of the Temple was twenty
Cubits one higher than another: And in in these Gates there were benches made
for men to sit on. There were many other Gates and doors on both sides, some 60
some 20 Cubits broad, all almost made of pure Gold, and of such weightiness,
that (as Josephus writes in his second book to Appius) two hundred men could
scarce open and shut them. Egi^ppus writes, That Vespasian coming before the
Temple to assault it, commanded his Soldiers to burn one of the golden Gates
(which then was shut) that so he might overcome the same, and with a strong
hand carry away a most glorious Victory: for it was wonderfully fortified both
by Nature and Art; it had deep Ditches, lofty Towers like unto Castles of
defense; and moreover, compassed about with Bulwarks and strong Walls, insomuch
that it was not possible to be won but with extreme difficulty and great
labor. When the Gate was fired, the gold that ran from it was in great
abundance: and by this means the Conquest was made easy. This shall suffice to
have spoken of the Buildings of the Temple.

The Allegorical or Spiritual meaning of the Tem^le.
THE terrestial Temple built by Solomon was pattly a figure of our Savior
Christ, and partly of his Church. For when the Son of God suffered the Temple
of his holy Body to be destroyed, and was risen again from the dead, John 2.
then he raised up to us the Christian Church, which is the true Spiritual House
and Temple wherein God dwells, 1 Cor. 6.

The Mystery of the white Marble.
CHrist is the right white Marble Stone which is without spot, And there is no
deceit found in his Mouth, Esaias 53. John. 8. This Stone the Builders refused,
but God chose it out as a most precious, and made it the head of the corner,
that we like living stones might be built upon it, Esaias 21. 8. 1 Pet. 2.

The Mystery of the Gold.
THE Gold and precious Stones in the Temple signified the Deity of Christ; for
in him dwelt the fullness of the Deity; (...), wholly and absolutely; and in him
was contained the Fountain and Treasure of all Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.

The Mystery of the Cedar-wood.
AS the Cedar, Cypress, and Olive-wood was neither subject to putrefaction nor
possible to be devoured with Worms, so the Humane Nature of Christ was subject
to no corruption, no putrefaction, Psalm. 16.

The Mystery of the Cherubims.
THE Temple also is a figure of the heavenly Glory, and of everlasting Life to
come, where the Angels and Cherubims being engraven and pictured to the image
of Man, do represent the Congregation of the blessed Angels and Saints, who in
the presence of the Lord sing a continual Te demn laudamus, Apoc. 4. The two
Cherubims placed upon the Mercy seat in the holy Quire, signify the Old and
New Testament, which contains the Doctrine of Christ; and as their wings
touched one another, so the old and new Testament were joined together, the end
of the one and the beginning of the other, the one continued to the end of the
first World, the other shall continue to the end of the second; both had
relation unto Christ, to whom the Ministry of God was committed.

The mystery of the golden Door of the Temple.
CHrist is the door of Life, by which we must enter into eternal Happiness,
John 10. 14. The two doors signify a twofold knowledge before we can enter
into this Gate? that is, of his Person and Office.

What the Vail of the Temple s^gnified.
THE Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, hanging upon the Altar of the Cross, is
the true Vail that is put between God and us, shadowing with his Wounds and
precious Blood, the multitude of our offenses, that so we may be made
acceptable to his Father, Heb. 10.

The My^tery of the Ark of the Covenam.
THE Ark of God made of Sittim-wood, wherein was kept the pot of Manna, Aarons
Rod, and the Tables of the Commandments, Exodus 25. Heb. 9. represent as well
our Savior Christ as the hearts of the Faithful; for as in Christ's Breast was
contained the Doctrine both of the Law and Gospel, so likewise is it in the
Faithful, though not in that measure. He was the true Manna that descended from
Heaven, to give light unto the World, John. 6. The Tables of the Law move us to
mutual love and new obedience. Aarons Rod flourishing with blossoms signifies
the sweetness of the Gospel, and the Glory of our High Priest Jesus Christ, of
whom Aaron was a Type.

The Mystery of the Golden Altar.
THE sacrificing Altar in the Sanctuary of the Temple, whereon were four Golden
horns, being made partly of Sittim-wood, and partly of Gold, compassed about
with a Crown of Gold, represent the unity of the Humanity and Deity in our
Savior. For as the wood, naturally incorruptible, was beautified with
refulgent Gold; so the Humanity of Christ, not capable of any putrefaction,
Psalm. 16. being adorned with Celestial glory of the Deity, personally united
to the Divine Nature, ascended up into the Heavens, and there sits at the
right hand of his Father, crowned with a Crown of majesty in Eternal happiness,
Psalm. 8.

The Mystery of the golden Candlesticks
THE golden Candlestick with six Branches and seven Lights, signifies Christ
and the Ministers of the Church. Christ the foundation is the chief Priest and
the Light of the World, illuminating us to eternal life, John. 1. The Doctors
and Teachers of the Church are the Branches, by whom Christ inlighteneth his
Church, with the sound and uncorruptible Doctrine of the Gospel, Apoc. 1.
Neither ought they to be separated from Christ, but by the light of their
Doctrine and sincere Conversation be a lanthorn unto our feet, Psalm. 119. that
so their works may return to his glory and the good of his Church. And as all
the branches were united into the body of the Candlestick, so every Minister
and faithful Child of God ought to be united into the Body of Christ, without
any Schismatical dissension or separation. The Flowers and Lillies denote the
Ornament and Graces of the holy Spirit, which Christ has bountifully bestowed
upon his Ministers. The Lights and Lamps do admonish all godly Ministers to a
diligent care, lest the light of Gods divine Word should either by men's
Traditions, or carnal and philosophical Opinions, be either diminished, or by
little and little abolished: but as often as such things happen, with the
sincere Doctrine of the Gospel to be purged and preserved.

The Mystery of the golden Table.
THE golden Table whereon the Shewbread stood, being compassed about with a
precious Crown, signifies the Ministry of the Gospel. For the Bread that is set
before us, is Christ, that Bread of Life which descended out of Heaven, John.
6. and he by the Ministry of the twelve Apostles is mystically offered unto us
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that whosoever eats thereof as they
ought, might have eternal Life. The Frankincense that stood by the Bread,
admonishes us, that earnest Prayers and Godly actions are to be used in the
time of the administering of the Lords Supper. For as Macarius says, if the
Devil was as strong as Mountains, yet at the Prayers of the Saints, he melts
as Wax before the fire. And St. Cyril says, That Christ is the Table upon
which the Bread of Life is set, whereby all the Faithful are nourished unto
eternal Life. And the Crown about this Table is the goodness and mercy of God,
whereby we are crowned, and brought to Eternal happiness. St. Ierom says, That
this Table was a figure of the Table and the Supper in the Kingdom of God, Luke
2. The Shewbread upon the Table is the Son of God, which gives Life unto the
World, John 6.

The Mystery of the golden Vine and the Crystal Grapes.
THE Vine in the East part of the Temple, made of shining Gold, fitly resembles
our Savior Christ, who compared himself unto a Vine, and the Faithful unto the
Branches, saying, I am the true Vine, and whosoever is ingraffed into me shall
have eternal life, Ioh. 15. The Crystal Grapes* do denote the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the works of the Faithful, which are Faith, Love, Hope, Charity,
Patience, Prayer, and works of Grace, all which do inhere unto such as ^^lieve.

The Mystyery of the Oblations and Sacrifices.
ALL the Oblations and Sacrifices of the Old Testament, were Types and figures
of our Savior, That as they were slain for the performance of the Ceremonial
Law; so Christ, for the Salvation of Man was Slain, and made a free will
Offering, by whose Blood and Mediation the sin of Man is pardoned, and he made
capable of eternal Life, Esaias 53. Ioh. 10. Heb. 9. etc.

The Mystery of the upper Court.
THE upper Court was a figure of the Spiritual Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who
has made us all Priests and Kings, and has beautified us with his guiltless
Death, 1 Pet. 2.

The Mystery of the Fountain, and molten Sea standing upon twelve Oxen, in the
uppermost Court.
THE molten Sea and Fountain was a figure of Baptism, and that living Water
issuing from the Wounds of Christ, whereby we are washed from all our Sins; the
La^er of Regeneration, whereby we are made capable of Eernal Life; that Well of
Water whereof if we drink we shall never thirst. The twelve Oxen represent the
twelve Apostles, whose voices have gone through the World (according to that in
the Corinthians) and have carried the Sea of Grace through all parts of the
Earth. Of which Water (says St. Augustine) if thou drinkest but one drop, it
is more effectual to quench the thirst of Worldly and insatiable desires, than
an Ocean of earthly Waters.

The Mystery of the middle Court.
SOlomon's Court, wherein Christ taught, and in which the Jews used commonly to
pray, was a figure of that Church which should be gathered from amongst the
Jews. For from thence he endeavored first to assemble and gather together a
Christian Congregation, according to that which he spoke to the Canaanitish
Woman, Mat 15. I am sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Of the outward Court of the Gentiles.
THis Court signified, That the Gentiles also should partake of the sheepfold
and Congregation of Christ, and be members of his holy Church; according to
that of John 10. I have yet other sheep which I must also bring hither, that
sothere might be one sheepfold, one Pastor, etc.

Of the rest of the memorable Buildings standing upon mount Moriah.
HAving thus described the Temple, together with the several Courts and
Ornaments, all which did typically represent Christ and his Church, I will now
proceed to the rest of the Buildings standing upon mount Moriah. The first and
most memorable was the house of Solomon, which stood just against the Temple
upon the South: it shined so with Gold and Silver, and was so stately and
sumptuously built, that when Queen Saba came to Jerusalem, she stood amazed to
see it. There belonged to it diverse Courts and Walks, in one of which the
Prophet Jeremy was prisoner, Ier. 37. Over against this he made the
Judgment-hall, in which he placed the Ivory Chair, spoken of 1 Kin. 10. He
built by that another house for his Queeen, she that was daughter of Pharaoh, 1
Kin. 7. But when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Jerusalem, all these, together with
the Temple, were burnt and utterly de^aced.

Of the Peol of Bethesda.
UPon the North lay that sheepfold, or sequestered place, called Bethesda, Ioh.
5. which had five porches or Xenodochius, as some would have it: here Cattle
came to drink, and the Priests used to wash their Sacrifices; because no
unclean Beast might come within the Temple, nor any thing that was foul or
spotted be offered upon the Altar. The water was of reddish color, and ran
into that place in great abundance, and therefore it was called the house of
effusion or pouring out. This was the place into which the Angel of God
sometimes descended and troubled the Water, after which, whosoever stepped in,
was presently cured: and here our Savior Christ healed the Man that had been
diseased 38 years, Ioh. 5. This place was made by King Hezekiah, who caused the
water of the uppermost Pool, which was called G^^on not far from mount Calvary,
to be conveyed by Pipes and passages through the Earth into the lower city
called Acra, and so fell into this place, for which cause it was called the
lower Pool. The Allegory or mystery hereof is, That every one of Christ's Sheep
ought to be washed in the Pool of his Blood, before, they can be made fit
Sacrifices to enter into his Temple or Church, 1 Ioh. 1.

Of the Tower or Castle called Antonia.
THis Castle, as Joseph. has it, lib. 6. de Bell. cap. 6. stood between two
Courts of the Temple, at the North-West corner; at first built by the
Machabees, and called by the name of B^ris: but after, King Herod, taking
affection to that place, bestowed great cost upon it, walled it about, built up
sumptuous Towers, and made it very strong; then gave it the name of Antonia, in
favor of Antonius that noble Roman; which Augustus a long time sustained after
their decease.

Of the Hall called Coenaculum Anguli.
THis house stood upon an Angle or Cantle of the Hill, and was therefore called
Coenaculum Anguli: it was very large and spacious, and within had a great Hall,
whereof Nehem. cap. 3. makes mention: and here, as some think, our Savior
Christ ate the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples; but I rather think it was in
the Suburbs.

Of the Tower Ophel, or the dark Tower.
NEar to the Valley of Cedron, toward the East, not far from the Temple, and
near the Castle Antonia, there was builded a lofty and strong Tower or Palace
called Ophel, that is, a place of darkness: it was a very sumptuous thing.

Of Hamea, or the Tower of the Centurions.
IN the Town wall, between the Sheep-gate and the Dung-gate, stood this Castle
Hamea or Centurion, taking the name ^ Centenario numero, i. The number of an
hundred, and was upon the East side of the City near to the sheepfold or Pool
Bethesda, Neh. 3. 12. Here the Centurions commonly kept watch.

Of Mount Acra, and the buildings upon it.
MOunt Acra (as is aforesaid) stood upon the West side of Jerusalem; it was a
very high Mountain, and took that name from the Greek word Acra, a sharp or
high Hill. It was much higher than mount Moriah in times past, till Simon,
Judas Machabeus's brother, caused it to be cut lower, to make it equal in
height with mount Moriah, Between these two Hills lay the Valley Cedron, which
was in profundity 400 Cubits. Upon this Mountain another part of the City was
builded, being strongly fortified, and richly adorned with sumptuous houses, of
which David and Sol^mon were the principal Founders; and was called the lower
City, or the Daughter of Sion. It was so beautiful, that some hold (of which
number are (...) and Eusebius) that it it exceeded the rest of the City. Here
stood the house of Helena Queen of the Adiabeno^s, near about the midst of it,
as Joseph. observes, Li. Bell. 7. cap. 13. which Queen being converted to the
Jewish Religion, built her an house in this City, that she might pray in the
Temple. Here stood the houses of her Sons, Monebasius and Grapta: here stood
the houses of the High Priests Annas and Caiphas, not far from the Valley
Tyropae: King Herod also, that wicked Man who caused the innocent Children to
be put to Death, built him an house here, near about the place where the
Machabees in times past had a Castle; (for they built two, one in Mount Moriah,
another in this Mount.) That in Mount Moriah was after called the Castle of
Antonia, and stood right against the Temple, as is aforesaid. And this being
very sumptuously built, and a Royal Seat, was after the death of this Herod a
Palace for his Successors, Archilaus and Herod Agrippa. Not far off he caused
two fair Theaters to be also built; the one in honor of the Emperor Augustus;
and this on the one side joined to a Tower called Acropolis, (which was built
by Antigonus Epiphanes, on purpose to place a Garrison in, to keep the Jews in
bondage; which Judas Machabeus afterward made level with the ground) and on
the other side, toward his own Palace. It resembled a Semicircle, made all of
white Marble, fairly polished, the Building somewhat low; within, full of high
Banks, one rising above another like Scaffolds, so that the whole multitude
might easily hear or see whatsoever was said or done. It was curiously
beautified with Gold, Silver, and many goodly Pictures; but amongst the rest,
the Battles which the Emperor Augustus had won against his People, were lively
pourtrayed. To this place, as well Jews as Gentiles resorted to see Interludes
and Plays Acted. The other was an Amphitheatre, and stood upon the South side
of the House: it was built round in a whole Circle, compassed bout with high
Walls, large and spacious. Here they used to Fence and to Fight both on
Horseback and in Wagons. And in the fifth year, in honor of Augustus, the
Circensian Games, according to the Rites of the Gentiles, were very sumptuously
performed. On the south side of this Amphitheatre, stood Queen Bernice's house,
Sister to Agrippa junior: it was a very fair and sumptuous Building, little
inferior to King Herod's. This stood in the Market place, and so all along were
very sumptuous and stately Pillars* Here Agrippa himself had also an House, and
over against that, upon the North, stood the Judgment-hall, where the
Sanhedrim, or the Council of the seventy Elders used to meet, to hear and
determine of men's causes. To this place Christ was brought when they asked him
if he was Christ, Luke 22. Here were the Apostles whipped, Acts 5. And close by
this stood the house of Pilate the Praetor, fairly glistering with Gold; in
which house all the Roman Pretors and Presidents for the most part had their
Residence: and here our Savior Christ was whipped, crowned with Thorns, and spit
upon. Not far off from this Pretor's house, stood the Chancery, or rather, as
we term it, the Treasury, a stately and magnificent house, curiously built, and
appointed only to lay Records and common Chronologies in. Here also the
Officers of the Town gave in their Accounts, and Creditors entered their Debts.
This was utterly destroyed by Vesp^tian. Thus much for the Buildings on this
Mount.

Next, the Market place was a thing very memorable, and was so large and
spacious, that in the time of the Wars many great Battles were fought there, as
Josephus says. In this Market place, close by Pilates house, stood a high Seat
or Tribunal, made of fair stone curiously wrought, and for the Eminence of it,
called in the Chaldaean tongue Gabatha; and because it was built of Stone, the
Grecians called it (...), the Latins, Lapidanium; and with us it might be
termed an heap of Stones; Or a well wrought stone.
(for so the word signifies. Here Pilate taking water, washed his hands before
the People, and said, I am innocent of this man's blood: At which they cried,
His blood be upon us and our Children. And after, by Gods appointment,
according to their own wish, fell upon them; for in the same place, and close
by this same Seat, it happened, that Herod wanting money, demanded of the Jews so
much out of their Treasury (which they called Corban) as would pay for the
making of a Watercourse (for he assayed to bring water into the City from a
Fountain some two hundred furlongs off it) but the Jews supposing it a needless
work, not only denied him, but gave him many outrageous and spiteful speeches,
tumultuously flocked about him, and with great clamors pressed upon him, even as
he was in his Seat: wherefore perceiving the danger, and to prevent mischief,
he sent to his Soldiers to apparel themselves like Citizens, and under their
Gowns to bring with them a Dagger or Poniard, and mingle themselves among the
multitude, which they did, observing who they were that made the greatest
uproar; and when Herod gave the sign, fell upon them with their Ponyards,
killing a great multitude. The rest, seeing this Massacre, suspecting Treason
amongst themselves, fell one upon another; and many for fear of loss, or to
avoid future danger, killed themselves. In this very place also, Florus,
General of the common Soldiers, within few years after, upon a small occasion,
made another cruel Massacre, and much more barbarous than the former; for he
spared none, the best of them he caused to be whipped to death, or else
crucified and put to the Sword; and for the Vulgar, spared neither Woman nor
Child. So that within the compass of one day there died of this obstinate and
wicked Nation, above seven hundred and thirty. This outrage was so cruel, that
all Strangers which inhabited within the Town pitied their misery; but
especially Queen Bernice, who, being partly frighted with their shreeks, partly
moved to commiseration through the extremity of their Affliction, endangered
her life to present her self before Florus, and upon her knees besought him to
take some mercy and pity of them, and withdraw his hand of vengeance from the
blood of the guiltless. But the fury of the Roman Soldiers was so fierce, and
the Resolution of Florus so unremoveable, that neither her Tears, not the
present Calamities could persuade him. But, as in such uproars it commonly
happens, she with the rest was in danger of her Safety, and was constrained
the next night, for the preservation of her Estate, to keep a strong Watch,
lest the Roman Soldiers should have done her some violence. Thus we may see a
just revenge of a perjured and stiff-necked People, and that in the place where
the Offense was committed, though at least eight and thirty years after.

In this Marketplace Agrippa had built a Gallery all of Marble, from his own
house to the Judgment-hall; it was covered above, and made with diverse and
sundry Rooms for men to walk in, all burnished with Gold, and called by the
name of Xiston, as Josephus has it. Here Agrippa after this cruel Massacre
made an Oration to the People (Queen Bernice standing by him) to this effect;
That they should forbear to raise any more commotions against the Romans, and
to banish the Seditious out of the City, for that they saw their cruelty;
Joseph. lib. de Bell. 2. Egesip. lib* 2. cap. 8. To this Gallery there joined a
Bridge, which passed over the Valley of Cedron to the Temple. And amongst many
other sair and sumptuous Buildings that were upon this place, there were the
Colleges of the Pharisees, Sadduces, and the Synagogues and Schools for the
Instruction of Youth, which were dispersed here and there among other stately
Buildings; and this was called the lower Town.

Of the Valley of Cedron.
BEtween this lower City and the Temple, there was a deep Valley, extending it
self from the Gate of Benjamin through the middle of the City to the Gate of
Sion. From this Valley they ascended into e^ther Mountain, (that is, Mount A^ra
and Mount Moriah) by certain steps or stairs. These two Hills (as is
beforesaid) were joined together with a Bridge; and this Valley passing between
them, was called by Zephaniah, cap. 1. Machten. In which place, above all the
rest of the Cities, dwelt Merchants, and such as used Commerce and trade, as
appears in the eleventh verse of his Prophecy; Howl ye Inhabitants of the
Low place, for the company of Merchants is destroyed: all they that exchange
for Silver are cut off. Upon which place of Scripture, the Chaldaean Paraphrase
reads it thus, Howl ye Inhabitants of the Valley Cedron. Josephus, in tit.
Bell. 6. c. 6. and. lib. 6. c. 7. calls this Valley by two names; one
Machten, from the profundity; the other Cedron, from the obscurity: for so the
name signifies; and whosoever looked down into it from the Temple, Fogs and
Mists seemed to lie in the bottom of it, like a cloud of darkne^s, such was the
depth of it. There was another Valley which lay between Mount Sion and these
Mountains, called by the name of Tyrexdon.

Of the Mountain Bezetha.
THis place lay Northward in Jerusalem, and between it and the former Hills
were deep Ditches cast; it had two Towns standing upon it, divided with two
Walls, and was commonly called the Suburbs; the name of the one, which lay
nearest to mount Moriah, was called the second City; the other that lay upon
the North, was called Neapolis, or the new Town. In the second dwelt Hulda the
Prophetess, and Zacharias the Father of S. John Baptist, 2 Kin. 22. 2 Chr. 34.
Nehem. 3. Joseph. li. 10. c. 5. It was adorned with many fair and sumptuous
Buildings, among which was that princely house Of Herod Ascalonites, that great
and mighty King of the Jews, in whose time our Savior Christ was born. This
house was sumptuously built, supported and adorned with Pillars of polisht
Marble, and so spacious, that in one room thereof there might stand an hundred
Tables: the Hall also was very great, and richly gilded with refined gold
intermixed with Silver: about it were many pleasant and delectable Walls, goodly
Gardens and Fountains for pleasure: it was compassed with a wall of polisht
Marble 30 Cubits high. And (as Valerius writes) in that house Herod caused
Christ to be mocked, put a long white garment upon him in contempt, and so sent
him to Pilate. Here also was a Prison, in which Peter was kept when the Angel
of the Lord delivered him, Acts 12.

Of the Town Neapolis, or the New City.
THis lay without the Walls of the City, and became inhabited by reason of the
great concourse of People that flocked thither, (for in times past there were
no inhabitants) and stood upon the North side of the Hill. Here dwelt the
Christians, and other Laborers and Strangers: and by all likelihood, it seems
that the house of Mary the Mother of John, surnamed Mark, stood here, which,
because of the continual resort of the Apostles thither, was called the house
of the Church. Hither Peter resorted when he was delivered from the hands of
Herod by the Angel: for thus says the Text, Acts 12. 9. That when Peter had
past the first and second Watch, he came to the Iron Gate which led into the
City, and lo it opened of it self. And from thence he went to the house of
Mary the Mother of John, surnamed Mark. Here also (in my opinion) Christ
celebrated the last Paschal Lamb, because after Supper he went into the Mount
of Olives, for this lying unwalled, lay open for them to go and come at their
pleasure. But afterward in Herod Agrippa's time, it was begun to be compassed
in with a Wall, and before it could be fully finished, the Angel of the Lord
struck him, and he died miserably: Here also stood the Monument of John
Hircanus the High Priest, and of Alexander King of the Jews, as it appears
in Josephus, lib. de Bello, 6. cap. 6. The tops of the Houses in the City
Jerusalem were flat, and covered with fair and plain Roofs, compassed about
with Battlements; upon which they used to Leap, Dance, and Banquet, and such
Recreations as they observed upon their Festival days, were there celebrated.
And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Mountains or Hills whereon
Jerusalem stood.

Of the Walls that compassed the City.
THis City of Jerusalem was so strongly fortified by Nature on every side,
except the North, (for it stood upon high Rocks and Cliffs) that it seemed to
be invincible. And, that that side might be the better strengthened, they
compassed it in with three Walls, and those so strong, that when Vespasian the
Emperor and his Army invaded the City, they had much ado to conquer them. The
first of these Walls was that which Agrippa built, and it compassed in
Neapolis, otherwise called the New Town. At the North-west end of which Wall,
was built an exceeding high Tower of very fair Marble stone; so high, that
standing on the top thereof, a man might see from thence to the Sea, and into
Arabia, and the uttermost bounds of Iudaea. This Tower was called Psephina.

The second Wall was that which divided the two Suburbs; wherein there stood 14
Towers and Gates. This King Hezekiah built, 2 Chr. 32. in a corner of which,
between the West-gate and the Valley-gate, there stood a high Tower, wherein
all the night great fire was made, which cast a light a great way off round
about; so that Travelers passing toward Jerusalem were guided by it in their
way. Of this light we read in Nehem. cap. 3.

The third Wall compassed in the Temple, and all the lower City; in it was
sixty Towers, but the chief of them stood in the East Angle, between the
Dung-gate and the Gate of the Valley, which was called Hananiel, and
signifies, the Grace and Gift of God. This is much spoken of in the Scripture:
upon this Wall King Herod the Ascalonite built three fair Towers; one between
the Garden-gate and the Old-gate, which he called Hippicum, in honor of his
Father Hippicus; the other Phaselum, in honor of his Brother Phasilus; and the
third Mariamne, after his Wives name, who notwithstanding he caused innocently
to be put to death. These three Gates were built of polish't Marble. Pliny and
Strabo say, that this was the fairest and most spacious City of the East; and
for the munition and fortification almost invincible. The Walls of it were all
of white polish't Marble, some 25 or 30 Cubits high* the stones were 20 Cubits
long, 20 broad, and 5 thick, so closely joined, that the junctures could
scarcely be perceived. Many of the Towers also were made of such stones, but
those of the Temple exceeded the rest; for they were 25 Cubits long, 12 broad,
and 8 thick, as Josephus witnesses, lib. Ant. 15. ca. 14. and de Bell. Iud. li.
6. ca. 6. which things being rightly considered, we may easily perceive that
these Walls were very difficult to be destroyed: Neither were the Ditches of
less strength that went about the Town; for they were cut out of hard stones,
at least forty Cubits deep, and two hundred and fifty Cubits broad, which were
impossible to have been won, if God had not helped and assisted the Romans,
filling up those Ditches with the Bodies of those that died of the Plague and
Famine within the Town.

Of the Gates of Jerusalem.
IT had twelve Gates to go out and in: Upon the East side lay five, the first
of which was the Fountain Gate, which was so called of the Fountain Siloah. And
this stood close by the Gate of mount Sion, in which Fountain the Man that was
born blind washed himself at the Commandment of our Savior, and had his sight
restored, Ioh. 9. And at this Gate Christ came riding in upon an Ass, when he
came from Bethania, on Palm Sunday.

2. The Sheep-gate, which was so called of the multitude of sheep that were
driven in by it, to be offered in the Temple (for it stood hard by the Temple.)
Right before this Gate stood Mount Olivet, some half an English mile and a
furlong from Jerusalem, Eastward; by it stood the Garden called Gethsemane,
where Christ was taken* and led into the City through this Gate; to be offered
up like an innocent sheep, for the sins of the whole World.

3. The Dung-gate: this took the name from a Dunghill, because the Rainwater
coming with great power through the City, washed away the filth, and with great
violence, carried it through this Gate into the Pool Cedron. Not far from this
Gate was the Watergate, and stood a little within it.

4. The Valley Gate, which took the Name of the Valley Iehosaphat, and lay not
far from the other Gate. Hereabouts also stood the Dragongate.

5. The Horse-gate, and stood just in the joining of the East and Northpart of
the City: it took the name from the Kings Horses, as appears, Ier. 31. Neh. 3.

The Gates upon the North.
6. The Corner Gate, which stood North-west, 2. King. 14. 1 Chapter 26. Ier. 31.
Zach. 14.

7. The Benjamin-gate, so called, because Men by this Gate went to the Borders
of Benjamin: in this Gate the Prophet Jeremy was Prisoner, Ier. 37.

8. The Ephraim-gate, by which they went to the Borders of Ephraim.

The Gates upon the West.
9. The Rain-gate, so called, because the Rainwater cleansing the streets,
carried away all the Filth, and so past through this Gate toward the West, and
there thrust it out of the City, Neh. 12.

10. The Garden-gate, before which the Garden stood wherein Christ was buried.

11. The Old Gate: before this Mount Calvary stood, whereon Christ was
Crucified.

12. The Fish-gate, so called, because of Sea Fish that came in by it: it was
also called the Brick-gate. Here the Prophet Jeremy broke an earthen Pitcher,
Jeremy 19. And out of this Gate they went to Bethlehem. But on the South side
there were no Gates, for there Mount Sion stood, which was so high and steep
that no Man could go up upon it.

Of the Gates within the City.
THE Gate of Sion, the Watergate; of which two I have already spoken. The
middle Gate Jeremy speaks of, cap. 19. and it is thought it stood in the
middle of City, in the Valley Cedron, not far from the Tower called Mariamne.
The Iron Gate, which opened of it self, when the Angel led Peter out of Prison,
Acts 12. this stood in the City Walls, passing from one Suburb into another:
all these Gates stood within the City. And thus much shall suffice to have
spoken of the Pourtraiture of it.

Of the Springs, Valleys, Fountains, and other memorable Places, as they were
situated near to the City, and how to the four parts of the World.
IN the next place, it rests to show what things worthy memory were about,
and stood near to the City: the first of which was, the Brook Cedron, which
sprung out of a Hill not far from it upon the South, and with great swiftness
ran through the East part of the City, and so between Jerusalem and the Mount
of Olives, to the Valley-gate of Iehosaphat: thence passing through the Cliffs
of Mount Olivet, it ran directly East till it came to the Dead Sea; which Brook
in the Summer time was most commonly dry. The Water of it was something Black,
which color the Valley Jehosaphat (which was very fertile) gave it; and from
thence it was called Nigrescens torrens, a blackish stream. This is mystically
spoken of, in 2 Samuel and Psa. 100. Where it is said, He (that is our Savior
Christ) shall drink of the Brook in the way: which he fulfilled, when he made
satisfaction for our Sins by his Death and Passion, as it appears in the 69
Psalm, Save me O God, etc. Into this Brook ran the Water of Silo, and that
which came out of the Temple.

Of the Mount of Olives and Bethania, which signifies a House of Mourning.
THese two, the one lay upon the East, the other South-west, about half an
English Mile and a furlong from Jerusalem. Of Bethania you may read in Nehemia.

Of the Hill Gihon.
GIhon stood before Jerusalem on the West side, right against the Fish-gate,
and the Old gate, 2 Chr. 22. Here King Solomon was Crowned, 1. Kin. 1. Not far
from this stood the Mount Golgatha, where Christ was Crucified. From whence may
be observed, That as Solomon upon that Hill was Crowned King, so Christ upon
this was Crucified; our Savior and the true Solomon, that made everlasting
peace between God and us.

From this Mount Gihon sprung the Fountain Gihon, and thereabouts also was the
Fullers Field, 2 King. 18. 2 Chronicles. 33. In which place Senacharib and other the
Princes and Ambassadors of the King of Assyria, spoke Blasphemous words against
the Lord, wherefore he slew 185 thousand of them, as appears in the 2 King.
19.

Of the Valley of the Son of Hinnon.
THis Valley lies behind the City of Jerusalem Southward, on the left hand as
they went from Jerusalem to Bethlehem. In this Valley the Jews set up an Idol
of Copper like a King, which they called Moloch, that is, a King of Idols. This
Copper Idol^stood with the Arms stretching out, and under it there was a great
Fire, whereby the Image showed fire-red: and besides that, the more to honor
it, they made a great Fire between two Walls, which burnt for his sake: and
through this Fire the Idolatrous Priests cast living Children into Moloch's
burning Arms, which he with his Arms red hot burnt to Death. And in this manner
the Jews offered up their own Children to the Idol Moloch: and when they did
it, they made a great noise and cry, and beat upon a Drum, that the Fathers
when their Children were offered, should not hear them cry, by reason of the
great noise of the Drums. This Valley was called the Valley of Tophet; for
Tophet signifies a Drum. This was a most gross and fearful Idolatry, and
therefore Christ likened this Valley of Hinnon to Hellfire; for he called it
Gehenna, Mat. 5. That the Jews should keep themselves from this Monstrous
Idolatry, God made a Law, That if any Man were taken committing this kind of
Idolatry, he should forthwith be stoned to death, and not suffered to live,
Levit. 18. and 20. The Valley of Gehennon is often times named in the Holy
Scripture, Josh. 15. Nehem. 11. 2. Paral. 28. 33. Ier. 7. Jerome writes, that
here, by this Idol Moloch, in the Valley of Hinnon, there was a Wood; for the
Water ran out of the Fountain Siloah along by it, and made the Valley Moist.

Of the field of Blood, called Hakeldama.
THis Field of Blood, which was bought for thirty silver Pence, for the which
Judas betrayed our Savior Christ, lay not far from the Valley of Hinnon,
Southward, by the City of Jerusalem, as Jerome writes.

Of the Hill Hameskita, or Offense and Slander.
THis Hill lay South-east, not far from Jerusalem, something wide of Mount
Olivet, so that there was but one Valley between them, and was not altogether
so high as it. Also upon this Hill King Solomon in his old age suffered his
Wives or Concubines to make Idolatrous Temples, wherein he and his Wives
worshipped Idols.

Of the Destruction of this famous City of Jerusalem by TITUS VESPASIAN.
THus have have I briefly set forth the Dignity, Situation and Curiosity of
the Buildings of Jerusalem: together with the Richness of the Temple and
sumptuousness of the Houses; now it rests to describe unto you, the manner and
means how this Famous City was destroyed; surely a thing worthy Wonder
(according to that in Jeremy) Whosoever shall hear of it his Ears shall tingle.
And that it might be the more famous, and the Christians within it might take
notice of the near approaching Desolation, there were diverse strange Accidents
happened, and Visions seen. As first, about some four years before, the River
Jordan was turned out of her course, and was brought into the City Pella: A
while after that, for a Year together, there hung a Comet like a flaming Sword
over the City* and in the Night there was seen a Light in the Temple: And in
the Day when they were at Sacrifice, a Calf brought forth a Lamb. Then about
the middle of the Night, the Eastern Gates of the Temple opened of their own
accord. In the Skies were seen Armies of Men Fighting, and Horses and Chariots
running to and again. And at last there was heard a terrible Voice in the
Temple, uttering these Words, Migremus Hinc; that is, Let us go ^ence. And that
there might be a general Proclamation of this sad and cruel Desolation through
the whole City, one Anani^s the Son of Jesus, a Man poor and Impotent, upon the
Feast of the Tabernacles, ran through all the streets of the City, and crying,
O, a Voice from the East, and a Voice from the West, a V^ice from the four
Wi^d^, a Voice over Jerusalem and the Temple, a Voice over the Bridegroom and
the Bride, and a Voice over the whole multitude of this City. And although he
was Whipped and Imprisoned, and cruelly handled, yet so long as he lived he would
not cease to utter these words, which by somewere judged to foretell the
horrible Desolation which after happened.

For Ti^us Caesar, Son of Fl^vius the Emperor, about seventy years after the
Nativity of our Lord, and about eight and thirty after his Ascension, utterly
overthrew it, even to the ground, about the first day of the Month of April,
and within a year after these signs. For he, taking advantage of the three
Factions which at this time swayed in Jerusalem: One of Eleazar the the Priest,
the Son of Simon; the other of Zilotus the chief Prince which held the Temple;
and the third of Johannes Giscalenus, a cruel fellow, which had the command of
the inferior. City; besieged it, and made this a fit opportunity to further his
Enterprises, while the Seditious and factious People little regarding their own
Safety, gave way by their evil and intestine Wars, to what he intended,
weakening themselves much more by their continued slaughters, than the Enemy by
his Invasion. Insomuch as the whole City, and Temple was filled with dead
Bodies; common Insolences and public Rapines were ordinarily amongst them:
some set fire of the City, others despoiling the Temple, a third for killing
the Priests, even as they were at Sacrifice; all places full of dead Bodies;
and to this, to add a greater measure of misery (without any regard at all to
their future defense) set fire of the storehouse wherein the Corn lay for the
sustentation of the City, and consumed that in one day which had been long a
gathering: by this means it came to pass, that they were sorely afflicted with
the Pestilence through the corruption of the Air, and with Famine for want of
Corn. All these things notwithstanding (such was the cruelty, obstinancy, and
perverseness of this People) could not restrain them from violating the most
Sacred and holy things of the Temple: insomuch as Johannes Giscalenus had a
full determination to have destroyed it, but that he was prevented by the
Romans.

About this time was the Feast of the Passover, and it fell upon the
fourteenth day of April, being the Sabbath; to the Celebration whereof, there
resorted to Jerusalem about three hundred thousand Jews. These the Enemy gave
way to enter into the City; but considering their present necessity for want of
Victuals, upon a sudden drew up their Forces, and so straightly beleaguered
them, that all this huge multitude was (as it were) (...) within the Walls,
where partaking of the former misery, they either di^d by the Plague or Famine.
Whence may be perceived the mavelous Providenc^ of God, that even on the same
day, and in the very same place, where but eight and thirty years before, our
Savior Christ suffered, the Authors of such cruelty suffered a most just and
severe revenge. Now as the Army of the Romans lay upon the North of the City,
Titus drew out a Band of six hundred Horse to ride about, to behold and view
the Walls of the Town: but as he was in this manner wondering at the
sumptuous^e^s of the City, the Jews in great multitudes slipped out at a
Postern-gate, and set upon him so fiercely, that they endangered his Person,
being without Armor; and had he not with great difficulty broke through them,
and recovered the Tower of the Romans, he had bin there slain. But presently
upon this, se^^ng the danger, he besieged the City in three parts; himself, a^
the Emperor of the Army, built a Castle about some two Furlongs from the City*
(...) against the Tower Pse^hina, the other part of the Army was (...) the
Tower Hi^^ieus, not far from the Garden of the Resurrection, and the third part
had their Castle in the Mount of Olives, some five Furl^n^s or thereabouts from
the City. Then did he build Bul^^rks, make Engi^s, and wonderful Devices, for
the battering of the Walls; and combining himself with some of the Jews, upon
the seventh day of the second Month, which answers to the Month of May, with
great difficulty and much labor entered the first Wall, which lay upon the
North, and won Mount B^zeth^ and Neapolis. Upon the twelfth of the same Month
(which was the Sa^^ath day) he entered the second Wall, which divided the
Suburbs* but this was again the same day recovered by the virtue of the Jews,
so that the Jews were constrained to fight upon the Sabbath day, according to
the Prop^^^y of our Savior Christ, Matt. 24. But after, upon the sixteenth of
this Mo^th of May, the Romans again recovered this Wall, and kept it in their
own custody.

Within a while after, in the Month of June, (about this time the Famine growing
intolerable within the Town) Titus, in the space of three day^, compassed in
the whole City of Jerusalem with a Wall, and (...) Towers and Castles, lest any
of the Jews should fly to sav^ t^emselves. Thus was the Prophecy of our
Savior Christ fulfilled, Thy (...) shall compass. thee about and hem thee in
on every side. Josephus was now in the City, and walking upon the Walls,
earnestly entreated the Jews to desist, and no longer to oppose the Romans,
but this was so hateful a speech to many, that they began to fling Darts at
him. And although at this time the extremity of the Famine was so sore, that
many died for want of sustenance, yet all persuasions were in vain; and such
was the Calamity, that as well those as went out, as those that continued in
the City, were in like danger of their lives; for they were either slain by the
Enemy, or else by the Pestilence and Famine; common Injuries, and unmerciful
Outrages still attending upon War.

Their Misery did rather increase than at all lesson it self; for the jealousy
of Treason, the hope of Riches and the madness of the Seditious, distracted the
minds of the Citizens with continual fears, and filled the Streets full of
Murder and daily spectacles of lamentable Tragedies: The Markets were
unfrequented with Corn, the Victuals with Viol^nce consumed and taken from the
true owners. And if it chanced that some one had more than would serve his
turn, though he dwelt in a fair and stately Building, yet the remotest Room and
most unfrequented he made his Tabernacle, and that little which was left, with
great parcimony he consumed, together with his life, till both were ended.
Those that were Fathers and Senators of the People (though before served and
attended with reverence and great state) in this confusion were glad of a small
morsel, though with much contention. The Wife was not ashamed to take away the
Meat from her Husband, nor the Children from their Parents, nor the Mothers
from their Infants: and if it happened that in any house the Seditious seemed to
smell food, with violence they took it, ransacked the rooms round about,
whilst the Master thereof was made a laughing stock and mournful Spectator of
those mischiefs. But according to the condition of Soldiers, whose natural
disposition is to be violent, without any regard either of Sex or Kindred,
committed daily outrages. So that here you might have seen the Mothers weeping
over their dying Infants, whilst their husbands were massacred in the streets
by the Seditious.

The increase of days were the increase of Torments, and the daily wants of
such as were in Power, being unaccustomed to such evils, caused them to invent
new means to satisfy their desire, and practice unusual Torments, for no other
purpose but to find out Sustenance: yea, such was their insatiable ^^irst of
blood, that they spared not him whom but now gave them all he had, and lest he
should live to cumber the City, either hang him up by the heels till he died,
or else pulled out his Entrails with a sharp Iron. Those that went out in the
Nightime when the Romans were asleep, to gather herbs, the Seditious would
meet, and with violence take what they had got from them: And though with tears
and lamentations, and prayers upon their knees, they entreated but for one
part, a small moiety of that which a little before they had got with danger of
their Lives, yet they would not give it them, and escaped fairly if they went
away with Life. These Insolences were committed by the common Soldiers, upon
such as were the meaner sort of People. But for the rest that were either
Honorable or Rich, they became a Prey to the Captains and Commanders, some
accused as Traitors, and that they would have betrayed the City to the Romans;
others as Fugitives, that they would forsake the City; most under pretense of
one crime or other, despoiled of that they had. And they whom John had thus
oppressed, were entertained of Simon, and whom Simon had injured, they were
entertained, by John; both drunk the blood of the miserable Citizens like
Water, so that the desire of Rule was the cause of their dissension, the
concord of their evil and cruel actions.

There was an infinite number that perished in this City by Famine, insomuch as
houses were filled with the bodies of Infants and Children. The Angle-gate was
thrust full of dead corpse. The young Men that remained walked up and down the
City like Images of Death. The old Men were destroyed by the Pestilence, the
contagion of which disease taking away their Senses they became Mad. And of
such as died among the Seditious, their Wives or kindred had not room nor time
to bury them, but as they were putting them into the Grave, they also dyed. Yet
for all this, amongst this Miserable Society, there was no Weeping, no
complaining, no deploring of their necessities; for the violence of the Famine
having dried up their radical moisture, the fear of grief was taken from them:
and such as had most cause to lament, and were most pricked with the sting of
sorrow, before they could utter their grief died, the beholders not shedding a
Tear: so that through the whole City there was a still silence, and a thick
mist of Death and Destruction didfully possess the same.

But the Seditious were much more cruel than these were oppressed with Calamity
and Sorrow; for some opened the graves of the Dead, and taking out their Bodies
thrust them through with their Swords; others to try the sharpness of the Edge
of their Weapons, would fall upon those that were yet alive, and when they had
slain them, go away laughing at their pleasure. So that, as Josephus says,
there was scarce any mischief under the Sun, but was both practiced and
tolerated in this City. To conclude, by Sedition the Romans conquered the
City, and Sedition conquered the Romans,

All love and modesty, through this extreme and intolerable Famine, became
utterly extinct, and the dearest Friends would kill one another for a crust of
bread; the fairest Lady commit open Adultery for a little sustenance. Their
food was extraordinary, and such as men did loath and hate; some would feed
upon Snails and Worms, others of old hay chopped small; many eat Corn either
unground or made into Bread: some plucked the Meat from the spit raw, others
with their teeth gnawed off the leather off their Shields; and that very mouth
which cried, Crucify him, Crucify him, let his Blood be upon us and our
Children, was constrained to feed upon three sorts of Dung, that is to say,
Doves dung, Ox dung, and Man's dung. Moreover, many were constrained, for mere
necessity, to feed upon the dead Bodies of such, as a little before Died,
partly by Famine, partly by the Pestilence. And to conclude, for very madness
eat up their Gold: for some of them being taken as they were flying for their
safety, by the Romans, in their Excrement was found Gold, of which the
Soldiers hearing, and supposing that all the Jews had been full of Gold,
through covetousness of that gain, in one night killed 2000 of them, and ripped up
their Bellies; and had not Titus Caesar, by a severe Edict, forbidden these
cruel and unheard of slaughters, there had been many more slain.

To make an end of this unheard of Famine, I will repeat one memorable Example
out of Josephus, of an Outrage which a Mother committed even upon her own Son.
There was a Woman of the Inhabitants beyond Jordan, whose name was Mary, of the
stock of Eleazar, and of the Town Bethezor, which signifies, the House of
Hysop; she was of a Noble and rich Family, and amongst others, went to
Jerusalem, in hopes of Safety, where she was likewise oppressed with the misery
of this Siege; for as soon as she had brought all her Riches and Substance into
the City, which she had before beyond Jordan, this Famine growing greater and
greater upon the Inhabitants, the Seditious perceiving that this Woman was well
furnished both with Riches and Sustenance, on a sudden set upon her house,
despoiled her of her Substance, took away her Sustenance, and utterly deprived
her of all means to live. She being pricked with the misery and calamity of the
Times, saw it little prevailed to strive, wherefore with Tears, upon her knees,
she entreated that she might have but some small part of that they had taken
from her, to maintain her self and her Son with life; but the Seditious gave
little ear to her entreaties: wherefore, being moved to extreme anger, she
daily cursed, with contumelious words, those barbarous Villains, that had thus
robbed her of all her means: but when she saw that neither Anger nor Entreaty
could procure Mercy, and through the Town not one morsel of food was to be
found, partly pressed with an extreme necessity, partly with a furious rage,
beyond all nature and compassion, laid violent hands upon her own Son, and
accounted an untimely Death more honorable, than that he should live to be a
Prey to the Seditious, or a Slave to the Romans.

The Body of this Infant she Roasted and Eat: the Soldiers of the Town being
pressed with hunger, smelling the Meat, supposing, that as in former times, they
should have found plenty, with violence broke in upon her, and look what she
had provided, greedily consumed, and compelled her to fetch the rest; which she
did, and when they were well satisfied, she showed them the Head and Feet of
her Son: which they perceiving, loathing the inhumanity of the fact, with
dejected countenance departed. This Famine was so extreme, that one measure of
grain was worth a Talent, that is 600 Crowns. But the Romans all this while did
abound with plenty of all things, and to vex the Jews, they showed them the
great abundance of their store, for the neighboring Provinces sent them
supplies.

After this Famine, there followed an extreme Plague, procured partly through
the stench of the Bodies that lay unburied, partly by the multitude of
Massacres which daily happned, that (as Egis^^^us writes) within the compass
of eleven Weeks, there were carried out by one Gate of the City, 111000 dead
Bodies; yet could they not empty the City, but that they were constrained
either to bury them at the Public charge, or else cast them over the Walls
into the Ditches of the City: which when Titus saw, and that the putrefaction
of the Bodies swam upon the brim of the Ditch, (for it was full with dead
carcasses) fetching a deep sigh, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, he said,
God is my witness, this is not my fault, but the punishment of God upon them.

The City being thus pestered with Sedition, Famine, Pestilence, and War, was
made now a ready prey to the Enemy: and that they might make a f^nal end of
their miseries, Titus caused the Engines of Battery to be brought against the
Walls; and upon the first day of the fourth Month (which answers to our June)
he took the third Wall, which lay upon the North. Upon the fourth of June
after, though with great labor, he took the Tower of Antonia, and in it placed
a Garrison. Upon the seventeenth day of the fourth Month, which was a Fast to
the Jews, Josephus going up to the top of that Tower, made an Oration to
Giscalinus and the rest, to dissuade them from their Rebellion, and cease to
oppose the Romans, but this little prevailed. Upon the twentieth day of July,
the Jews burnt a part of the Porch of the Temple, toward the North, not far
from the Tower of Antonia, lest that the Romans, having got that Hold, should
with the greater facility have conquered the Temple also. Two days after, the
Romans destroyed the whole Porch with Fire, and the Jews helped to pull it down
with their hands: this was none of the three Porches, but a Bulwark of the
Temple. Upon the 25 of July, the Jews filled the Porch toward the West with
Pitch and Bittume, and then made as though they meant to fly and leave the
City, which some of the Romans perceiving, without any command of their
Captains, put Scaling Ladders to the Tower, and began to Assault it, but when
they were most busy, the Jews on a sudden put fire to the Pitch, and burnt
them most miserably; insomuch as Titus pitied them to see their Extremity,
although they were such as did contrary to his command. Upon the last day of
this Month they took the North Gate, which lay toward the rising of the Sun,
and close by the brook Cedron; this they burnt down with fire. Upon the third
of August, Titus commanded to fire the Gate of the Temple, that was all covered
over with Gold and Silver; by this Gate the Romans made a breach into the
Temple, which e're this had been profaned by the Jews: while this gate was a
burning* the Jews stood astonished, and not one of them resisted the Romans.
Caesar and all his Army labored three days to quench this Fire, after which he
called a Council to determine wha^ he should do with the Temple, it was so rich
and sumptuous, that he would fain have left it as an Ornament for the Roman
Empire. But the Jews having got a little breathing, made new incursions upon
the Romans, by which means they could not determine thereof. The 6th of August,
the Soldiers of Titus, without command of their Captains, fired the Temple,
just upon that day which Nebuchadnezzar before time had destroyed it, as
Josephus witnesses, li. de. Bell. 6. c. 26. 27. Caesar would fain have saved
this Temple for the sumptuousness of it, and beckoned to his Soldiers to have
quenched the fire, but they, partly pressed on with desire of wealth, partly being
pricked on with fury and madness, gave no ear to his speeches, but committed
most cruel Massacres, without either regard of age or sex: So that the cries of
the Slaughtered, the sound of the Roman Trumpets, the fierce resistance of the
Seditious, and the Fire furiously burning, represented a most horrible
spectacle: The ground below was covered with dead bodies, many in desperation
threw themselves into the fire, 6000 were burnt in the same Gate, whither they
fled for refuge, and the Priests most cruelly massacred as they were in the
Temple of Jerusalem, the mirror of the World being consumed and spoiled with
Fire and Sword.

After these things, upon the Bridge that passes from the Temple over the
Valley into the lower Town, Titus made a Speech by an Interpreter, to the two
Seditious Captains, gently entreating them to leave off their Rebellion, and he
would spare the City, and commit no more outrages, and such further requests as
they desired should according to reason be granted them; but if they would not
embrace mercy, and cease their violent resistance, they must expect no manner
of compassion, but the very Law of Arms, This they contemned, and made but a
mock of Caesar for all his offers; whereupon, in a great rage, he gave the
signal to his Soldiers, and they went through all the City and set it one
fire. The next day they won the lower City, and with fire and sword consumed
the place where the Records lay, the Court and all the Princely buildings until
they came to that stately house of Helena, which stood in the midst of Acra,
all the houses near being filled with the Bodies of the Dead, and the streets
horribly defiled with the blood of those that were Slain. Within a short while
after Johannes Giscalinus was taken alive and committed to prison.

The inferior City being thus taken and destroyed, about the 16 day of August,
Caesar began to build his Engines, and to batter the Walls of the upper City,
which within the space of 18 days after, with extreme labor and skill, he laid
flat with the Ground, (as Josephus says.) And upon the 7th of September, with
great facility he conquered the City, the Jews of their own accord descending
from the Towers: and the Rom^ns set upon the Walls their Ensigns, with a great
Acclamation, and wasted all the City with Fire and Sword, sparing neither Men,
Women, nor Children.

The eighth day of the Month of September, the whole City was destroyed, and
not a stone left upon a stone, but laid level with the Ground, only the three
Towers that were built by Herod, which were of shining Marble (viz. Hippicus,
Phaselus, and Mariamne) that future Ages, seeing the excellency of those
Buildings, they might judge of the stateliness of the rest. But these also were
after destroyed by Adrianus Caesar.

There died by the Famine and Pestilence an innumerable number, by Fire and
Sword ten hundred thousand: 2000 were found that either killed themselves, or
one killed another; 7900 were taken Captives; of these, all the seditious
Thieves that accused one another, were slain by Frontonius Caesar. Titus freed
many, 7000 were sent into Egypt, with extreme labor to consume and dye; the
Properest and most able were reserved for Triumph; many were distributed
through the Provinces, some were slain by the Sword, and by Beasts, for public
Spectacles; and those that were sixteen years of Age and under, together with
many other, Caesar sold, under the Crown, at thirty for a silver Penny; that as
Christ was sold for thirty Pence, so thirty of them should be sold for a Penny.
With the Riches of this Town Caesar triumphed, rode into Rome with two golden
Chariots, built the Temple of Peace, and there put all the Plate which he found
in the Temple of Jerusalem. After all this, for a full determination of those
Evils, the two seditious Captians, Johannes Giscalinus and Simon the Son of
Giora, were put to most cruel deaths. Thus may we see the grievous punishment
of the obstinate and ambitious, which God permitted to fall upon them for their
Unthankfulness and cruel Tyranny.

How the City of Jerusalem, after this Destruction by Titus Vespasian, was
utterly beaten down, and defaced by Aelius Adr. Caesar, which he re-edifying,
called it after his own Name, Aelia.
THE City of Jerusalem being thus laid level with the ground, for the space of
sixty Years lay desolate, a receptacle for Thieves and Murderers, a fit place
for Wolves and wild Beasts, which resorted thither to feed upon the dead
Bodies. And now Time consuming their Flesh, left their Bones and Skulls to lie
upon the Earth, as in a Charnel-house. Thus it continued until one Benchochab
(which signifies the Son of the Stars) born in the Town of Bethcoron, not far
from Emaus, professed himself to be the Messiah, or Christ. The Jews supposing
this to be true, because of that saying of Numb. 24. There shall a Star rise up
out of Jacob, assembled themselves, to the number of many thousands, and
followed him, with great Tyranny and Cruelty spoiling the Holy Land, and
through all the Country of Judaea, committing many Outrages and Massacres.
Thus they continued for the space of eighteen years, at the end of which time,
Adrianus Aelianus the Emperor, hearing of those Insolences, levied an Army,
and sent them into Judaea, under the Government of Julius Severus, who, in a
pitched field near to Bethcoron, and not far from Emaus, conquered this
Benchochab or Pseudo-Messiah, and with him slew five hundred thousand Jews,
that were deceived by his persuasion. Now when they went to seek for the Body
of this Deceiver amongst the Dead (as says Talmudista) he was found lying with
an horrible Serpent about his neck; intimating how God rejected him that would
seem to imitate his Son; for even as the Serpent deceived our first Parents, so
this Benchochab deceived the Jews, and for this cause they called him Be^cozba,
that is, The Son of Lying. The number of the Jews which in the time of this War
were slain, amounted to 500000 men, besides many others that perished by
Pestilence and Famine. This War happened 64 years after the destruction of
Jerusalem.

After this second Desolation of the Jews, at the command of the Emperor,
(that there might be a final extirpation of the Ancient City of Jerusalem, and
that the words of our Savior might be fulfilled, Lo, there shall not be a
stone left upon a stone, Mat. 24.) the Ruins and Foundations thereof were
dug up, the Stones broken in pieces, the Ground left desolate, and the
Mountains are now become barren, and overgrown with Brambles: And, that the
Name thereof might utterly be forgotten, and as it were rooted out of the
Earth, he set up a new Town, not far from the Hill Gihon, and Golgotha, where
Christ was crucified; which, after he had adorned with many goodly Buildings,
he called it by his own Name, Aelia. In the place of the Temple, he set up a
Church, in the honor of Jupiter and Venus. Just in the place where the Holy
Altar stood, he erected his own Image, upon a Marble Pillar, which continued
until St. Hierom's time. At Bethlehem he erected the Image of Adonis, and to
that he consecrated a Church. Upon the Gates of the City he cut Hogs in Marble,
in contempt of the Jews. Then did he abjure them, That they should not come
within the Walls of the City, not set Foot upon the ground near Jerusalem. This
being done, (as Dion says) he dedicated it to the honor of Jupiter
Capitolinus; and only made it free for Christians and such like to be in it.
This Town at this day we call Jerusalem, although it be situated in another
place, and called by another name.

Future Ages calling the Actions of precedent Times into question, pulled a
great Contempt upon this Town, and so much the rather, because Infidelity and
other Heathenish profaneness was cherished within this City. So that that which
a little before was set up in honor of the Emperor. Aelianus, is now grown
into Contempt. Wherefore Helena the Mother of Constantine the Great, having
command of that Empire, to give some satisfaction to the Universality, caused
those profane Temples and Idols to be abolished, and in their places erected
others. Upon Mount Golgotha, the Church called Golgothanus: upon the Mount of
Olives one, in the place of the Ascension of Christ: and Constantine her Son
richly adorned the Sepulcher, and over it built a stately Temple, all of
Polish't Marble, richly gilt with Gold, so that to this day it remains as the
chief Ornament of the Town. In this man's time, the Jews with great boldness
endeavored to rebuild the Temple, just in the place where it stood before; at
the commandment of the Emperor they were repelled, and in recompense of their
presumption, had their Ears cut off and their Noses slit, because they had
Ears and would not hear, neither obey the Commandment of our Savior.

But as the Emperor was Religious, and endeavored to support Christianity, so
his Successor Iulianus was as full of Impiety and Profaneness; who, that he
might frustrate the Prophecy of our Savior, that Jerusalem should never be
built again, in contempt caused the Jews to assemble together, and with all
expedition restore it to its former glory, giving the uttermost of his help to
their endeavors. But as they were seriously laboring in this Work, of a
sudden there came a great Earthquake, and look what they had built was by that
quite overturned; then Fire came out of the Earth and from Heaven, which
destroyed both the Matter and the Workmen. And that the Jews nor any
Philosphers might impute it to a Natural Cause, there was seen in the Heavens a
Bloody Cross, and upon their clothes Crosses shining like Stars, which the Jews
could by no means wipe off, yet this little prevailed: A second time they
attempted, and as before, a second Earthquake happened, with a storm of Wind,
which came with such extreme violence, that all the stuff which they had heaped
together for this purpose was utterly blown away and destroyed. So that of
force they were constrained to leave off, and acknowledge* that Christ, whom
their Forefathers had Crucified, was the true Messiah. Greg. Nazianzen and
Hierom report, That nevertheless the Jews, even to this day, although it cost
them much money, come yearly to the place where Jerusalem stood, and upon the
day of the Destruction thereof, weep over it. Such was their affection unto
this City.

But these evils were purged with a sudden Invasion (for no crying Injuries nor
profane Insolences against God pass unpunished, but that then or soon after,
a just revenge falls upon them) for Cosro^* Emperor of the Persians, whose
Impudency and Impiety was so great, that he would be worshipped as a God, about
the year of our Lord 615, besieged this Town, took it, and put to death 90000
Christians, carried the Patriarch thereof, together with many others, away
Captive. But Heraclius the Emperor, to punish him for his Pride and Cruelty,
set upon Persia, and with Fire and Sword destroyed the Country not far from
Nineveh, and went away with an honorable Victory. Seroes also, the only
begotten Son of Cosroes, but a little before Invading the Kingdom, killed his
own Father in Prison, restored the Patriarch, and the rest of the Captives
which his Father had taken, to Heraclius: and about the seventh year after he
had Warred upon Persia, he returned to Aelia* with great Pomp.

Not long after, in the year 637, Haumar the Chief Prince of the Saracens,
which was the third from Mahomet, with a great Army afflicted Syria and Iudaea,
conquered their Countries, and in his Victories used great Tyranny and cruelty.
Within two years after he won Aelia, which had maintained a long and sharp
Siege; neither would Zacharias the Patriarch give it up, till he was compelled
thereto by extreme Famine, and soon after died with Grief.

Thus the Town continued for the space of 450 years in the hands of the
Saracens. Then in the year 1012, Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, won it, beat down
the Walls, destroyed the Temple which the Emperor Constantine had built, and
made havoc of all things. Presently upon this, the Turks, which came out of
Sythia by the Caspian Mountains, won the City, and drove thence the Saracens.
Thus we may see that the Saracens and Turks, though they were both of one
Religion, yet for the Country of the Jews fought one against another, and
compelled the Christians to pay them Tribute for the fourth part of the City,
wherein the Sepulcher of our Lord stood, being again restored by the Emperor
Constantine after the Destruction of Caliphas.

The Christians being weary of this Tribute, and of the oppression of these
Infidels, became suitors to Pope Urban, the second of that name, for their
delivery; who in the year 1094 assembled a council at Clearemont in France, and
by the instigation of one Peter the Hermit, stirred up the hearts of diverse
Christian Princes and Lords to make a Croysado; so that 10000 brave and well
mounted Soldiers went into the Holy Land, and for a token of their War, bore
red Crosses upon their Arms.

In the same year there was a great blazing Star seen in the West, and after
that followed a great Plague for the space of two years through the World: this
nevertheless hindered them not in their Design, but that they went their
intended Journey, won the City of Aelia from the Saracens, delivered the
Christians from their Bondage and Tax, and chose Godfrey of Lorrain Earl of
Bulloin, King thereof, whom they anointed in the Temple of the Holy Sepulcher;
but he refused to be Crowned with a Crown of Gold, saying, That it ill beseemed
him to be called King of Jerusalem (the true King whereof was Christ) or to sit
crowned with Gold, in the place where he was crowned with Thorns that was the
Son of the ever-living God: and then chose Arnolphus of Rhodes Patriarch.

In the Month of October, the same year, a blazing Star of a mavelous bigness
appeared toward the South: it seemed to be like a waving Sword, foreshewing,
no doubt, the Destruction of all those that went about to reestablish this
Earthly Jerusalem. Immediately after the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, all
the Christians of the East Countries, upon Candlemas-day, came out of Syria,
but especially out of Antiochia, to Jerusalem, and in the Temple of the holy
Sepulcher consecrated their Bishops and Choristers, and with one consent sung
Illuminare Jerusalem. They took also all the Cities, Castles, and Villages, and
over them set Bishops; created four Principalities, one at Jerusalem, another
at Antiochia, a third at Edissa, a fourth at Tripoly. Also certain Earldoms and
Baronies, as at Bri^o, Zidon, Caesaria,, Galilee, Ioppa, and Ascalon. All these
were appointed to pay Tribute to the King of Jerusalem. All this was done in
the year of our Lord, 1099.

No sooner were these News published to the World, but there was an universal
Croysado through all Christendom, for the conquering and winning of the rest of
the Holy Land, but before they could get thither, they were either slain by the
Grecians, and other Nations, or else died through Famine and Thirst: so that in
them was fulfilled the Prophecy of Zacharias, cap. 12. 3* where it is said, It
shall happen that I will make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all People: all they
that lift it up shall be torn, though all the People of the Earth be gathered
together against it. And verse 9. And in that day will I seek to destroy all
Nations that come against Jerusalem.

This year 1100 died Godfrey King of Jerusalem, of a Fever, upon the Eighteenth
day of July, when he had reigned scarce a year, and was buried in the Temple of
Mount Calvary.

After him succeeded his Brother Baldwin, the first of that name, and the
second King of Jerusalem. This Man reigned Eighteen years in Jerusalem, and
being overcom by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt, after the loss of thirteen thousand
Christians, he had much ado to escape with life. Within a short time after he
died without Issue.

Baldwin the second succeeded his Uncle, and was the third King of Jerusalem. He
began his reign Anno 1118. This man overcame the Turks: and the King of
Damascus had Issue only one daughter named Milesent, whom he married to the
Earl of Angiers, and gave with her the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and died without
heir Male, in the year 1131.

Fulco, in right of his Wife, succeeded his Father in Law, and was the fourth
King of Jerusalem. This Fulco was Brother to the King of England, he Reigned
thirteen years, fought many worthy Battles against the Turks, put 3000 of their
men to the Sword, took many of them Prisoners, and carried them to Jerusalem.
After that, as he was hunting the Hare in Acon, riding speedily, he fell from
his Horse, and was sorely bruised, whereof he died, and left two Sons called
Baldwin and Almerick.

Baldwin the third was the fifth King of Jerusalem, and succeeded his Father,
he won the City of Ascalon, he rebuilt the Town of Boza, (which had been
destroyed) placed there certain Knights Templers; he lost the City of Edissa to
the Saracens, where many Christians were cruely slain. And having reigned
nineteen years, he died without Issue.

After him succeeded his Brother Almerick, who was the sixth King of Jerusalem.
In the time of this King, the Sultan of Egypt gave a great overthrow to the
Knights Templers; which he seeking to revenge, invaded Egypt with a great Army,
besieged the great City of Alcair, but to small purpose; wherefore returning
back to Jerusalem, he shortly after died, when he had reigned twelve years: he
left behind him three children, a Son called Baldwin, and two daughters,
Sibella and Isabella.

Baldwin the fourth succeeded his Father, and was the seventh King of
Jerusalem; who abusing his government, was struck with a Leprosy, with the
contagion of which disease he died miserably in the twenty fifth year of his
Age, having reigned thirteen years. Baldwin, the fifth of that name, the only
begotten Son of his Sister Sibil, by his consent was chosen his Successor, a
youth of nine years old, his Fathers name was William Mountferrat, Earl of
March, who dying, his Mother married one Guy Earl of Lusignan, to whom Baldwin
committed the protection of the Kingdom, and of his young Kinsman till he came
to man's estate. But this young man, within seven years after the Death of his
Uncle, died sitting at his Table, not without suspicion of Poison. Guy his
Protector, by the persuasion of his Wife, and at the Instigation of the
Jerosolimits, took upon him the Government; But Raimond Earl of Tripoly was his
great adversary, for that Baldwin the 4th for his exceeding pride, at the
Instigation of that Guy, had displaced him of all his Offices and Titles in the
Commonwealth. These two striving for the Kingdom, it happened that Guy was
charged with his Kinsmans death, under which pretense Raymond made War against
him. During these troubles, Saladine Sultan of Egypt, taking advantage of this
opportunity, made War upon them both, and with great facility conquered the
Kingdom, and destroyed Jerusalem.

In this year 1187, there happened so great an Eclipse of the Sun, that at Noon
day the Stars were plainly to be seen. Soon after this, Raimond and Guy were
both taken Prisoners, and thirty thousand Christians cruelly put to the Sword.
After this, the Saracens sacked the Town, threw the Bells out of the Steeples,
made Stables of the Churches; only the Temple on Mount Golgotha stood
untouched: for the Turks and Saracens honor Christ as a great Prophet.

And thus the new Kingdom of the Christians in Jerusalem ended, which was upon
the second day of October, in the year 1187, after it had continued in their
possession 88 years. During the continuance of this Kingdom, there were many
horrible Visions, and strange Signs and Wonders seen both in Heaven, on Earth,
and in the Air; foreshewing (no doubt) that God was not well pleased with their
actions, which sought to restore that Kingdom of Jerusalem. For, My Kingdom
(says Christ) is not of this World.

And although after that, there were many Kings that by all possible means
endeavored to recover and restore the same, and for that purpose have leavied
many great Armies, and undertaken many tedious Journies; yet all their councels
and determinations came to nothing, so that God, so often as they undertook any
such Expedition, either stayed their Armies, oppressed them with War, or else
plagued them with Famine, in such an extreme measure, that with very hunger they
have been constrained to eat their Horses.

Frederick Barbarossus may be an Example of these Calamities; who with a great
Army making an Expedition to Jerusalem, as he was traveling through Asia
minor, his Horse started, and flung him into the River, where he died miserably
e're he could be saved. Many other Princes besides, in the like enterprise came
to the like ends; for they were either destroyed by the Barbarians, with the
loss of thousands of their men cruely slain, or utterly destroyed with
unnatural Diseases or untimely Deaths.

Now when the Emperor Frederick, the second of that name, had besieged and
brought to great misery the Sultan of Egypt, and the Knights Templers had done
the like to Damieta; Corderio the Sultans Son beat down the Walls of Jerusalem,
and had it not been for the great lamentations and earnest Entreaties of the
Christians, he would have destroyed the City; but for their sakes he left
standing Solomon's Temple, and the Temple of the holy Sepulcher; for at this
time Christians inhabit in them.

Within a while after, about the Year 1228. Frederick, the second of that Name,
Emperor of Rome, went to the Holy Land with a great Army, and came to
Ptolomais, otherwise called Acon, where staying a while, he made a League with
the Sultan of Egypt for ten years, regained Jerusalem without drawing Sword,
and was there crowned in the Year 1229. keeping at that time in Jerusalem a
Royal Easter. This man fortified the Christians with a Garrison, rebuilt
Nazareth and Ioppa, and so returned into Italy.

In the Year 1246, Cassanus King of the Tartars, being persuaded by the Sultan,
with a great Army invaded Iudaea, won Jerusalem, caused the Christians to be
cruelly slain, beat down the Holy Sepulcher even to small pieces, and left but
little standing. It was after this destroyed by Tamerlain King of the Tartars,
and by Mahomet, the second of that Name, Emperor of the Turks. But the Monks
had leave to build up the holy Sepulcher again, for the which, they paid to
the Sultan or his Deputy a yearly Tribute.

In the year of our Lord 1516, Selymus Emperor of the Turks, about the twenty
fourth day of August, near to Damascus, overcame Campson Gaurus Sultan of
Egypt, in a cruel War, and put to death many thousands of his Men; and the
Sultan himself seeking to save his Life by Flight, was miserably slain. This
Selymus conquered the Holy Land, Syria, Damascus, and all the Countries
thereabouts; and as he went through Iudaea, leaving his Army at Gaza, with a
few of his Soldiers he went to Jerusalem, that he might see with his Eyes that
place which was made so famous by the ancient Writers, and was so often
mentioned in the Old and New Testament. But when he came, he found nothing but
a ruinate and waste place, barren and rude to look upon, inhabited by a few
poor Christians, and they also held in great Contempt and Bondage, paying a
great Tribute to the Sultan of Egypt, for their Liberty and holy Sepulcher, as
P. Iovius writes. But after that Selymus in that place had done his Offerings
and Sacrifices to his God Mahomet, seeing the Priests and Christians pressed
with extreme Poverty, out of his singular Mercy and Compassion, gave them a
large and sumptuous Gift, when he had stayed but one day and one night in the
Town. The next morning before day he went with all expedition to his Army at
Gaza, and from thence into Egypt, where he besieged the great and famous City
Alcaire, and in the year 1517. took it, conquered all the Country, utterly
extirpated the Sultan, and went away with an honorable Victory and rich Booty.
From this year even till now, the Town of Aelia or Jerusalem is under the
Jurisdiction of the Turks. Thus may we see how often, and with what miserable
Calamities this City has been afflicted, even since the first Destruction by
Vespasian; which makes evident the great Judgment of God not only upon the
Jews, but also upon the Earth where they inhabited, for their Infidelity and
unmerciful Cruelty.

The Description of Jerusalem and the Situation thereof as it is now in these
times.
THE former Incursions and common Desolations leaving this Town ruined and
spoiled for want of Inhabitants, it became a Desert and forsaken place; only
some few Christians, either out of the zeal of Religion, or for vulgar
Ostentation, to show that there had been a Town, dwelt there: and thus it
continued until the year 1542. at which time, Solomon the Great Turk, either in
respect of the strength of the place, or in hope of profit, or else to get
himself a Name, with great Cost and Labor re-edified it, set up many stately
Buildings and sumptuous Houses, beautified it with two costly Temples, the one
the Temple of Solomon, and the other the holy Sepulcher; enlarged the extent
thereof, and seated it upon high Hills. After all this, compassed it about with
a spacious and thick Wall, and upon that placed many strong and stately Towers,
wherein there stands eight Gates, viz. the Fish Gate, the old Gate, S. Stephens
Gate, (so called, because they say S. Stephen went out by that Gate when he was
stoned) the Angle Gate, the Dung Gate, the Sheep Gate, the Golden and Fountain
Gates. Thus the ancient City, and that which the Emperor Adrian built, being
both destroyed, in another place is set up again. So that between both, this
new City stands, and the first City begins to be again inhabited.

Of the Temple of the Holy Sepulcher.
THIS Temple lies upon the West within this new Town, at first fairly built by
the Emperor Constantine, but destroyed by Caliphas Sultan of Egypt: then by
the Emperors of Constantinople rebuilt, which continues to this day. It is
round in the proportion, adorned with seventy nine Pillars thirty foot long;
the Wideness, by the Diameter (besides the Pillars) is seventy three Feet,
leaded above, and upon the top of the Roof stands a Lanthorn, by which the
Light comes in: This Lanthorn is very curiously glazed. In the middle stands
the holy Sepulcher. To this joyneth the Church in Mount Golgotha, and serves
instead of a Quire. It stands something lower, but all under one Roof. The
place where the holy Sepulcher stands is four square, eight foot long, and
eight broad, hewn out of a Rock, and covered with Marble; there is a little
door in the East part of it very low, by which men go into it, and within that
the Sepulcher it self stands upon the North side, made of gray Marble, 3
handfuls high, and 8 foot long. There are no Windows for light to come to it,
but over there hangs continually nine Lamps burning, whereby it receives
Light. The Vault of this Sepulcher is divided with a Wall; the outward is both
of the same Proportion and Length as the inward, but that which is without
seems to be an Entry to the inner Cave where Christ was buried: and there (as
some say) even to this day is found a piece of the Stone which the Angel rolled
from the Grave before the Resurrection; the other part of the Stone (howsoever
it came there) lies upon Mount Sion. But some think that the Armenians carried
it thither, because upon it they have built an Altar. In this inner Cave there
hangs nine Lamps to give light unto them that enter in by the East; so that in
the inner and outer Vault there stands eighteen Lamps. The Mount whereon
Christ was crucified seems to stand upon a Rock of Stone, whitish and
something blushing. It is distant from the Holy Sepulcher a hundred and thirty
foot. The place where the Cross stood was an hard Rock, eighteen steps in the
Ascent, and answers to nine and twenty feet. The hole where the Cross stood
is about the roundness of a man's head in Latitude; and if a man might believe
the Monks thereabouts, they say also, that in that place is to be seen the
color of our Saviors Blood even to this day. Upon the left hand of this there
stands an Altar made of Marble, and over that a sumptuous Chapel, paved, and
covered with polished Marble, gilt and adorned with refulgent Gold, the Walls
whereof are very curiously wrought and gilded. In the Church, upon Mount
Golgotha, they also show part of a Pillar naturally black, speck'd with red
Spots, where they say Christ was whipped, and make the Vulgar believe that these
Specks are the drops of Blood that fell from him. The other part of this Column
was carried to Constantinople, as it was thought. In this Church, Godfrey,
first Christian King of Jerusalem, and the rest of his Successors lie buried.

Of the Temple of Solomon, as it is at this day.
THIS Temple lies toward the East, and was built by the Christians just in
the same place where the former Temple stood, at the time when the City was
rebuilt and enlarged. The body thereof is very high and spacious, and built of
polished Marble, adorned with most exquisite and curious Workmanship, very
artificial and glorious both within and without, insomuch that the polished
Stones cast a singular beautiful and resplendent Luster. Above it is covered
with Lead, and was built up at the cost and labor of the Grecians; in the Roof
whereof, the Turks place an half Moon, as they usually do in all such Churches
wherein they come and have Authority. The Turks and Saracens have this Temple
in great Reverence and Devotion, they adorn it (according to their Custom) with
diverse artificial Pictures and Emblems. They will suffer no Christians to enter
into it, nor any Jews, upon pain of Death. And if it happens that at any time
they go into it, they first wash themselves with Water very clean, then put off
their Hose and Shoos, and so go barefoot. This Temple they call the holy Rock,
and in the body thereof there hangs seven hundred Lamps, which burn Night and
Day. In the midst hereof there stands a certain little Rock, every where
indented with Iron, near to which, not any of the Saracens or Infidels dare to
approach or touch, although there come many very far to visit it: for they
believe that there were many memorable and worthy things done in that Rock:
they think that Melchisedeck the first Priest of the great God, offered Bread
and Wine upon it, Genes. 14. and that here the Patriarch Jacob saw the Ladder
which reached from Heaven to Earth, Genesis 28. which indeed happened not in
Jerusalem, but in Bethel, as the Scriptures witness. Further they believe, that
upon this Stone David saw the Angel of the Lord standing with a shaken Sword
when he struck the City with the Pestilence, 2 Samuel 24. and that the Priests of
the old Testament offered upon this stone their Sacrifices to the Lord, which
were devoured with Fire from Heaven. All which things do utterly differ from
holy Scripture.

The Jews also are of Opinion, That the Prophet Jeremy, about the time of the
Captivity of Babylon, in this Stone hid the Ark of the Covenant, until such
time as the Lord brought the People back again from the Captivity: which is
contrary also to the Books of the holy Scripture; for, 2 Match. 2. it is said,
it was hid in the Mount Nebo, where Moses stood when he saw the whole Land of
Canaan. Also the Turks say, that Christ sat upon this stone when Simeon took
him in his arms and blessed him. Here also he sat in the midst of the Doctors
when he was but twelve years of Age, Luke 2. which also differs from the
Scripture; for this was not the Body of the Temple, but in the middle Court, or
Solomon's Porch, which sometimes was taken for the Temple, because it joined to
it. And diverse Circumstances of the Scripture do seem to make this evident,
because here Christ taught, and here the People usually met together, as
appears, Josh. 10. and Psalm. 72.

About the Temple of Jerusalem there is a fair Plain, much resembling our
Churchyards, all paved with marble stone. To this there is adjoining a fair
Church covered with Lead, and was sometimes called Solomon's Porch; but after the
Christians had won Jerusalem, they gave it the Name of St. Mary's. The Turk
keeps burning in this daily eight hundred Lamps, and it is much greater than
that of Solomon's Temple. The Sultan of Egypt also about an hundred years
before, built a little Church or Moscho close by Solomon's Temple, wherein are
continually burning eighty eight Lamps. There is a Vault under the Temple of
the blessed Virgin Mary, of such an extraordinary Greatness, that six hundred
Horse may easily be placed in it. And thus we may see the Temple of Solomon and
City of Jerusalem not only to be in the power of the Turks, but also profaned
with the blasphemous Doctrine of Mahomet. And also we may here behold the
Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy place, where sometime was the
Ark of the Covenant, Dan. 9. Mat. 24. and the Prophecy of Jeremy is fully
finished, cap. 19. This place shall be unclean like unto the place of Tophet,
where they did sacrifice to the Host of Heaven, and unto other strange Gods.

Of other Buildings within the City of Aelia, which is now called Jerusalem.
MOunt Sion is placed toward the South of Jerusalem, where even at this day the
Monks undertake to show the Ruins of David's Tower, the Sepulchers of the
Kings of Israel, and many other holy places. But P. Orosius, and other
Historians write, How in the time of Adrian Caesar there happened a great
Earthquake, in such a terrible manner, that the Mountain of Sion, with the
Sepulcher of David, fell down, and were utterly defaced. Further, all true
Historians do write, That Adrian the Emperor did so much deface the City, that
he left not a stone standing upon a stone; nay, not a whole stone, but all were
broken into small pieces; and yet notwithstanding Pilgrims are so mad and
blind, that they go thither with great pains to seek those holy Places, where,
when they come, with the expense of a great deal of time, in recompense of
their pains, are made a laughingstock to the Kings of Jerusalem, and find
nothing but feigned and supposed holy Places and Buildings: since the words of
our Savior manifest, That there shall not be a stone left upon a stone, which
shall not be broken to pieces. And Borchardus the Monk says, That the Romans
caused the Temple and other Princely Buildings, together with the Mountains, to
be thrown down, and cast into the Valleys, with which being filled, there
remains not so much as an Emblem of the old City. From whence may evidently
appear, That those Places which are now shown to Pilgrims by the Monks of
Jerusalem, are merely suborned and feigned, on purpose to deceive them, and get
their money. They are very simple therefore that go to Jerusalem, to seek their
Salvation in such places. And as for the Sepulcher (as is aforesaid) the
Tartars beat it all in pieces; so that this Monument of our Lord is not to be
found upon the Earth. Wherefore our Savior Christ is no more to be sought
among the dead, but in the Sacred Monument of his holy Word, for there he has
promised to make evident his Divine Presence, etc.

Of the Sects that are in and about the Temple of the Holy Sepulcher.
IN and about the Church which is built over the holy Sepulcher, upon Mount
Calvary, there are at this day many of diverse Nations and Countries which
inhabit, of diverse Opinions and Religions. And although they differ in material
Points of their Faith, yet would they be all Christians: of which number, there
are some Latins, Greeks, Abissines, Armenians, Gregorians, Nestorians,
Surians, and Iacobins.

The Latins for the most part are such as we call Franciscan Monks,
Observants, or Friars. These have the keeping of the holy Sepulcher, and look
to it very diligently; where sometimes they make a certain number of Knights of
the Noble Order of St. John's Templers, with many Ceremonies and great
Solemnities. These Knights are girt with a Sword all gilt, hanging in a red
Velvet girdle; a Chain of gold is put upon them worth about an hundred
Hungarian Ducats, at the end whereof hangs a Jerusalem Cross of gold. This
kind of Cross also they are permitted to wear upon their Arms and Clothes; then
have they a pair of gilt Spurs with Velvet tyings. But before they are admitted
into this Order, they must swear upon the holy Sepulcher to maintain and defend
the Doctrine of the Pope.

The Graecians that are there be also Monks, and do inhabit within the Temple
of the holy Sepulcher; but they have the keeping of the place where our Savior
Christ was crucified, and differ from the Romanists. For they believe first,
That the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and not the Son. Secondly, they
give the Sacraments in both kinds. Thirdly, they hold not the Pope to be Head
of the Church. Fourthly, they deny Purgatory and Prayer for the dead. Fifthly,
they sing Mass in their own Language, that every man may understand it, but
they observe seven Sacraments as the Romanists do. They teach men to pray to,
and call upon Saints; they yearly observe two strict fasting days, and eat no
Flesh upon Saturdays.

The rest of the Graecians that are through the East parts, leave Marriage
free, as well for the Clergy as Laity, and condemn the Latin Priests because
they marry not. They allow no graven Images in their Churches, but in some
places of the Churches they have fair painted Pictures hanging. They approve
not the Pope, but have a Patriarch for their high Bishop, which Patriarch is
greatly reverenced, and much honored in Constantinople.

The Abissins be such as are of Prester John's Government: their Complexion is
brown, their Habitation is in the Temple upon Mount Calvary, on the East side
of the Church door: They also approve not the Pope, but allow Priests to marry,
and give the Sacrament in both kinds; yet there are many Sects and Opinions
among them, forbearing those Meats forbidden in the Old Testament; they
circumcise both Male and Female, which the Jews do not; they observe our
Saturday for their Sabbath; they baptize their Children with Fire, of which I
will speak more hereafter, in the description of the Town of Saba.

The Armenians are Christians, and come out of Armenia; their Dwelling is in a
Chapel upon Mount Sion, near to St. James his Church; they deny the Pope to be
Head of the Church; they minister the Sacraments in both kinds; their Priests
marry; they forbear the meats forbidden in the Old Testament. They have a kind
of Custom to whine and cry by the Graves of the dead; upon Twelfth day they
keep a great Feast, and the next day begins their Lent, which they keep
strictly, and eat neither Eggs nor Fish, nor any living thing during that time:
they observe Wednesdays and Fridays; they preach, sing, and say their Service
in their own Tongue; they deny Prayer for the dead, and Purgatory; they all
wear Hats with blew Hat-bands.

The Gregorians are Christians that dwell by the great City of Trapezunta upon
the Euxinian Sea. Their Priests marry, but if their Wives dye they must not
marry again. They dwell in Jerusalem, in the Church upon Mount Calvary, where
Christ, after his Resurrection, showed himself like a Gardner unto Mary
Magdalen.

The Nestorian Heretics, who now are found in great numbers in Ninevie, which
at this day is called Mossell, and in other places thereabout, do yet hold the
Heresy of Nestorias their Master, and teach, That Christ had two Natures, and
that he has two Persons, and that Mary was not the Mother of God, but that she
bare Christ who was man only: about their Hats they wear flesh-coloured
Hat-bands. Some of their Priests are found to dwell in the Temple of Mount
Calvary.

The Surians follow the Grecian Christians, touching the most of their
Opinions; they respect not much their Religion; for in regard of their Poverty
they are forced to work for day Wages under the Turks. Some of them also dwell
in Jerusalem in a Church called S. Marks, which stands in the place of the
house where John Mark dwelt, where the Apostle Peter knocked when the Angel led
him out of Prison.

The Sect of the Iacobins are resident in a Chapel which stands behind the
Sepulcher. They take that name of Jacob the Heretic, who was a Disciple of the
Patriarch of Alexandria; they are wavering and unconstant among themselves, and
are here and there found in Iudaea, Egypt, and Barbary, divided into many
Sects; for some of them hold with Eutichus and Macharus, who ascribe one Nature
to Christ, which is the Godhead, and deny the Manhood. Some of them
circumcise their Children, some baptize them with Fire, and make a Cross upon
their Faces. Of this fiery Baptism you shall read more hereafter in the
description of the City of Saba.

Hereby you may note, how the Temple of the holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem is
filled with many Sects, who altogether give and pay Tribute to the Emperor of
the Turks; whereby you may see, that Christ will be no more sought in the holy
Sepulcher, but rather in the holy Evangelists, where he suffers himself to be
found by all those that seek him with a pure Heart.

Of the Sects of the Jews.
IN these our times the Jews do inhabit in Jerusalem, and are divided into many
Sects, that is to say, Pharisees, Saducees, Essaes, Genisteis, Morboneis, and
Meristeis. The Pharisees took that name from the Interpretation of the Law, and
is derived from the Hebrew word Parasch, which signifies to expound: so that
Pharasei is as much as to say Doctor, or Expounder of the Law: they approve of
Moses and the Prophets; they hold the Immortality of the Soul: but of Christ
and the principal parts of his Doctrine, of the Law, of Sin, and of Ceremonies,
they have many ungodly Opinions and Expositions. They feign that the Law was
instituted by God for outward Discipline; that sin is only outward
Transgression and the violating of men's Traditions: they hold there is no
Original Sin, but that men may perform the Law, and merit everlasting Life;
besides many other things, as Washings, Fastings, offering gifts in the Temple,
and such like Ceremonies; of which there is no Commandment extant in the
Scripture. Read Mat. 3, 59. 12, 5. etc. Mar. 2, 3. 7. etc. Ioh. 3. 7, 8. etc.
Acts 15. 23. etc.

The Sadducees give themselves an honorable Title, being derived from Zedukim
or Zeddikim, calling themselves just, from the word Zadock, he was just, and by
Amphetresim is not unproperly derived from Dicai^o, or Dicaios, signifying
justus: and by Prothes^n in Latin, Iudex a Judge. So that Zaddik or Zadducaeus
signifies a just Judge, which would judge all others, but they themselves were
without offense: thus the worst men got the best Names. They only allow the
five Books of Moses; they dream the Messiah should be an earthly King; they
believe the Souls of men to be mortal, and to perish with their Bodies; they do
not believe the Resurrection, nor that there are either Angels, Spirits, or
Devils.

The Essaes had rather be called Students, taking their Name from Asa, under
which Title, they would seem to reprehend, and amongst other things, avoid the
profane Liberty of the Sadducees, and approve not the arrogant dissimulation of
the Pharisees; but that they tech more Divine and profitable Precepts. These
live a Monastical Life, unmarried; their Goods are common; for the most part
they practice Physic: in their Assemblies, the ancientest of them read some
part of Moses's Law, or some of the Prophets; all of them, both young and old,
at certain times of the day, say Prayers. They have no new kind of Doctrine,
but embrace the Priesthood of Moses: They dwell in the Deserts and utmost parts
of Iudaea near to the Lake Asphaltites, and in the garden of Balm near Jericho,
where the ancient Prophets Elias and Eliseus had their Schools, whose Disciples
were called the Children of the Prophets. These three Sects began in Judas
Maccabaeus's time, Joseph. l. 3. c. 18.

The Genisteis are said to be those that do certainly affirm, that they are of
the Posterity of Abraham, although they have lost their Genealogies, and cannot
prove it. These call themselves Great and Noble, and are of the stock of those
that in the Captivity of Babylon married the Wives of other Nations; of which
you may read in Nehem. So that they are half Gentiles, half Jews, and account
themselves to be of the Nobility.

The Morboneis very solemnly observe the Sabbath, which many others, that are
Flatterers of the Turks and Saracens, do not: there are a great company of
these; for almost all the Jews do very superstitiously celebrate the Sabbath:
and therefore they take their name partly from a Multitude, and partly from
Usury; for Merebech in Hebrew signifies a Multitude, and T^rebah Usury.

Meri^teis are those Jews that divide the Scripture, and say the Prophets spoke
not all with one Spirit; and what they list they make Scripture, and what they
list they leave out: and therefore the Graecians call them Meristein, which
signifies to divide.

There are also others in these our times that are Jews too, but they are
called Samaritans, which only approve of the Mosaical Law, and reject the rest
of the Scriptures and Prophets. These are so called from Keeping; for this word
Schamar properly signifies to preserve or keep a Speech in heart, and has
therefore a certain Congruity and Consonance with the Latin word Sermo: so that
Schamar in Hebrew, and Sermo in Latin, are much what of one signification.

But all the Jews, except the Sadducees, have one Faith; they think they may
fulfill the Commandments, and by their own works be justified and purchase
eternal Life. They deny the Trinity and Christ, and do believe that their
Messiah is yet to come, and shall bring them back again into the Land of
Promise.

Of the Saracens and Turks which inhabit in Jerusalem: of their Faith and
Religion.
THE Saracens are a People of Arabia the Stony; of the Posterity of Ishmael the
Son of Abraham, which he begat of Hagar: from whence they are rightly called
Agarins, notwithstanding they had rather be called Saracens. Others call them
Saracens, a Saraca, which is a part of Arabi^ the Stony; It seems therefore
that these People took their name from a Principality; for Sarar in Hebrew is
the same that Principatum gessit is in Latin, or if you will, Principatum
obtinuit, which signifies (to obtain Principality.) And therefore the Saracens,
or Sarazens, may be said Princes or Captains, whose Principality extends it
self far and near: but Agarins signifies Perigrinators; for Gor or Gar is as
much as to say a Pilgrim.

These People combined themselves with Mahomet that false Prophet, born of
obscure Parentage: his Fathers Name was Abdiminech, of his Wife that was of the
Family of Ishmael, or of the Saracens, born in Arabia the Stony, (and as it is
expressed in their Alcoran) upon the 21 day of September, according to our
Account, about the year of Christ 570. He took his name from a tumultuous
Confusion: for Hamah signifies tumultuatus est; he has been tumultuous; and
Hamam, tumultuando disturbavit, he divided by Contention. From hence Maimo
signifies tumultuor, a Contender, and Maiomai, concitor, a Rebel. From whence
may be gathered, that Mahomet is an ominous and seditious name. Whilst he was
in his Infancy he lived with his Father: after, being of a prompt Wit, he
served one Abdomoneplis a Merchant, in whose Service, conversing with
Christians and Jews, he got a smattering knowledge of the Old and New
Testament, and many Acquaintance; amongst which, was one Sergius an Arian Monk,
a man very well affected of this Abdomoneplis. Abdomoneplis died, and by the
Per^uasion of this Monk, Mahomet married Cadican his Wife, although she was
fifty years of Age, and by her had great Riches: she soon after also died, and
left Mahomet all that she had. He on a sudden, being lift up to this height of
substance, grew very ambitious (for he was naturally proud, wrathful, a Thief,
a Whore-master, a most impudent Adulterer; and wheresoever he came made havoc
of all things.) This man, by the help of the Saracens and others, affected the
Kingdom of Arabia, which within short time after he obtained, entering Mecha the
chief City thereof, upon Thursday the 15th of July, Anno Dom. 622. and by the
help of two Jews, and this Sergius, wrote that blasphemous Law of the Alcoran,
falsely professing himself to be a Prophet; and began cruelly to oppose himself
against all neighboring Nations and Cities.

The Alcoran takes the name from Splendor or Brightness; for, Al in the
Arabic, is as much as Karan in the Hebrew, and that signifies to s^ine or cast
forth a brightness. This Alcoran contains a blasphemous and detestable Law,
written in the Arabian Tongue, without any order or color of Knowledge,
teaching manifest Lies and execrable Blasphemi^s against God; and for the most
part, the Pleasures and Delights of this World: for he does deny that there is
one eternal Essence of the Deity, and the holy Trinity; our Savior Christ they
one while call the Son of God, and another while, the Soul or Spirit of God.
They deny his Deity, but say that he was a holy man, born without a Father, of
the chaste and incorruptible Virgin Mary. And although he was before all
beginning, yet they believe that he was not begotten, but created before all
other essential Creatures, by the Eternal God. Also they say he was not
crucified, but some other in his place; and therefore the Salvation of man not
to consist in the merits of Christ, but in our own proper Works. And that the
Jews might embrace the Alcoran, they retain Circumcision, which is commonly
done when the Children are thirteen years of Age; about which time, Ishmael was
circumcised. They forbear the meats forbidden in the Law; they have many Wives
at one time, they tolerate a Bill of Divorce, and affirm, that after the
Resurrection men may have many Wives, and with them banquet, surf^t, and use
pleasant Recreations, with diverse such Errors and vain Trifles, which for
brevities sake I omit.

That he might the better persuade men to embrace and believe these his Lies
and blasphemous Doctrines, he very cunningly seemed to confirm them with many
false and feigned Miracles: and amongst the rest this was one: Having taught a
white Dove to put Corn in his Ear, whilst he was preaching to the People, it
chanced she came and sat upon his Shoulder, and putting her Bill into his Ear,
according to her accustomed manner, he persuaded the People that it was the
Spirit of God, which delivered him the words of the Law. A Bull also, taught
after the same manner, at his Voice came before him, and kneeling down did him
reverence, with the Alcoran tied upon his horns; which he affirmed was come
from Heaven and brought that new Law. Then did he make diverse horns of gold and
silver, and filling them full of Milk hid them in the Earth; after which, in a
great assembly he caused the same places to be opened, and told the people that
these signified plenty and abundance to all such as kept and observed that Law;
but the Violaters thereof should be punished with Death: together with many
other such like idle and foolish Miracles, (which would be too tedious to
recite) that he might make the People believe that it came from God. And being
afflicted with the Falling Sickness, gave it out, that then the Angel Gabriel
told him the Law, making this likewise a means to further his designs; but
after, viz. upon the eighth of June, Anno Dom. 632. and in the 61 year of his
Age, he died miserably of this Disease, after he had reigned in Mecha ten
years; and Enbubizer or Abud^char his Father-in-law, succeeded him in the
Government, who built in his honor a Church, and in that put his Sepulcher,
both stately and sumptuous.

The Turks also embrace this Doctrine, and joined their forces with the
Saracens: they extended their Empire under Mahomet the third, into Asia,
Europe, and Africa. They derive their Name (as I suppose) from Cruelty; for
Turca signifies a cruel Destroyer, or an armed Enemy, being derived from the
Hebrew word Tarach, that is, to effect his purpose. From whence, they are not
improperly called of the Gr^c^ins (...) to vex and make weary; or else from the
Hebrew word Tachaera, which signifies a shield; and from the Greek word (...)
and (...), to put on a Shield, and to arm themselves: for the Turks are armed
Enemies, and Destroyers of the whole World: and by Ezekiel are called Gog and
Magog, cap. 38. and 39. of Magog which was the Son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. and as
some think, inhabited the North parts of the World. Pliny places them in
Bospherus, Cimmerius, Scythia, etc. which lies toward the East. But indeed
they have often changed their Residence, and have come into Persia, Armenia,
Syria, Palestina, Arabia, and cruelly destroyed them, until they had conquered
Constantinople, and got a great part of Europe; and have infe^ted the minds of
all the Inhabitants of those parts, with their Manners, Slaughters, and
Rapines, according to that blasphemous Law of the Alcoran. They first afflicted
those Parts about the year of our Lord 760. Constantius Copronius being then
the Emperor of Rome; since which time, they have conquered a great part of the
World.

A Relation of the Travels and Peregrinations of the Saints and holy
Patriarchs, as they are severally mentioned in the first Book of MOSES.
And first, of the first Man, Adam.
ADAM the first man, took his name from Adamah, which signifies red Earth,
because he was made of the red slime of the Earth: therefore the Latins derive
Homo from Humo; also the Graecians from (...), which signifies the Earth. But,
when Man was laid open to all Calamities, Miseries, yea and Death, the Hebrews
called him Enosh, which signifies, a mortal and miserable Man: for this
Attribute to Man agrees with the word Nosch, which signifies to be sick of a
deadly disease. There are some that think that Man was made in Syria near to
Damascus, because there is found much red Earth. Others say near to Hebron, a
City in the Tribe of Judah, and there also lies buried; for in a Cave near that
place, lies much red Earth, which the Inhabitants, even to this day, show unto
Pilgrims: but this is nothing to the purpose, since we know that Man was first
created, and then brought into Paradise, Genesis 1. and 2.

Of Paradise.
PAradise, which in Greek is (...), and in Hebrew Pardes, signifies a pleasant
Garden plentifully furnished with fruitful trees, but principally Myrtle-trees,
which bears a kind of Berry of a very delectable taste: for this Hebrew word
seems to be a compound, that is, of Parah, which signifies to fructify, and
Hadas, a Myrtle; of the fruit of which tree, there is made a certain Wine
called Myrtle, or Mulberry Wine: the mystery hereof is, that Christ is that
Tree of Life, that fruitful and pleasant Myrtle, whereby we are rais^d up unto
Eternal Life, Genesis 2. Apoc. 22. Mat. 11. Luther calls Paradise, in his
discourse of Germany, a pleasant Garden, Eccl. 2. Munster, an Orchard: and in
the Bible it is called Eden, a place plentifully furnished with all things
necessary for the procuring of Pleasure and Delight. The Grecians call it
Hedone, which signifies an extraordinary delectable and pleasant place; for in
it there was great Abundance of all things, as well of Trees, Fruits, Herbs,
and sweet smelling Flowers, as of Beasts and Fowls of the Heaven. Into this
place God put man, to dress it and keep it: But where it stood, and whether it
be now upon the Earth, there are diverse Opinions: The Romani^ts hold, that it
is placed in the East, without the Tropicks; others would have it under the
Equator, because it is a very Temperate Region: but Experience tells us, that
there it is very hot and scorching: Others think it stands upon the top of a
high mountain, free from all the violent motions and impre^sions of the Air, in
which place, they hold Enoch and Eliah are yet living. There are others that
assign the whole East part to be Paradise, and that there were some peculiar
places most fruitful, of which they think was Syria, Damascus, Arabia Foelix,
Egypt and Iudaea, in which Part man was put. They also say, that the Tree of
Knowledge stood upon Mount Calvary, near about that place where Christ was
crucified, so that he made satisfaction for sin in the same place where sin was
first committed: And this I hold to be the better Opinion, and that it remained
till the Deluge, kept in the custody of Angels, at Gods appointment, and by the
Flood, together with other Creatures, was abolished.

And for that Saying of our Savior to the Thief upon the Cross, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, is not to be understood of the Earthly Paradise,
but of the Heavenly, the Place of the blessed Angels and Saints, where God with
his Divine Majesty fills them with the Light of Righteousness, and quickens
them with Eternal Life. This place St. Paul calls the third Heaven, and that
Heavenly Paradise of which the Earthly Paradise is a type, 2 Cor. 12.

Of the four Rivers that watered Paradise.
THE four Floods of Paradise were, Pison, Gihon, Hidekel, and Euphrates, Genesis
2. There was but one Fountain of all these Floods, and this was in Paradise it
self, which in those times was divided into four Streams. But as by the Flood
all the face of the Earth was changed, so likewise were these Rivers and their
Fountains and Channels altered from the places where at first they were;
notwithstanding in memory of them, there remains some Relics, though perhaps
not in the same place, nor springing out of one and the same Fountain, as they
did before. And as the Mediterranean Sea, the Gulf of Arabia, and many other
Meers and Lakes, before the Flood were not, but (by the general consent of all
Learned men) happened by that huge Inundation; the same may be said of these
Rivers.

The head, or beginning of the River Pischon or Pison, is 4800 miles Eastward
from Jerusalem, and is like unto an Arm of the Sea, some twelve or sixteen
miles over, and for that cause it takes the name from Posch, that is,
increasing, or, of an extraordinary greatness: from hence the Grecians call it
Phuson, because it divides it self into diverse Rivulets or Streams. It
compasses in Havilah, it divides that part of the World which we call India,
into the outward and inward: and there is called Ganges, taking that name from
an Aethio^ian King called Gange, as Suidas says. Some say, it is unknown where
it first rises; others say it rises in Scythia, and waters all the
Neighbour-Countreys as it passes along, as Nilus does, and so being dispersed
into thirty Channels, divides India with one of them: the narrowest place of
Ganges is eight miles over, and the shallowest an hundred foot deep, it
brings forth Dolphins, Crocodiles, and diverse other Creatures.

Solinus and Strabo say, That the River Tigris rises in Armenia, a very fair
and clear Fountain; it is distant from Jerusalem six hundred miles toward the
North: it runs with such an exceeding swiftness that Fishes cannot swim
against it, and passes through the Lake of Arthusia, without once mingling it
self with the Water: and for this cause it is called Tigris, which signifies a
dart, and a Beast of extraordinary swiftness and cruelty. This River running
from toward the North and the rising of the Sun, it compasses in Mesopotamia,
and passes by the Borders of Media and Assyria, and after that, of Chaldaea
and Arabia, it there receives in the River Hydas^is, and so joining with
Euphrates, falls into the Lake of Persia. The Hebrews called this River
Chidikill from Chadad, which signifies acute, and Kalal, light, for it is a
swift running Stream: from hence the Graecians call it (...); the Latins,
Celer; the Germans, Ein Zelter, which signifies with us a Horse swiftly
running; for it passes away swifter than an Arrow out of a Bow. Going toward
the East, some thirty six miles from the ancient Babylon, it runs through a
Town called Bagedeth, bordering upon Turkey and Persia, and from thence toward
the Latitude, to a Town called Argentaratus, where it changes the name to
Tigris; in that place it runs so extreme swift, that it will make a man's
head dizzy to look upon it.

Strabo says, the River Euphrates rises out of a Mountain in Arme^ia, called
Nipha, some 300 miles from the City of Jerusalem toward the North, watering
Mesopotamia and Chaldaea, and passing through the midst of that flourishing
City Babylon, divides it into two parts; and after passing through, and
fructifying Arabia, it joyneth with the Flood Tigris, and falls into the
Persian Gulf. Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians, and of Babylon, built a Bridge
over the narrowest place of this River, being some three quarters of a mile
over. The Hebrews call this River Parah, because it fructifieth; and from
thence the Graecians call it (...), or (...), to bear fruit, the Germans,
Fruchter, which in English is, fruitful or pleasant. And therefore St. Ambrose
says, it is derived from Eu^hranein, that is, from rejoicing; for that
overflowing the Fields, it causes them the next year to flourish with all kind
of Fruit and pleasant Flowers. The Water of this River is very foul and dirty,
so that it is unfit to drink; according to that of Jeremy, chap. 2. What
avails it thee to go into Assyria, that thou might drink of the Water of
Euphraters? If a man takes this Water in a Vessel, and let it stand but two
hours, the Dirt and Sand will lie at the bottom thereof two inches thick.
Therefore the Inhabitants near about it are wont to take a great Pot that
holds a good quantity, whereinto putting Water, they let it stand till all
the filth be sunk to the bottom, and so they clear Water to drink.

Nilus takes the beginning from a certain Mountain in Ma^^itania the Lower,
not far from the Ocean, and iss^es from a Lake which they call Nidiles, and
partly from other Lakes, and is increased with the Snow Waters falling from the
Mountains of the Moon in Africa, 3200 miles from Jerusalem toward the South.
Some think it took the name from Nileus a certain King thereabouts; others,
from the Soil which is yearly brought down in the Stream, whereby all Egypt is
made fruitful; from whence some think it was called Servious Nilus, for that it
brings down new Mud with (...). The Hebrews call it Gihon, because it
breaks out of the Earth with great Violence. This River comes through the
Deserts of Aethiopia, and so with great Violence comes into Egypt, where it is
divided into seven Streams, and in times past had seven Gates, the names of
which were Canopi^us, or Heracli^ticus, Bolbitinus, Sebiniticus, Pharmiticus,
Mend^sius, Taniticus, and Palusiacus; the two outward Gates of which, viz.
Cano^icus and Palusiacus, were 160 miles asunder. Appianus says, there are two
ot^e^ Gates called Tineptimi^us and Diolcus: this ninth Gate is divided at a
City and place called Delta, taking the Name from the likeness that it has to
the Greek Letter so called. So that Nilus is divided into nine Gates, by which
nine Gates it falls into the Mediterranean Sea. There are many that think that
Paradise was only in Egypt, and that then it had only but four streams, and
that at the Flood it was confused into nine, and they would seem to prove their
Opinions out of the 31 Chapter of Ezekiel, where he calls Egypt a Garden of
Pleasure. But this differs from the description of Moses, for it is not
sci^^ate in the East, but rather the South from Ierus^lem, and far distant from
the two Eastern Rivers, Euphrates and Hiddikel, by which the holy Scriptures do
principally denote Paradise. Wherefore it may be concluded, that Egypt was only
a part of Paradise, not Paradise it self; and that this River was one of the
Rivers, not all, the Streams of which River, at some times of the year, viz. in
the Summer Solstice, when the Sun is near the Dog Star, begins to swell and
overflow the Banks, by reason of the melting of the Snow which lies upon the
Mountains of the Moon, and so drown all the places near unto it, through the
Land of Egypt, leaving behind it certain Slime and Mud, by which it comes to
pass that the Country is very fruitful, and serves them instead of Rain, at
which time of the Year (for this happens once every year) the People and
Inhabitants of the Country retire themselves to their Towns, Ci^ies, and
Castles, sci^uated upon Rocks, Mountains, and high Grounds, from whence it
happens that they sustain very little discommodity or loss by any such
Inu^dation. They also keep little Boats, whereby they pass from one place to
another, because all their Passages and Foot-paths are then drowned with
Waters. There are many pretty Observations which the People of Egypt were wont
to take notice of in the rising of this Water, for they had certain Staves
whereby they measured the depth of it; if it rose but to twelve Cubits (which
is six yards in height, they then stood in fear of great Famine, so also if it
was but thirteen, for then the Water was not deep enough to make the ground
fertile; but if it rose to fourteen or fifteen, then they were in great hope,
and did not doubt of a fruitful Year; and if to sixteen, they then greatly
rejoiced at their Prosperity, and kept Banquets and Feasts, and were assured
that the succeeding year would be very plentiful; but if it rose above, they
laid aside all signs of Joy, and lived very sparingly, and with great Sorrow;
this great Inundation of Waters fore-shewing Scarcity, and Want, and Famine,
and Pestilence, and Death. And thus Nilus yearly, every year is to them instead
of Rain, for Egypt is without Rain.

In Autumn, at such time as the Sun going out of the last face of Libra,
enters into Scorpio, the Waters of Nilus, by little and little, retire
themselves into their Banks, and the Earth becomes quite uncovered of Water:
about which time, the Country being exceeding hot, the Earth is presently made
dry in all those places, so that in the Month of October they may both till and
sow their Land. In this River the Crocodile and the Ichneumo breed, of the
nature of which two, you may sufficiently read in Gesner. There also breeds the
Pelican, of which St. Ierom says, there are two kinds, one that lives upon the
Water, another that lives upon the Land: these Birds, as some affirm, kill
their young ones upon their Beak, and then leave them lying in their Nest for
three days; at the end of which time, the Female grievously wounds her self
upon the Breast, and pouring her Blood upon her young ones, revives them again.
This Bird may very well be a type and figure of our Blessed Savior, who
shedding his precious Blood upon the Cross for our Sins, after the third day
rose again, and that he might restore us to Life that be dead in Sin, pours
out his Blood upon us, whereby we are made capable of Eternal Life.

Of the Place where Adam and Eva dwelt after the breaking of the Commandment.
Genesis 3.
ADAM and Eva, being driven out of Pradise, dwelt at Damascus, 160 miles from
Jerusalem, as Munster and others write: the Townsmen of Damascus, at this day
show the place where Cain slew his Brother Abel; and it is well to be believed
that this City receives her Name thereby, for Damascus signifies
bloodshedding, or a place which has drunk up Blood.

Of the Place where Cain dwelt.
CAIN, after he had slain his Brother Abel, dwelt in the Land of Nod, a Land of
Fear and Disquiet, in the Town of Hanoch, and, as some think, it was the same
place where Babylon (after Noah's Flood) was built, being four hundred and
eighty miles from Jerusalem Eastward.

Of the Place where Noah dwelt.
NOAH, signifying quiet and rest, dwelt in Armenia, six hundred miles from
Jerusalem Northward, hard by Mount Ararat, upon which Mount, the Ark, (after
the Flood) stayed it self, Genesis 8. Ptolomaeus names these high Hills in
Armenia, Gordes, which are always covered with Snow, and no man may get upon
them.

Sem.
SEM who in the Holy Scriptures is called Melchisedech, that is, a King of
Righteousness, dwelt in the City of Jerusalem, which as then was called Salem,
that is, a City of Peace.

Nimroth.
NImroth was the first Prince and Regent upon Earth, and built Babylon, which
is six hundred and eighty miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Strabo writes, That
in Babylon there was an old apiece Tower built of Brick, four hundred and
sixteen Else high That is 200 yards high.
, and each side thereof four hundred and sixteen Else broad: This without doubt
was a piece of the Tower of Babylon, the top whereof should have reached up to
Heaven, Genesis 22.

Babel or Babylon signifies a Confusion, because in that place God confounded
the Work-mens Tongues, when they built the Tower of Babylon.

The Travels of Abraham.
1. ABraham went out of his own Country of Vr in Chaldaea, to the City of
Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 376 miles.

2. From Haran, by Gods commandment he went to Sichem, which is four hundred
miles.

3. From Sichem he went to the Plain and Wood of Mam^e, to the Hill between
Bethel and Hay, which is 28 Miles.

4. From thence he went into Egypt, traveling Southward 240 miles.

5. Out of Egypt he went again into Canaan, to the Hill that lies between
Behel and Hay which is 240 miles, Genesis 13.

6. From thence he went to the Plain of Mamre near Hebron, 32 miles.

7. From the Plain of Mamre, he went to Dan, which is 124 miles, and there
overthrew the four Kings which had taken Lot Prisoner, Genesis 14.

8. Then he pursued the Enem^ for the space of 80 miles to Hobam in Phoenicia,
which lies in the left side of Damasco, Genesis 14.

9. From Phoenicia, he went to Sodom, where Melchisedeck met him, which are 160
miles, Genesis 14.

10. From Sodom, he went back again to the Plain of Mamre, which are 40 miles.

11. From the Plain of Mamre, he went to Gerer, which is six miles, where his
Son Isaac was born, Genesis 20. 21.

12. From Gerar, he went to Beersaba, which is 12 miles, where he took an Oath
of King Abimilech.

13. From Beersaba, he went to Mount Moriah, which is 40 miles, where he would
have offered his Son Isaac, Genesis 22.

14. From Mount Moriah, he returned again to Beersaba, which is 40 miles.

15. From Beersaba, he and his Wife went to the Plain of Mamre by Hebron, which
is 16 miles, and there they died and were buried, Genesis 23. and 25.

So that all the Travels of the Patriarch Abraham were 1794 miles.

Now follows the description of the Towns and Places.
THE Town of Vr in Chaldaea where Abraham was born, at this day is called
Orchae, (as Petrus Ap^ianus writes) and is distant from Jerusalem 624 miles
Eastward. It seems it either took that Name from Light or Fire, or else from
Divine Worship, for there they used to offer many burnt Offerings, but at that
time they committed Idolatry, for which cause Abraham went from thence,
perceiving tha^ the Chaldaeans took the Fire for their God, because Fire came
down from Heaven and consumed their Offerings. Learned men therefore are of
Opinion, that the Chal^aeans in the Town of Vr, worshipped the Fire for their
God.

Haran or Charan, that is, Wrath.
HAran is the chief City in Mesopotamia, where Abraham for a time dwelt with
his Father Thara. There the rich Roman Crassus with his Army was overthrown by
the Parthians, and is distant from Jerusalem 440 miles North-Eastward, taking
its Name from the Water Charan which runs through it. But at this day the
City is called Ophra, lying eleven days Journey from Mossel or Nineveh, as D.
Leonard Ronwolfe writes, who in anno 1575, upon the thirtieth of January was
in that Town. Ophra or Haran is a fair City well inhabited, and indifferent
great, compassed about with Walls and Towers, richly furnished with
Merchandise, but especially with fair Coverle^s of diverse colors, that are
made therein.

There is likewise great Trade and Traffic for diverse kinds of Wares brought
thither by Caravans, which are great Numbers of Camels, Horses, and other
Beasts, that carry great Burdens, with many men to conduct them, which traffic
and travel from one City to another.

This City in times past belonged to the Parthians, even then when Crassus the
rich Roman, fifty three years before the Birth of Christ, robbed the Temple of
Jerusalem, and of those holy Relics bare away to the value of six Tuns of
Gold: for which, God punished him openly; for upon the sixth of June, after he
was by the Parthians overthrown hard by Haran in Mesopotamia, and there taken
and slain; the Parthians pouring molten Gold into his Mouth, said, Drink now
thy fill (thou greedy Wretch) of that which thou so long have thirsted after,
for with this thou may fill thy greedy Throat.

In this overthrow were slain thirty thousand Romans, and by that means the
City of Haran returned again under the Parthians.

After that, the Persians took it; but now it is under the Turk.

In this City of Haran at this day there is to be seen a Well of very clear
Water, at which Rebecca gave drink to Eleazer Abraham's Servant, and to his
Camels, Genes. 24. 19. This Well by the Townsmen is called Abraham's Well:
there also Rachel, Laban's Daughter, first spoke with the holy Patriarch Jacob,
who turning the stone off from the Well, gave her Sheep of the Water to drink.

This Water has a very pleasant Taste, and is a notable Type of holy Baptism;
for like as the holy Fathers took their Wives by this Well, so Christ receives
his holy Congregation by the Well of Baptism, in his Word and holy Sacrament.
This is the right Well of Israel, which flows into Everlasting Life.

The City of Haran (now called Ophra) lies from Nineveh 232 miles Westward.

Sichem, a Shoulder.
SIchem is a Town in Samaria, on the borders of Ephraim, lying on Mount
Garizim, 36 miles from Jerusalem Northward. It takes the Name (as Phil.
Melancthon writes) from the place whereon it stands, like a Shoulder; for
Sichem signifies a Shoulder.

Of this Town I will speak more at large in the New Testament, for that by it
Christ spoke with the Samaritan Woman, Joh. 4.

In this Town, Dina, Jacob's Daughter was ravished, Genesis 34. and there the
Bones of the Patriarch Joseph were buried, Josh. 24.

Abimelech for spite, and upon no occasion, utterly destroyed the Town, and
having razed it to the ground, sowed it with Salt, Judge. 9. But Jeroboam King
of Jerusalem built it up again, and dwelt therein, 1 Kin. 12.

It was a free Town, whither a Manslayer might resort that had killed any man
by chance, and save himself, Josh. 20.

Mount Garizim, whereon the Town of Sichem stood, was a piece of Mount E^hraim.

Tanais, in Hebrew Zoan, an Inn, or House of Harbor.
TANAIS or Zo^n, was the chief City in Egypt, where Pharaoh in Abraham's time
kept his Court, as we read in the thirteenth Chapter of the fourth Book of
Moses, and Psil. 58. and lies 232 miles from Jerusalem, South-eastward. Four
miles from Tanais stood the Kingly Town of Memphis, which was likewise built
before Abraham's time; but at that time it was not so famous as Tanais, for
there is not one word spoken of Mem^his in the Books of Moses. But when time
serves I will speak more of these two places.

Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay.
THIS Hill is four miles from Jerusalem, upon the North, lying between the two
Towns of Bethel and Hay, and is called Mount Ephraim; where Abraham at his
return out of Egypt the second time, set up his Tabernacle, of purpose to be
conversant with Mel^hisedeck, who dwelt in Ierus^lem; and with him gave thanks
to God for the singular favors that he had showed toward him, in delivering
his Wife Sara from the hands of Abimelech King of Egypt, who would have
ravished her, and, as he feared, indanger^d his Life. In this place Lot
separated himself from Abraham, and went to dwell in Sodom.

Of the Plain or O^k of Mamre.
THE Plain of Mamre stood a mile from Hebron, toward the East, and distant
from Jerusalem twenty two miles South-eastward. In this Vall^y there was a fair
and pleasant Wood, where a certain young man called Mamre dwelt. This man was
Brother to Escal and Aner, mentioned by Moses, Genes. 14* who, according to the
custom of Gentlemen with us in these times, built up his house nea^ (...)
pleasant Wood or Bottom, which, as some think, was called after his name,
Mamre. Others, (of which Opinion is Ierom) of Aelon, which signifies a Valley
or Tree (an Oak-tree, says he.) But Joseph and Aeges^ppus call it a Terebinth
tree, which both Summer and Winter bears green Leaves like a Palm Tree, the
Sap or Juice whereof is very good for Medicine. Abraham dwelling near to this
Tree, being entertained by the three Brothers as a Stranger, grew into such
favor and familiarity with them, that he converted them from Paganism, and
taught them to know the true and ever-living God. To gratify which great
favor, they aided him in his War against the four Kings that had taken Lot
Prisoner, and gave him free liberty to inhabit in, and use the Plain
thereabouts for his Cattle: before whose door (as some Authors affirm) this
Terebinth or Oak-tree stood, and so continued from the beginning of the World,
till the time of Constantine the Great, it being lawful for none to cut a bough
of it, or touch it wit^ a Hatchet, because it was in those days accounted a
holy Tree, and visited by diverse Strangers: and then Helena caused a fair
Church to be built in that place; and so much the rather, for that Abraham
sitting under that Tree, the three Angels appeared unto him in the Similitude
or Likeness of men, Genesis 8. ^, 2. And some are of Opinion, That because of
this, the Jews offered Incense to their Gods, and committed Idolatry upon high
Mountains and under green Trees, Ezekiel. 16. There was also a double Cave made of
white Marble, which as Josephus says, was very fair and beautiful to the eye,
and curiously wrought and polished; wherein Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
their Wives Sarah, Rebecca, and Le^h were buried; and as some think, was that
Cave which he purchased of the Hittites, Genesis 23. 34. But that Adam and Evah
lie buried in the same place, seeing there is no warrant for it in the holy
Scriptures, I let it pass; because, whatsoever has not Authority of Scripture
to prove it, may as easily be contemned as allowed. But, Abraham's S^pulchre in
Ierom's time was to be seen, being old and decayed.

Of Hebron.
THIS City was not only a Kings Seat, but a Priests also, being built not long
after the Flood, and some seven years before that City of the Egyptians called
Zoan or Tanis, Numb. 13. and was placed upon a goodly high Mountain very
pleasant and delectable. It takes the name from Chabar, which signifies to
accompany; and from thence, Chebron or Hebron, a pleasant and delectable
Society. It was a metropolitan City in the Tribe of Judah, and after called
Kiriatharba, as it appears in Josh. 14. taking that Name from Arba the Chief
Governor of that City. This man was one of the Anakims, and a very mighty
Prince. Others there are that say, the City being divided into four parts was
thereof called (...) for Arba signifies a Quaternion, from the Rote Raba four
square. It was first built by Heth, the Son of that cursed Canaan, whose
Posterity (the Hittites) inhabited in it; and such was their Hospitality, that
they entertained Abraham, being a Stranger and Traveller. These People dwelt
Here also dwelt Sisai, Abiman, and Thalmas the sons of Anak.
there until Joshua's time; and then one Hoham was King thereof, who with other
Kings, opposing the Children of Israel, was by them slain, and had their
Country wasted and destroyed. This Town was after made a Town of Refuge, and
belonged to the Inheritance of Caleb, and was together with Mamre in the Tribe
of Judah, Ios. 20. Here David was first anointed King, and reigned therein for
the space of seven years, 2 Samuel 5. But this Town, by the injury of Time, and
oppression of the Enemy is now become desolate, only some few old Relics are
to be seen, to show there had been a Town there. Nevertheless there is a Town
not far from it which retains the name, placed in a very fruitful Valley
called Mamre to this day. Here, while it was under the Jurisdiction of the
Christians, stood a Cathedral Church, and a Bishops See; but the Turks have
turned it into a Mosko, or one of their Churches. Into this place they will not
suffer any Christian to enter. The Inhabitants take upon them to show unto
Strangers many things, as the Vault or Cave wherein Abraham was buried, the
place where Cain killed Abel, the Well where Adam and Evah wept seven years for
the death of their Son; with many such like Fables which are to no purpose,
seeing they are not warrantable by Scripture.

Some Bows-shot Eastward from this place is the Field of Damascus, where the
red Earth lies whereof they feign Man to be made. It is naturally tough, and
may be wrought like Wax or Pitch. There is also that is white of the same kind,
and this is conveyed to many places by the Saracens, and sold at dear Rates.
They use it either for the teering of Sepulchers, or to mingle with Salves and
Unguents.

Of Gerar.
GErar is the uttermost Town in the Land of Canaan, and lies between the
Deserts of Sur and Cades. Genesis 20. Here King Abimelech kept his Court at such
time as Abraham came thither; and here Isaac was born, Genesis 21. It takes the
name from Gor, which signifies a Pilgrim or Traveller, and did well agree with
the Condition of the ancient Patriarchs that sometimes lived there, because for
the most part they were like Pilgrims and wayfaring men, Genesis 47. It lay six
miles from Hebron South-west, and from Jerusalem 30, upon the Territories of
the Tribe of Judah.

Of Beerazaba.
BEerazaba is a Town situated upon the utmost Bounds of the Holy Land, forty
miles from Ierus^lem South-westward, and is derived from Beer and Shebuah, and
sig^ifieth the Well of Covenant: for Abraham having dug a Well near to this
place, Abimelech King of Gerar entered into League with him, and his Posterity.
Is^ac also renewed this League in this place, as appears, Gen 21. It is now
called Gallim or Giblin by the Jews. In S. Hierom's time it was a great Town.

Of Moriah.
UPON this Mount Abraham would have offered his Son Isaac, and stood not far
from Salem or Mount Sion, where Mel^hisedech dwelt. They were so near, that
Melchisedech upon the Tower of Sion might easily see the Angel that spoke with
Abraham, when he renewed the Covenant with him concerning his Seed and
Posterity; and is derived from Mor or M^rar, which signifies bitter Myrrh,
because, as Gregorius says, the Church is ever subject to Affliction; For all
they that will serve God and live religiously, must suffer Persecution, Mat.
16. 2 Timothy 3. and Iarr, which signifies to fear.

How Abraham may be typically apprehended.
ABraham signifies the Father of a Multitude, from Ab, pater, a Father; Ram,
excelsus, Mighty; and Hamon, multitudinis, Of a Multitude. Not in regard of the
Jews only, but all those that in succeeding times shall be ingraffed into the
Church, and partake of everlasting Life through the Mediation of Christ Jesus,
the promised Seed, Gal. 3. Ephesians. 1. Acts 3. and is a Type and Figure of God
the Father; for, that as Abraham was the Father of many, yet had but only one
Son: so although God be the Father of all Nations, yet had but one only Son,
Jesus Christ, begotten of his own Essence from before the beginning of the
World. And as Abraham so loved God, that for his sake he would not have spared
his only Son; so God so loved Abraham and the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son to die for the Salvation of their Souls.

The Travels of Lot.
LOT traveled with Abraham from Vr in Chaldaea, to Haran in Mesopotamia, which
is 336 miles, Genesis 12.

2. From Haran they traveled to Sichem in the land of Canaan, b^ing 400 miles.

3. From Sichem they traveled through Morae, to the Hill lying between Bethel
and Hay, which is 24 miles.

4. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay, they went into Egypt, which is 240
miles, Genesis 13.

5. From Egypt they went into the Land of Canaan, to the Hill lying between
Bethel and Hay, where Abraham had dwelt before, which is 240 miles, Genesis 13.

6. From the Hill between Bethel and Hay Lot separated himself from Abraham,
and went to the Town of Sodom Eastward, which is 28 miles, Gen 13.

7. In the Town of Sodom Lot was taken Prisoner, he and all his household, and
led away to the Town of Dan, which is 32 miles, Genesis 14.

8. And when Abraham had delivered him out of the hands of his Enemies, a
pursued them, he returned with him from Dan to Hobam in Phoenicia, lying on the
left side of Damascus, being 80 miles.

9. From Phoenicia, Abraham came again with Lot to Sodom, which is 160 miles.

10. Lastly, when the Lord had determined to rain Fire and Brimstome on Sodom,
Lot, according to his Commandment, went thence to Zoar a little Town near
adjoining, where being drunk with Wine, he committed Incest with both his
Daughters; but after, coming to the knowledge of his Offense, he was so sore
afflicted in his Conscience, that with extreme Grief he died. Luther says,
that Abraham took him to Hebron with him to comfort him, and that there he
died. Hebron is 36 miles from Sodom.

So all the Travels of the Patriarch Lot were 1652 miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places where he traveled: and first of Sodom.
THE Cities that were destroyed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, were four
in number, that is, Sodom, Gomorrah, Adama, and Zeboim, lying 24 miles from
Jerusalem South-eastward, where now the Dead Sea runs. The fifth was the City
Bela, called also Zoar, which was spared for Lot's sake, and distant from Sodom
two miles. This, Lot accounted but a little City; but there are that say it was
a very spacious and Princely place, near to which his Wife for her Disobedience
was turned into a Pillar of Salt, and not far off he committed Incest with his
two Daughters, And although Luther be of opinion, that that also within a while
after was burnt, yet this cannot be certainly proved, especially because it
remains even to this day, situated both in the ancient place, and called by
the ancient Name; unless some new City has been lately built in the same
place, and is now called after that name, which I cannot think to be true.
Sodamah signifies a Mystery; Gomorrah, a Faggot of Thorns; Adamah, Red Earth;
Zeboim, Fertile and Pleasant; Zoar, the burning of B^la; for in ancient times
it was called Baela. It is the received Opinion, that the Country wherein these
five rich and opulent Cities stood was called Pentapolis.

Of the Lake or Dead Sea, called Asphaltides.
IN the very same place where these Cities were burnt and destroyed, there is
at this day to be seen a Lake about 36 Miles long, and in some places six, in
others eight, and twelve miles over. It boileth with Pitch and Brimstone, and
in some places passes by the name of the Salt Sea, and in others, the dead
Sea, because of the noisome and venomous Air that rises out of it, insomuch as
the very Birds that fly over it fall down dead; and if a Beast do but drink of
it mixed with Water, it makes him incurably sick. It is of a wonderful nature,
for whatsoever heavy thing you fling into it will not sink, but swim upon the
top, be it either Iron, Lead, Copper, or any other weighty matter: of which
Vespasian the Emperor having notice, to make experience of what he had heard,
made a Journey of purpose to see it, and with him took certain condemned men,
who for their Offenses had deserved Death; these he manacled, and where he
thought it to be deepest caused them to be thrown in; but they rose up again
with such violence as if some Storm or Tempest had sent them up. The Water
thereof changes three times a day, and shines against the Sun with diverse
colors, casting out Fire and great Cakes of Pitch much resembling Bulls
without heads, and of that quantity. This Pitch is good for diverse things, as
to calk Ships, to lay upon Cables, and to use in Medicines; wherefore such as
come to this Sea and know the nature of it, have certain Skifs and Instruments
wherewith they draw these Cakes of Pitch to their Ships, to which it cleaves
so fast, it being naturally tough, that being brought to Land they cannot get
it off again but by the help of Urine. Upon the Banks thereof grow Trees that
bear fruit of diverse kinds, as Apples, and such like; which are fair and
pleasant to the Eye, but if you either touch or open them you shall find
nothing but Dust.

Brittenbacchus says, In this place the Serpent Tyrus (whereof they use to
make Treacle) is found. It is a little Serpent about half a Cubit long, and a
Finger thick, being of diverse colors, and is so venomous, that where it biteth
there is no remedy, unless by cutting off the Member: the Head of it is rough
and hairy, and there seems to lie upon the Tongue of it, if it be angry, a
fiery flame. The same Author says, that a little from Zoar, between this Lake
and the Mountains of Engedi, the Pillar whereinto Lot's Wife was turned, is yet
to be seen shining like Salt. The furthest part of this Sea Northward lies 14
miles from Jerusalem: toward the East the River Jordan runs into it.

The Travels of the two Angels that led Lot out of Sodom.
THese two Angels having spoken with Abraham in the Valley of Mamre near
Hebron, forthwith went to Sodom some 40 miles distant from that place, where
Lot having entertained them into his House, by their help was delivered,
together with his Wife and two Daughters, from that miserable Desolation of the
Sodomites.

Of Lot's two Daughters.
LOT escaping (...) is Desolation, and seeing a President of God's Judgment
fallen upon his Wife for her disobedience, fearing that he should not continue
safe in Zoar, left that, and turned aside into the Wilderness, and continued
there among the Mountains, although the Lord had promised him safety in this
Town: wherefore continuing in a Cave in the Wilderness, the eldest of his
Daughters losing her Husband in this Destruction, supposing that all men had
been destroyed, counseled her Sister to commit Incest with her Father. Lot
being now oppressed with Care, by reason of the former Calamities, gave
himself, at the Inticement of his Daughters, to drink Wine, insomuch as with
the Excess he became drunk: at which time, not being himself, he begat by his
two Daughters two Sons; the eldest had a Son whom she called Moab, which
signifies, the begotten of his Father; whereby the Impudency of this Woman is
laid open to the World, in that she was not ashamed of her Sin. Of him came the
Moabites and dwelt upon the North-side of the Lake Asphaltides, some 32 miles
from Jerusalem. The youngest Daughter had a Son, which she called Ben-ammy,
that is, The Son of my People; for although she bare him with great shame, yet
she dwelt among the People of God. Of him came the Ammonites that dwelt beyond
Mount Gi^ead, threescore miles from Jerusalem North-eastward.

Of the four Kings that took Lot Prisoner.
THE first of them was called Amraphel King of Shinear or Babylon, the Son of
Ninus and Semiramis, as some think, and is called sometime by the name of
Berosus, sometime Ninus. He kept his Court at Babylon in Chaldaea, which is 680
miles from Jerusalem Eastward. This Ninus is called Amraphel, because of the
notable Victories that he won, and the number of Countries and Provinces he
conquered.

The second was Arioch, or Arrius, his Son. He was thus called because of his
Courage and Cruelty in War; for Arioch signifies a mighty roaring Lion; Arius,
Mars. This man, during the life of his Father, was created King of Lassir, that
is, Assyria, for so it is called in the Chaldaean Tongue; the chief City
whereof is Nineveh, and lies from Jerusalem North-eastward six hundred eighty
four Miles.

The third was Keder-laomer King of the Elamites in Persia, 1200 miles from
Jerusalem toward the East. This Prince had a great command in that Country.
Kedar signifies an Ornament or Crown; Laomer, well deserving.

The fourth was Thideal King of the Nations. He kept his Court in Damascus, the
Metropolis of Assyria, some 160 miles from Jerusalem Northward. Thideal
signifies an exalted Lord; of Alah, that is, to be lifted up.

These four Kings were Confederates, and bent their Expedition principally
against A^toro^h and Kiri^thaim, which they took, and spoiled all the Country
round about with Fire and Sword: and their Armies being retired from the Spoil,
met in the Valley of Siddim (where now the Dead Sea runs) and there pitched
their Tents. In this place, after a cruel and sharp War, they conquered the
five Kings of that beautiful and pleasant Soil of Pentapolis, (for so it was
called because of those five Cities that were in it) where, among others, they
took Lot Captive, with all his Substance.

Of Astoroth.
AStoroth seems to be the City of Venus, because the Citizens thereof
worshipped her: for Astoroth is a Goddess of the Sidonians, and is compounded
of Ash, which signifies a company of Stars, and Tor, placed in order. The
S^rians call Venus Ashtoroth. This Town lay in the Land of Gilead, and belonged
to the half Tribe of Manasses beyond Jordan, 56 miles from Jerusalem
North-eastward. In this City the four Kings of the East conquered the Giants of
Karnaim, that were mighty Princes and Commanders there, when they made War
against that and Kiriathaim. Not far from hence also in the Land of Ham, there
dwelt certain Giants called Zusim, of Zus and Hamah, which signifies to stir up
Commotion. These were very great, strong, and stately People, and had the
Command of all the Countries thereabouts, which they held in great fear, and
were conquered by the four Kings.

Of Kiriathaim.
KIriathaim was a City in the Tribe of Reuben beyond Jordan, Josh. 13. twenty
two miles from Jerusalem toward the East, and so called because it was divided
into many Parts and Divisions. The Heathens corruptly call it Carthage. The
Hebrews derive it from Kiriath, which signifies a City, and Emah, Terror. Here
dwelt the Emims, a grave and f^arful people; for so their name signifies.

Of Hazezon Thamar.
THIS City took the name from a Palm Tree, or a Palm bank. Of this kind of Wood
the Israelites made their Arrows, and therefore derive it from Charar, which
signifies to shoot; and Thamar, a Palm Tree. This City stands upon the Bank
of the Dead Sea, twenty miles from Jerusalem North-east, upon a very fruitful
Soil, where was found plenty of Palm Trees and precious Balsam; and by some
called Engedi, or the Lambs Well, being derived from Ein and Gedi, which
signifies Fontem haeduli lactantis, that is, The Well of a sucking Lamb or
Goat. Not far from hence stood the Cave where David cut off the outward lap of
King Readiness Garment, ^ Sam. 24.

Of the plentiful Valley Siddim.
THIS Valley stood there where now the Dead Sea runs, and took that name
from the fertility of the Soil, and seems to have some affinity with the Hebrew
word S^del, which signifies a Field, partly arable, partly Pasture and Meadow,
furnished with Trees, Herbs, and Orchards. In this place stood diverse Wells of
Bitume, from whence the Inhabitants fetched Caement to build their Houses with;
but after, for their Wickedness (which was so great, as it appears in Genesis
18. that the Cry thereof as^^nded into Heaven) the Lord did grievously punish
them, first with War, by which the Inhabitants were destroyed; and after that,
with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; so that (as is aforesaid) this goodly
Valley is nothing but a stinking Lake.

The Travels of the Egyptian Maid Hagar.
AFter Sara had preferred Hagar to that high Grace as to make her equal with
her self, she growing proud thereof, contemned her Mistress, and in recompense
of that Favor, carried her self very presumptuously toward her; which Sara
seeking to restrain, offered to her Son hard Measure; which Abraham (upon her
Complaint) winked at: whereupon, Hagar, partly oppressed with Grief, partly
with Envy, privily stole away from her Mistress, and went from the Valley of
M^mre near Hebron, to the Well of Life, sixteen Miles Southward, Genesis 16.
and it is to be thought, that her Journey tended toward Egypt, which was her
native Country; for this Well lay directly in the way as they went down into
Egypt. This flight of Hagar without doubt did greatly trouble Abraham's House,
and put him and his Wife into a great sorrow and fear, lest she should destroy
her self and the Infant, or fall into some other Danger. Wherefore, that God
might make evident the exceeding Care he had of them, he sent an Angel unto
Hagar, and willed her to return unto her Master: which Angel, some think was
the Son of God, for he was called by the name of Jehovah, Genesis 16. which name
was not communicated to any created Angel. Whereupon, Hagar, according to his
Command, went back again to her Mistress Sarah into the Valley of Mamre, 16
miles, Genesis 16.

From Hebron, Hagar went with her Mistress to that Kingly City Gerar, six
miles, Genesis 20.

At Gerar she and her Son Ismael were put out of her Masters house, and going
in the way that leads into Egypt, they lost themselves in the Wilderness of
Beersaba, after they had traveled twelve miles from Gerar: where, oppressed
with want both of Water and other necessaries, she fainted and her Son also;
wherefore she laid him under a Tree, and about a Bows shoot off sat down and
wept, expecting nothing but death. As she was in this misery, God heard the
voice of the Child, and sent an Angel unto her, saying, Fear not, for I will
make of thy child a great Nation. And God opened her eyes, and lo, close by her
there was a Well, so she went and filled her bottle, and gave her Boy drink. At
this time Ismael was fifteen years of age; So God blessed the Child, and he
became an Archer, and lived in the Wilderness.

From thence she and her Son went into the Wilderness of Pharan, eighty miles,
where Ismael married an Egyptian, Genesis 21. So all the Travels of Hagar the
Egyptian Maid were 132 miles.

Of the Fountain of Hagar, which is also called the Well of Life.
THIS Well lies between ^ared and Kades-Bernea, ten miles from Jerusalem
toward the South. Some call it the Well of the Living and Seeing, because God
did there look mercifully upon Hagar, when she fled from her Mistress. Here
Isaac dwelt, and had his two Sons, Esau and Jacob, Genes. 26. Afterward it was
called the Well of the Living God, and seems mystically to represent Baptism,
the Lavor of Grace and Regeneration by the operation and special working of the
Spirit: for the Church (like Hagar with her Son Ismael) traveling through the
Wilderness of this World, is pressed with a multitude of Sins; and seeing her
own misery, finds no remedy but by Faith in Christ Jesus, to be delivered from
so heavy a Burden; wherefore they joining together in Prayer, crave the
merciful audience and gracious assistance of God, That it would please him of
his goodness to refresh them with the Water of Life, the Doctrine of Grace,
that so they may be made capable of eternal Glory. For Hagar signifies a
Pilgrim, and Ismael, a godly and good man whom the Lord hears: who traveling
together with his Mother the Church in this World, fights against the Enemies
thereof, and shoots the Arrows of Faith against all infernal and cruel
Beasts. For Schamah signifies, He has heard; and El, The Almighty God, who
mercifully hears the fervent Prayers and Petitions of the Just; according to
that of St. James, chapter 5. 15.

Ismael was born Ann. Mundi 2035. Abraham being then 86 years of age. He was
circumcised at thirteen, he went from his Father at fifteen; he was at
Abraham's Funeral, being 89 years of age; he died when he was 137 years of age,
fifty years after the death of Abraham, and left behind him twelve Sons, as
Jacob did, which were the Princes of their Families, as was his. Of which the
Apostle Paul has an excellent Allegory; Abraham had two Sons, one by the
Bondwoman, another by the Freewoman: he that was of the Bondwoman was
according to the Flesh, but he that was of the Freewoman was by Promise. By
which things another thing is meant: for the one, which is Agar of Mount Sinai,
gendereth unto Bondage; for Agar or Sinai is a Mountain in Arabia, and
answers to Jerusalem that now is; and she is in Bondage with her Children:
but Jerusalem which is above is free, f^r it is written, Rejoice thou Barren,
etc. Wherefore we are no more of the Bondwoman, (which is the Law) but of the
Free; no^ by our own Works or Righteousness, but by Faith in Christ, who makes
us Heirs of that Heavenly Jerusalem.

Where Ishmael dwelt.
PAran a City of Arabia the Stony, stood an 104 miles from Jerusalem
Southward, and takes the name from fertility; for Parah with the Hebrews
signifies a fruitful root. From this Metropolitan Town, the Desert of Arabia
the Stony, near Cades, takes name: of which mention is made, Number. 13. and 14.
Deuteronomy. 1. Genesis 14. 21. Habac. 3. and is called the Desert of Pharan. Here
Ishmael, that excellent Archer and Hunter dwelt, after that with great power
and strength he had conquered all the Neighboring Princes and People
thereabout. His Posterity also inhabited these Parts, and after his name were
called Ishmaelites, some eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the South. These
People were excellent Soldiers, and of noble courage; their principal delight
was shooting, and therein they exceeded others, living for the most part by
Hunting and Pillage, and so they continue to this day. The Saracens, who
likewise had their abiding in those Parts, were derived from that Family,
though they had rather take their name from Sara, and from thence Saracens:
These are of the Opinion of the Turks.

The Travels of Eleazar the Servant of Abraham.
AFter Eleazar had sworn to his Master to take a Wife for his Son Isaac of the
Generation of his Fathers, he went from the Valley of Mamre near Hebron, to
Haran a City of Mesopotamia, 468 miles off, and there made a Contract with
Rebecca the Daughter of Bethuel, and Sister of Laban, whom he took along with
him, and returned to his Master. So that his Journey to and again was 944
miles. These things happened in the Year of the World 2089, and before Christ,
1879, Isaac then being forty years of age.

This Eleazar was Steward of Abraham's house, and born at Damascus, the chief
City of Syria. He was so called, because God was his help; Eleazar being a
compound word of El and Ezaer, which signifies Almighty God the helper. From
whence we may perceive, that God is the Keeper of the Poor, and a ready helper
in time of Tribulation; according to that in the Psal^s, All they that know
thee trust in thee; because thou, O Lord, hear their Prayers, and bring
them out of trouble.

Rebecca, as it should seem, took her name from the expectation of Eternal
Life; for Rebechan in Hebrew does denote such a Woman, which expects a free
delivery from all Calamity, and an inheritance of eternal Life. Therefore
Rebecca is a notable Type of the Church of God, which is the Spouse of Ch^i^t,
shadowed in Isaac; as shall hereafter be more plainly manifested.

The Travels of the Patriarch Isaac.
ISaac being young, went with his Father Abraham from Berzeba to Mount Moriah,
where his Father would have offered him unto God, as the Lord commanded him,
which is forty miles, Genes. 22.

2. From thence with his Father he returned again to Berzeba, which is forty
miles.

3. From Berzeba he traveled with his Father to Hebron, by the Plain of Mamre,
which is 16 miles.

4. From the Plain of Mamre, Isaac traveled Southward, to the Fountain of
Life, which is 16 miles, and there he dwelt, Genesis 24.

5. From thence he returned back again to his Fathers Burial, who was laid in
that double Cave in Mamre, which is 16 miles.

6. From thence he returned back again to the Well of Life, where he dwelt; 16
miles.

7. From the Fountain of Life, he went to Gerar, which is eight miles; where
Abimelech seeing the Beauty of his Wife Rebecca, would have ravished her, and
for fear, she told him that she was his Sister, Genesis 26.

8. From Gerar, Isaac went Westward to the Valley of Gerar, which is eight
miles, and there he caused the Well to be dug up again, which the
Inhabitants had stopped up, Genesis 26.

9. From thence he went to Beersaba, which is four miles; where the same Night
the Lord appeared unto him, and said, I am the God of thy Father Abraham, fear
not, for I am with thee, and will bless and multiply thy seed for my Servant
Abraham' s sake, Genesis 26.

10. From Beersaba he returned again to Hebron by the Plain of Mamre, which is
16 miles: here Abraham, Sarah and Rebecca died, and were buried, Genesis 35. So
all the Travels of the Patriarch Isaac were one hundred ^orty eight miles.

The typical signification of Isaac.
THE Name of Isaac is derived from Laughter; for Zakah in Hebrew is as much as
quod risit is in Latin, which signifies that he laughed; and from hence
Zechock signifies a Laughter, and Isaac, Mirth, or one that rejoices with
Mirth. This Name was given to him by God before his Nativity, Genesis 17. 18.
There were seven that were named by God before their Nativity, viz. Ishmael,
Genesis 16. Isaac, Genesis 17. Cores or Cyrus King of the Persians, Esa. 44. Sampson,
Judge. 13. Iosia King of Judah, 1 King. 13. John Baptist, and Jesus Christ the
Son of God, Luke. 1. of whom Isaac was a notable Type. For Christ is our true
rejoicing, the Laughter, Mirth, and Delight of the whole Church of God. Abraham
upon the day of the Nativity of Isaac made a great Feast, to which, no doubt,
he called many godly men, and perhaps some of the Patriarchs: for there was
then living Sarag, Arphaxad, Salah, Heber, Thamar, and Sem, the Son of Noah,
who also had a certain knowledge of Gods promise to Abraham, and that of the
seed of Isaac should come the Savior of the World.

And as Abraham when he would have offered his Son unto the Lord, carried the
Fire and the Sword, but Isaac the Wood upon which he should be slain and
burned, (O miserable sight, especially to a Father, to see his only Son and
Heir, which was miraculously begotten, even then when he was without hope of
Issue, burnt to Ashes before his Face! This was on Mount Moriah, a little from
Salem or Jerusalem) even so our Savior Christ, for the sins that man commits
and carries about him, bore upon his Shoulders the wooden Cross, whereupon he
was offered an acceptable Sacrifice to his Father, that so by his Mediation and
Satisfaction we might receive Pardon for them: and this was likewise done upon
Mount Calvary, a little from Jerusalem. And as the Lord provided another
Sacrifice for Abraham, that so he might save his Son, which was a Ram tied and
entangled in Thorns; so God provided a Sacrifice for the Salvation of the
World, even Jesus Christ our Mediator, who is that immaculate and precious Lamb
of God; whose Head being crowned with Thorns, and hanging upon the Cross, by
his precious Death opened unto us the door of eternal Life, and made us capable
of everlasting Happiness, John 19. 1 Peter 1. Such was the love of Abraham, a
Father, unto God, such the love of God, a Father, unto man, that they spared
not their only Sons, the one typically to represent the other. The other, that
is, the only begotten Son of God, to dye effectually for Abraham, Isaac, and
all Mankind, Ioh. 3. Genesis 22.

The Travels of the Patriarch Jacob.
FRom B^ersaba Jacob went to Bethel, which is 48 miles, and there he saw a
Ladder that reached down from Heaven, whereby the Angels ascended and
descended. Genes. 28.

2. From Bethel he went to Haran in Mesopotamia, which is 432 miles; where he
married Leah and Rachel, Genesis 28.

3. From Haran in Mesopotamia he went to Mount Gilead, which is 380 miles: and
when Laban pursued him (at the Commandment of the Lord) he made a League with
him, Genesis 31.

4. From Mount Gilead he went to Mahanaim, which is 16 miles, and there he met
with the Angels of God, Genesis 31.

5. From Mahanaim he passed the Water and went to Penuel, which is four miles,
and there wrestled with the Angel of God, Genesis 32.

6. From Penuel he went to Succoth, where he pitched his Tents, two miles, Genesis
33.

7. From Succoth he passed the River of Jordan, and went to Sichem, not far
from Salem (about eight miles) where his Daughter Dinah was ravished, Genesis 33.

8. From thence he went to Bethel, which is eight and twenty miles, Genesis 31.

9. From Bethel he went to Bethlehen Euphrata, which is twelve Miles; in which
way Rachel died, and was buried not far from Bethlehem; then Jacob went
forward, and set up his Tents near to the Tower of Eder, a mile from Bethlehem
toward the South, Genesis 35.

10. From Bethlehem Euphrata and the Tower of Eder, he returned again to the
Valley of Mamre near Hebron, to his Father Isaac, which is 20 miles, Genesis 35.

11. From Hebron he went to Beersaba, which is 16 miles, Genesis 38.

12. From Beersaba he went to the Town of Any a little off Egypt in the land
of Gossen, which is 168 miles, where Joseph his Son gave him honorable
Entertainment, Genesis 46.

13. From Any he went to the City This was the Chief City of Egypt.
Zoan, which is also called Tanis, twenty eight miles, where he was presented
to King Pharaoh, Genesis 47.

14. From Tanis he returned to Any, which is 28 miles, and there he dwelt and
dyed in the Land of Gossen, Genesis 49.

The Description of the Towns and Places to which Jacob traveled.

Of Bethel.
BEthel was a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, eight miles from Jerusalem toward
the North, and signifies The house of God. In times past it was called Luz; but
Jacob seeing in that place the Vision of the Ladder, with the Angels ascending
and de^cending upon it, and because there the Lord renewed the Covenant with
him concerning his Seed, and the coming of Christ; he therefore called it
Bethel.

Afterward, Jeroboam having unlawfully usurped the Kingdom of Rehoboham, caused
a Calf to be set up there; for which cause, it was then called Bethaven, which
signifies the house of Sin and abominable Offense. Vatablus is of opinion,
that there are two Bethels, one in the Tribe of Benjamin, the other in the
Tribe of Ephraim, both not far from Hay: but if this should be granted, then
these two Towns should stand within two miles one of the other, which seems
very absurd; therefore I dare boldly affirm, that there was but one Bethel,
which stood upon the borders of Benjamin and Ephraim, both Tribes bordering
upon the South Side of the Town of Luz, Josh. 16. and 18.

This Town of Bethel was at first in the Suburbs of Luz, until the Division of
the Tribes; for then both these Tribes of Ephraim and Benjamin, ending in that
place, so much increased this Town, that they became both one City, and so were
called Bethel, Ie. 28. and 25. Josh. 7. and 18.

From hence there is a twofold Mystery to be apprehended: the first, of Jacob,
whose sleeping in this place upon a Stone, caused this City or Town to be
built, and to retain the name of Bethel, that is, The house of God. So
whosoever seeks to have eternal Life, must rest upon that corner stone Christ
Jesus, the Son of the everliving God, and by faith be incorporated into the
Church, which is the House of God, of which Christ (the anointed of the Lord)
is both King and Priest for ever. Secondly, as Jacob resting upon this corner
Stone, saw the Angels ascending and descending from Heaven unto Earth, so by
this Incorporation into the body of the Church (of which Christ is the Head) by
Faith and Baptism, our Souls are made capable to ascend into that heavenly
Tabernacle, which he has prepared for all those that believe: according to
that in John 14. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no Man comes unto the
Father but by me only. And whosoever is assured of this Ladder (that reaches
from Heaven unto Earth) may well say with Jacob, Surely the Lord Jesus Christ
is in this place; here is nothing but the House of God, and here is the Gate of
Heaven; as Christ himself testifies in the tenth of John, I am the door, and
whosoever enters not by me, etc. So that Christ is the Head of his Church, the
Ladder that ascends into Heaven, and the door whereby we may enter into
eternal Life.

Of Gilead.
THIS Land of Gilead was a Country that lay between Jordan and the Mountain of
Gilead, or rather between the Sea of Galilee and the (...) ^ilead, sixty miles
from Jerusalem toward the South-east: for the (...) beginning at Mount Gilead,
extended thence unto (...), and separated the Country of Israel beyond Jordan,
from (...) of the Ammonites. But that part which lies between the S^a (...)
Ammon, is properly called Gilead; for when Jacob and Lab^n (...) either with
other, in the Mount Gilead, they gathered a (...) Stones, and making a Banquet,
eat together upon it, Genesis 13. and (...) thence that Mountain, and all the
Country thereabouts, took the (...); For Laban in the Syrian Tongue is called
JEGAR SAHADUTA, (...) ^e^p of covenant. But Jacob in the Hebrew Language,
called that (...), together with all the Country thereabouts, Gal^ed, or
Galaad; the heap ^f te^timony: for Gal signifies a heap or grave, and Galal,
he rolled, or he thrust into a round heap. From whence the Greek word (...), to
roll, and (...), a circle, is derived: Also Edah signifies testimony with the
Hebrews, being derived from Id, which signifies testatus e^, that is, he
bears witness; and from hence (...), amongst the Grecians is derived, which
signifies a witness. This Land of Gilead was very fertile and pleasant, being
adorned with many Castles and strong Cities: and in this Country the Prophet
Eliah was taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot, 1 Reg. 17. 2 Reg. 2. The
Grecians call this Decapolin, from ten Cities that are strongly built in that
Country, Marc. 7.

Of Machanaim.
MAchanaim was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of G^d, near to the flood of
Iord^n and Iaboch, forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east, and
situate in the Land of Gilead beyond Jordan; being so called of the Patriarch
Jacob, because there he saw the Tents and Army of Angels, which he understood
to be his assistants against his Brother Esau, whom he feared, Genesis 31. For
Chana signifies Castrametatus est, that is, the Tents are measured out; from
whence Machanaim is the proper name of a place, being derived from two Tents of
Angels which appeared to Jacob, that they might defend him in his Journey; For
the Angels of God compass them about that fear him, Psalm 33. and therefore
Jacob with great Joy brake out and said, The Tents of God are here, and called
it Machanaim. This was assigned to the Levites, Josh. 21. and here David was
received, when he fled from his Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 17. Here Jacob wrestled
with the Angel, Genesis 32.

Of Pnuel, or Penuel.
THIS Town was upon the East Side of Jordan, close by the mouth of the River
Iaboch, in the Tribe of Gad, forty miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east;
and is derived from Panah and El, which signifies, He beheld the Almighty God
face to face: and for that cause he called it, Penuel, or Pnuel, which is, the
face of God, Genesis 32. The Tower of this Town was destroyed in Gideons time,
Judge. 8.

Of Succoth.
THIS is a Town beyond Jordan, not far from Penuel, in the Tribe of Gad, 40
miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east. Here Jacob set up his Tabernacles,
and continued for a while; from whence it borrows the name. For Sachach
signifies a covering, and from thence it is called Succha, and (...) with the
Greeks, which signifies, a shield, covering, defense, or tabernacle: Of this
Town there is mention in Josh. 13. 2 Chr. 4. Gideon caused the Inhabitants of
this Town of Succoth to be torn to pieces with thorns, Judge. 8.

Of Salem.
SAlem is a Town of the Sichamites, lying toward the East side of the River
Jordan, and in the midst of the Tribe of Manasses, forty miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, not far from Sichem, where Dinah, Jacob's Daughter, was
ravished, Genesis 33. and 34. In Aenon near to this place John Baptist baptized,
and signifies a City of Peace and Integrity.

Of Bethlem Euphrata.
THIS Town was distant from Jerusalem toward the South, six miles; it was
situated in a pleasant and fruitful Country, and from thence took the Name:
for Bethlachem is called The house of Bread; Euphrata signifies fruitful, being
derived from Parah, that is, to fructify; and Both signifies a house, from
the affinity that it has to Banah, that is, to build: so that Baithlachem does
denote unto us the house of bread, and other fruits and meats that are fit to
be eaten. Here was Christ the Son of God born, that Bread of Life, of which
whosoever eats shall live eternally, Ioh. 6. And here David was the second
time anointed King, 1 Samuel 16. Of this Town you may read more Luke 2.

Of Rachels Grave.
ABout a mile from Bethlem toward the North, Rachel the Wife of Jacob was
buried, over whom he set a stately Sepulcher, made of (...) Marble stones, or
Pyramides; these Stones are seen to this day (...) right hand of the way, as
you go from Bethlem to Jerusalem: (...) thence all the Land thereabouts is
called the Land of Rachel. ^or (...) Herod killed the innocent Children, all
the Inhabitants thereabouts (...) and would not be comforted, Matthew. 2. Ierem.
31.

Of the Town of Aeder.
THis was a Watch Tower of the Bethlemites, about a mile from Bethlem, toward
the South, and was so called from the flocks of Sheep that resorted thither:
for Migdal signifies a Tower, and Aeder, a flock or Herd; for thereabouts were
very fertile Pastures. Here the Angels told the Shepherds of the Nativity of
Christ, lying at Bethlem in a Manger: and in the place of that Tower there was
a Church built, which in Ieroms time was called Angelus ad Pastores, because
the Angels there appeared to the Shepherds. Here Jacob dwelt for a time, and in
this place Reuben lay with Billah his Wife, Genesis 36.

Of Gosen and Any.
GOsen was a very delectable and fruitful Country in the Land of Egypt, the
Metropolitan whereof was Any, two hundred miles from Jerusalem, toward the
South-west: In this City Jacob dwelt.

The typical signification of the Patriarch Jacob.
JAcob signifies a Supplanter, and was a Type of Christ, who is that Supplanter
of Satan, and by his death has broken his head in pieces. Again, he is the
type of a Christian man: for as he, wrestling with the Angel, obtained a
Blessing; so every good man continually striving with Perseverance in Prayer,
shall at length obtain an everlasting blessing: for, for this cause was Jacob
called Israel, that is, the Prince of God, in that he prevailed with God: so
all those that belive in Christ, are called Princes of the Kingdom of Heaven;
because by his Mediation they have prevailed with God, and are made partakers
of Eternal Life.

Jacob had two Wives, Leah and Rachel; Lea signifies wearied, and was a type of
the old Mosaical Church: for that was oppressed and wearied with the Laws of
Moses, and brought forth Priests, Levites, Kings, and Warlike Princes, by which
the People of the Jews became oppressed and wearied by extreme Labors, and at
length were miserably extinguished: for as it is in the fifteenth of the Acts
of the Apostles, The Law of Moses was an intolerable and troublesome Burden.
But Rachel signifies a Sheep, and is a Type and Sign of the Church of God in
the New Testament, as Christ himself speaks in the tenth of John, My sheep
hear my voice and follow me, and I will give them eternal Life.

Sheep are naturally patient and peaceable; so all such as are of Christ's
Church, seek after Patience and Peace. Leah was nothing so fair, but much more
fruitful; Rachel was nothing so fruitful, but a great deal fairer. Leah was the
Mother of Benjamin, which signifies Sorrow; Rachel of Joseph, who was a Type of
Christ.

Of the Travels of Esau.
ESAV traveled from Mount Sier in Mesopotamia, to the Town of Pnuel or Penuel,
eighty miles, to meet his Brother Jacob: where the singular civility and
humility of Jacob toward him, is worthy observation. For he first sent to meet
him, then he did him obedience to the ground seven several times, and so
saluted him, saying, Lo, these are the Children which God of his Grace has
given thy Servant. From whence it may be gathered, That it becomes every man
(if it be possible) to win his Enemy to Peace and Concord rather by Humanity
and Humility, than by force: for Esau, seeing this kind of Reverence, though
before he had a full determination to do him violence, yet now he comes to meet
him, embraces him, takes him about the neck, begins to weep, and kisses him,
yea, such was their love, that they both wept with joy, Genesis 33.

After, Esau returning, went home to Sier back again, eighty miles: these
things happened in the year of the World 2206; when both Brethren were about 89
years of Age, and in the year before Christ 1762.

Of Mount Sier.
MOUNT Sier, where Esau and his Posterity dwelt, is forty miles from Jerusalem
toward the South; and was so called of Sier, the King or Lord thereof, of whom
came the Horrites, who being driven thence by the fourteen Sons of Esau, into
Arabia the Stony, where they continued, Genesis 36. It was called Edom of Esau,
and then Idumaea, Genesis 25. and the Inhabitants thereof Edomites, or Idumaeans.

The typical meaning of Esau.
ESAV signifies a Factor, and was so called from Redness: The Enemies of the
Church coloring themselves red with the blood of the Godly: For as Rebecca had
in her Womb two Sons, that is, Esau and Jacob, one elected the other
reprobated: so in the Church there are found two sorts of People, good and
evil; some are wicked and impious, contemners of Gods word, and persecuters of
the Church; as after, the posterity of Esau: was. But there are others that are
the faithful Children of God, that hope through the mediation of our blessed
Savior, to be made heirs of everlasting happiness, and be crowned with him in
his Kingdom with the Crown of Glory. So that here the saying of our Savior may
be verified; the first shall be last, ^^d the last shall be first; for Esau was
the eldest, yet lost his Birthright; and Jacob was the youngest, yet got the
Blessing.

Of the Travels of the Patriarch Juda.
JVDA traveled from Sichem, where Jacob dwelt, and went to the Town of Odulla,
some forty and four miles, where he was married to the daughter of one
Chananei, whose name was Schuah, which signifies, a happy Savior, by her he
had two Children in that place, Viz. Ger and Onan.

From thence he went to Timnah to shear his Sheep, six miles: and as he turned
aside out of the way, he committed incest with his daughter-in-law Thamar, when
she was about 26 years of Age.

Afterward he went twice with his Brethren into Egypt, to buy Corn at Zoan,
where Joseph at that time was; for the Famine was very great round about. So
that reckoning his Journey twice two and again, it amounted to 822 miles; for
Zoan was 208 miles from Hebron, where Jacob and his Sons dwelt.

Lastly, he returned again with his Father and his Brother into Egypt, 208
miles. These things happened in the year of the World 1239. and before Christ
1729.

The Description of the Towns and places to which the Patriarch Juda traveled.
Of Odullam.
THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Juda, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west, and signifies The Testimony of the Poor: being derived of Ed, which
signifies a Testimony, and Dallimo, such as are called Poor. Here David hid
himself from the fury of Saul in a Cave, 1 Samuel 22. Jerome knew this Town, and
says that it was a Village. This was a Type of the Faithful, who being still
subject to the calamities and miseries of this World, and persecuted for
Righteousness sake, are glad with David to seek Holes and Caves to defend them
from their wicked Persecuters.

Of Thimnah.
THimnah is a City in the borders of the Tribe of Judah and Dan, situated in
Mount Ephraim, six miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west, and signifies a
perfect and fully finished City; being derived from Thamam, that is, fully and
absolutely finished; for it was adorned with many very fair and spacious
Buildings, set up by Joshua: for in his time it was a fair and large City, and
at such time as the Children of Israel invaded Canaan, he had much ado to win
it: Therefore the Children of Israel, for his great Valor, and to manifest
their thankfulness toward him, they gave it to him and to his Posterity for
ever; and here he lies buried, Joshua 24. Here Sampson married his wife, and
by the way killed the Lion mentioned in the fourteenth of Judges. This is a
Type of the Church, wherein Christ Jesus the true Ioshuah is the Head,
illuminating the same by the bright shining beams of his Gospel, the luster
whereof has gone throughout the whole World.

Of the Travels of the Patriarch Joseph.
WHEN Joseph was sent from Hebron by his father Jacob, he went to Sichem to
seek his brothers, 60 miles, Genesis 37.

2. From thence he went to Dothan, four miles, where by his Brothers, he was
thrown into a Pit, and after sold to the Ishmaelites, Genesis 37.

3. From Dothan he was carried to Tanis in Egypt, and there sold to Potipher,
Pharaohs chief Steward, 272 miles.

4. From Tanis he went to meet his Father in the Land of Gosen, which is 28
miles, Genesis 46.

5. From thence he turned back again to Tanis, and presented his Father and
Brethren unto Pharaoh, Genesis 47. which is 28 miles.

6. From thence he went back to Any to see his Father, who now was sick unto
death, there receiving his Ble^sing, he closed his eyes: which was 28 miles.

7. From thence he returned back again to Tanis, which is 28 miles.

8. From Tanis he went back to Any with a great company of Horses and Chariots,
preparing an honorable Funeral for his Father, Genesis 15. being 28 miles.

9. From Any he went to Atad, which lies upon the further side of Jordan toward
the East; which is 240 miles, where he made a great lamentation for the Death
of his Father seven days, Gen 50. The reason why Joseph went thus far about,
was because he went with such a company toward Hebron, that the Idumaeans,
through whose Country he should have gone, would not suffer him to pass that
way, standing in fear of his power.

10. From Atad he went to Hebron, the Metropolis of the Tribe of Judah, near to
which stood the double Cave in the Vale of Mamre, where Jacob was buried, which
was 40 miles, Genesis 50.

11. From thence to Heliopolis, a City of the Egyptians, where Joseph set up a
stately Academy for all Aegpyt, which was accounted 200 miles.

12. From thence he went to Tanis, or Zoan, which was the chief defense and
Metropolitan City of all Aegy^t, being accounted 6 miles.

So all the Travels of the Patriarch Joseph was 1962 miles.

A Description of the Places and Cities through which Joseph traveled.
Of Dothan.
DOTHAN was a City in the Tribe of Manasseh, forty and four miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, and distant six miles from Tiberias toward the
West, and signifies a commandment, being derived of Dothor Dathath, that is, he
commands or ordains, Here Joseph was thrust into an empty Ditch, and sold
to the Ishmaelites, Genesis 37. Here Elias the Prophet, being besieged by the
Syrians, showed to his Servant the Host of Angels that defended him with the
Chariots of Fire, etc. 2 King. ^6. Here Holophernes was slain, who had pitched
his Tents against Bethulia; for Dothan is a City which at this day remains at
the foot of the Mount of Bethuel, being situated in a fertile and pleasant
place, compassed about with fair Vines, Olives, and pleasant Medows, where the
Inhabitants do show that ancient Ditch wherein Joseph was cast, when his
brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites; according to that of Solomon, One
Generation passes, and another comes, but the Earth indureth for ever.

Of Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun.
THIS City is called by the Prophet Esaias, chap. 19. Irheri, which signifies The
City of the Sun, and is derived of Ir and Cheres, which signifies The
brightness of the Sun, and distant from Jerusalem 224 miles, toward the
South-west, six miles and a half from Zoan, or Tanis. This was a goodly City,
and in times past the Kings of Egypt have in that place kept their Courts and
places of residence. Here was a flourishing Academy, wherein was taught
Astronomy, Cosmography, and many other Liberal: Arts and Scienecs, with great
care and diligence, but principally Divinity (as Munster says) being adorned
with many benefits and privileges; for it was thought that the Patriarch
Joseph was the first Founder of it, and taught there, Genesis 47. Here dwelt
Dionisius the Areopagit, a Student of Athens, who at such time as our Savior
Christ was crucified, at Noon day (the Moon then being in the full) seeing the
Sun totally darkened, said to his Master Apollophan, Either the God of Nature
suffers, or the Fabric of the World is dissolved. The said Dionisius was
afterward converted by the Apostle Paul, in the City of Athens.

Of Goraen Atad.
THIS Town, or Corn-floor, was beyond Jordan, not far from Bethabara, 16 miles
from Jerusalem toward the South-east, (Here Joseph and therest of the
Egyptians bewailed the Death of Jacob) and took the name from Thorns and
Briers that compassed it every where about.

The Interpretation or Allegory of the Patriarch Joseph, and of his Life.
JOSEPH was a type of Christ diverse ways: for as Joseph's Coat, being of diverse
colors, was dipped in the Blood of Goats, so Christ, being very God, taking
upon him the Humane Nature, and sprinkled with the Blood of his stripes and
wounds, (being the Lamb of God slain for the sins of the World) was also made
changeable and of diverse Colors. Again, as Joseph was sent by Jacob to seek
his Brethren, so Christ was sent by God, his Father, to seek the lost sheep of
Israel, which, according to the flesh, were his brethren, Mat. 15. And as the
Brethren of Joseph were so great Enemies to him that it was impossible for them
to dissemble their hatred toward him, but that both in words and deeds, they
must needs express their bitterness, (Envy being the common companion of
Virtue) the Jews, the brethren of Christ, to whom the knees of all things both
in Heaven, in Hell, and in Earth bow, persecuting him with Taunts, Mocks, and
Stripes, yea, unto death, because he professed himself to be a good man, and
the Son of the Ever-living God.

And as the Is^maelites and Midianites, to whom Joseph was sold by Judah, was
of the stock of Joseph, the one being derived from Ishmael the Son of Abraham
by his maid Hagar, the other of Midian the Son of his second wife Keturah: so
Christ was sold by Judas, his Disciple, to the Jews, his kindred according to
the flesh, if you respect the Nation. The difference was in the price; Joseph,
the Type, being sold but for twenty pieces of Silver, Christ, the Substance,
sold at thirty. The End of the Book of Genesis.

Of the Travels of the Prophet Moses, and the Children of Israel out of Egypt.
IN the year of the World, 2412, and before Christ, 1554, Moses (being then
about forty years old) fled out of Egypt into the Land of Midian, 180 miles,
where he married Ziporah, the daughter of Rivel, Exodus 3.

2. From thence he went to Mount Sinai, or Horeb, 64 miles, Exodus 3. 7.

3. From Mount Horeb, he returned to Midian to his brother, 65 miles Ex. 4.

4. From Midian he went to Thanis in Egypt, 180 miles, Ex. 12. 13.

5. From thence he went with the Children of Israel to Raemses, 48 miles, Ex.
12.

6. From Raemses he went to Succoth, 8 miles, Ex. 13. Number. 33.

7. From Succoth he went to the Wilderness of Etham, eight miles.

8. From Etham he went to Hahiroth, which lies right against Baal-zephon 16
miles, Number. 3.

9. From Hahiroth, they passed through the middle of the Red Sea, and traveled
three days though the Wilderness of Etham, resting themselves at Marah, which
is forty miles: There Moses threw a piece of Wood into the Water, being bitter,
and presently it became Sweet as soon as the Wood was thrown in. Exodus 15. Number.
33.

10. From Marah he went to Elim, where there stood 12 Wells of Water and 70
Palm Trees, which is eight miles, Ex. 16. Nu. 33.

11. From Elim they went toward the South, 6 miles, and rested themselves by
the Red Sea; Number. 33.

12. From the Red Sea they went to the Wilderness of Zin, where it rained Manna
from Heaven, which is 16 miles, Number. 32.

13. From the Wilderness of Zin they went to Daphca, which is 12 miles. Number. 33.

14. From Daphca they went to Alus, which is twelve miles, Number. 33.

15. From Alus they went to Raphidim, being 8 miles: there Moses struck the
Rock, and presently Water issued forth, Ex. 27.

16. From Raphidim they went to mount Sina, which is eight miles: there God
gave the Commandments, Ex. 19. and 20.

17. From Sina they went to the Graves of Concupiscence, because there the
Children of Israel murmured against God for Flesh, and lo it rained Quails into
the Camp: which is 8 miles, Number. 11.

18. From the Graves of Concupiscence they went to Hazeroth, which is 8 miles,
there Miriam (Moses sister) was struck with Leprosy, Number. 12.

19. From thence they went to Rithma, which is 8 miles, Number. 33.

20. From Rithma they went to Rimon-Parets, which is six miles, Number. 33.

21. From Rimon-Parets they went to Libanon, which is six miles.

22. From Libanon they went to Rissa, which is six miles, Number. 33.

23. From Rissa they went to Kehelatha, six miles, Number. 33.

24. From Kehelatha they went to the Hill of Sephar, which is four miles.

25. From the Hill of Sephar they went to Harada, four miles and a half, Number.
33.

26. From Harada they went to Maceheloth, four miles. Number. 33.

27. From Maceheloth they went to Thahath, four miles, Number. 33.

28. From Thahath they went to Thara, four miles, Nu^. 33.

29. From Thara they went to Mithka, four miles, Number. 33.

30. From Mithka they went to Casmona, eight miles, Number. 33.

31. From Casmona they went to Moseroth, 32 miles, Number. 33.

32. From Moseroth they went to Bneiaecon, 24 miles.

33. From B^eiaecon they went to Mount Gidgad, 20 miles.

34. From Mount Gidgad they went to Iotbatha, 24 miles, Number. 33.

35. From Iotbatha they went to Ebrona, 20 miles, Number. 33.

36. From Ebro^a they went to Eziongaber, 28 miles.

37. From Eziongaber they went to the Wilderness of Zin-Kades, 48 miles.

38. From Zin-Kades they went to Mount Hor, as God commanded, 48 miles, where
Aaron died.

39. From Mount Hor they went to Salmona, 28 miles.

40. From Salmona they went to the Town of Phunon, 20 miles.

41. From Phunon they went to Oboth, 24 miles.

42. From Oboth they went to Igin upon the Hill Abarim, 16 miles.

43. From Igim they went to Dibon Gad, 16 miles, there is the Water Sarum, Number.
31. 33.

44. From Dibon Gad they went to Almon Diblathaim, 16 miles, Number. 33.

45. From Almon Diblathaim they went to the Hill Abarim, 16 miles.

46. From the Hill Abarim they went downward over the River Arnon, to the Field
of the Moabites, to the Town of Iachra, 16 miles, where Moses overcame Sehon
King of the Ammorites, with all his Camp. Numb. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

47. From Iachra they went to Hesbon, four miles, which Town Moses won from the
King of the Ammorites, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

48. From Hesbon they went to the Town of Iaezer, which Moses won, eight miles,
Numb. 21. Deuteronomy. 2.

49. From Iaezer they went to Edrei, twelve miles: there Moses overthrew King
Og with all his Army at Basan, Number. 21. Deuteronomy. 3.

50. From Edrei they went to Mount Libanus, 56 miles, which Moses won. Number. 21.
Deuteronomy. 3.

51. From Mount Libanus they returned back again to the Field of the Moabites,
forty miles, by which Field lies the high Hill Pisga, where Moses died, Deuteronomy.
34.

So all the Travels of the Patriarch Moses were 1424 miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places by which Moses traveled with the
Children of Israel.
Of Midian.
MIdian was a metropolitan City of the Midianites, near to the Red Sea, some
160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and signifies a Measure, being
derived of Madad, which signifies, He has measured. Here Jethro (Moses
Father-in -law) dwelt. In this Town the Kings of Idumaea kept their Court, 1
Reg. 11. There was also another City of the same Name, that stood near to
Arnon, some twenty four miles from Jerusalem toward the East; so that the
Midianites had their seat partly near the Red Sea, in Arabia Petraea, and
partly upon the Confines of the Moabites, taking their beginning from Midian
the Son of Abraham, which he had by his Wife Kethura, Genesis 25.

Of Horeb.
HOREB is a Mount of the Midianites, and is sometimes called by the name of
Sina. It lies 420 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. In this place God
appeared to Moses in a flame of Fire, Exodus 3. And as Bernard Britenbach says,
in this place there is a Chapel built, called the Church of S. Mary in the
Bush. In this Chapel there is a place showed where God spoke with Moses, Ex.
3. but how true, that I leave, because there are many Churches built by Monks
for no other purpose but to deceive Travelers and Pilgrims of their Money.

Of Raemsis.
THIS is one of the strong Cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, and
is a Metropolitan City in the Land of Gossen, 174 miles from Jerusalem toward
the South-west, and signifies Joy and Delight, being derived of Raam and Sus,
that is, to leap for joy.

Of Pihachiroth.
THIS was a certain Plain lying between two Hills near to the Red Sea, and was
called Pinaehiroth, which signifies a Mouth cut, or carved out; where the
children of Israel pitched their Tents. Here Pharaoh invaded them when they
went out of Egypt, taking opportunity of the place: for they having on either
side of them a high Mountain, before them the Red Sea, and behind them a cruel
and mighty Tyrant, to the judgment of man, had no means to escape. But the
Lord, to express the mightiness of his Power, and that the children of Israel
might know who it was that delivered them, made them a Passage, and led them
under the conduct of Moses through the Red Sea; in that very place drowning
their Enemies which had thought to make a prey of them. A little from this
place the Temple of the Idol Baal-zephon is to be seen.

Of the Red Sea.
THE Red Sea is 160 miles from Jerusalem Southward, betwixt, Arabia and Egypt,
and, as some are of opinion, it takes the name of the red Scales that grow
therein, wherefore in Scripture it is also called the Scaly Sea. Some say it
takes the name from red Sand that lies upon the shore, cast up by the Sea.
Others say, that the redness thereof happens because of the shadow cast into
the Water by the Mountains thereabout. The Vulgar are of opinion, that it is
naturally red by reason of the Water; but it is not so because it is like the
water of of the Ocean, clear and salt. Strabo, lib. 16. observes that this Sea
was so called from Erithraea, and thence Mare Arithraeum; because the word
Erithraeum in Greek signifies red or purple: the Latins call it Mare rubrum,
and we, the red Sea. This Erithrae was Son to Perseus and Andromeda, who
sometimes dwelt in the Island of that Sea. It is also called the Arabian Gulf,
running from the South to the West; and by the Hebrews, I am suph, a Scaly Sea,
all which names are at this day used: at the utmost bounds hereof are seen the
admirable works of Pharaoh Meco, who would have brought this Sea to the River
Nilus, that so he might have sailed thence into the Mediterranean Sea: but this
work he could not finish, being opposed by the wise men of Egypt. Here also
grows certain Trees that are as red as Brasil wood.

Of the mystery of the Red Sea.
AS Moses led the Children of Israel through the Red Sea, and delivered them
from the Bondage and Captivity of the Kings of Egypt; so Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, by his precious Blood, has deliver^d us from the house of Bondage, and
the tyranny of Satan: and as Pharaoh and all his Host was there drowned; so
the Sin of Adam, Death, and the Devil, in that Sea of Christ's blood is utterly
drowned, and we delivered from the Pit of Hell.

Of Baal-Zephon.
THIS was an Idol erected by the Egyptians near to the shore of the Red Sea,
and is called Baal-zephon, that is, the Lord of defense and watchfulness,
because, as they thought, he resisted Fugitive Servants, as Fagius and other
Hebrews observe: being derived from Baal, which signifies a Lord, and Zapha,
that is, that has seen, or to behold and see. The Temple of this Idol stood
close by the shore of the Red Sea upon a high hill, very curiously wrought, so
that the Children of Israel going through the same could not choose but see it,
yet nevertheless they went securely, when Pharaoh and all his Host were
drowned, notwithstanding that their God of Defense was so near them.

Of Marah.
THIS is a place in the Desert, which took the name of bitterness, distant from
Jerusalem 160 miles, toward the South-west. Here Moses made the Water sweet by
throwing in Wood: The mystery whereof is, when Adam and Evah had eaten of the
forbidden Fruit, they brought bitterness through all the World, yea, the
bitterness of Sin and Death: but God showed unto Moses another Tree, that is,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who being thrown into the Waters of bitterness,
Afflictions, Calamities, Miseries, yea, and the Death of the Cross, for our
sakes and sins underwent the curse of the Law; that so taking away the
bitterness, we might be made capable of that sweet and delectable place of
Eternal Life.

Of Elim.
THIS was the sixth resting place of the Israelites in the Desert, 120 miles
from Jerusalem toward the South-west; and is derived from Aial, which signifies
a Heart, a strong and swift Creature, of which it seems there were great
multitudes which resorted to this place to drink: and from thence it is called
Elim. Here stood 12 Fountains and 70 Palm Trees.

Of Sin.
THIS was a thorny place in the Desert, 156 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west. Here it rained down Quails and Manna from Heaven; being a Type of
our Savior Jesus Christ, that Heavenly Manna which raises us up unto Eternal
Life, Ioh. 6. and is derived of Manah, which signifies to distribute; and
therefore Man or Mannah signifies a distributive Gift, or Meat fallen from
Heaven distributively. Sin signifies a thorny place, from Zemeh, which
signifies a Bush: for Christ flourishes in the midst of his Enemies, as a
Lilly amongst thorns, Can. 2. Psalm. 10.

Of Raphadim.
RAphadim was a place where the Children of Israel pitched their Tents in the
Desert, not far from Mount Sinai, 132 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west, and signifies a Grass bench strewed with sweet herbs and flowers;
being derived from Raphad, which is as much as to say in our Language, To make
a Bed or place for one to lie down on. Here Moses struck the Rock, out of which
Water issued, Exodus 17. which was a Type of that Spiritual Rock Christ Jesus, 1
Cor. 10. who being struck with the staff of the curse of the Law, out of his
precious wounds and side sent forth that Water of Life which runs into
Eternal happiness. In this place the Children of Israel fought against the
Amalekites, and overcame them, Ex. 17. and here Iethro came unto Moses, where,
according to his counsel, there were seventy Elders chosen over the People, Ex.
18. This was a fruitful and pleasant place.

Of Mount Sinai.
SInai is 120 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and because in that place
there are many Bushes and Thorns, it is called Sinai; for Senaeh signifies a
Bush. Here the Law (which we call the Ten Commandments) was given; and not
unfitly, because like Thorns they prick and vex the Hearts and Consciences of
wicked men. It is also called Horeb, or Chareb, which signifies a place made
dry. Bernard Britenbach, and many others, in the Month of September 1483, went
purposely to see this Mountain, and with great Labor ascended to the top
thereof; for (as he says) it is a great Mountain, and of an extraordinary
height; in the lower part round, in the upper part divided into two tops or
mountains, one standing toward the West, the other toward the East. That toward
the West is called Horeb, that to the East, Sinai. And from these two it is
sometimes called Horeb, sometimes Sinai, being both one Hill of the Base.
Between these there lies a fair and spacious Plain, in the middle whereof (and,
as it may be thought, in the midst of the Mountain) there stands a Monastery,
near to which there is adjoining a very pleasant Garden and Orchard,
plentifully furnished with Date-trees, Fig Trees, and many others, very
profitable and pleasant; where in ancient times there were many Monks that
continued there. But it happened, that a certain number of Pagans, in hope to
find some Booty, came from a Haven of the Red Sea, called Thor, and upon a
sudden broke in upon them, and put forty of them to the Sword; from whence it
was ever after called the Abbey of the forty Martyrs. Now it remains desolate,
few or none inhabiting there, only two Monks of St. Katharines Order, and these
are also grievously troubled with the incursions of the Arabians. The Orchard
also is destroyed with Locusts, and the ground become barren. In this Orchard
there stands a little Chapel, in which there is a Cave where S. Onuphrius the
Anchorist lived.

At the foot of Mount Sinai, upon the North, stands the Monastery of St.
Katharine, of which the Emperor Justinian was the first Founder: it is
compassed about with a Wall; close by it stands a goodly Orchard, furnished
with diverse Trees of Fruit, pleasant and delightful; in that there stands a
goodly Fountain, which waters all about it. In this place there are a great
number of poor Monks, which get their Living by their hands, in the Desert
thereabouts. They say that here stood the golden Calf, spoken of Exodus 32. And
they show a round stone lying there, where they say Moses broke the two Tables
that were given him by God. To Pilgrims also they show the Tomb of St.
Katharine, standing upon the right side of the Quire, with certain other
Relics of hers. Upon the left side of the Quire, there stands a little door by
which you enter into a place called the Chapel of St. Mary of the Bush, where
they show the place of the Bush in which God appeared unto Moses: And, to give
grace to their Superstitions, there may none enter into that place but he must
put off his hose and shoes. There is another place, where, they say, God
commanded Moses to bring up Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu with him, and the seventy
Elders; with many other Superstitious Chapels, which would be too tedious and
frivolous to recite. Not far from this, there stands also a Mosko of the
Saracens, full as fair and spacious as that of St. Katharines, to which there
is adjoined a certain Turret; hither the Arabians and Saracens do also often
come to visit St. Katharine.

At the Ascent of the Mount Horeb, near to the Monastery of St. Katharine,
there stands a Fountain of very clear Water, in the likeness of a Bow, made
of Stone, reaching from the one side of it to the other; and stands like unto
an Arch or Gate. A little above that, at the foot of Mount Horeb, is to be seen
the Cave where Eliah rested when the Lord spoke unto him, 1 Reg. 19. Something
above that, is the Cliff of the Rock where Moses stood by Gods appointment,
when he past by, and he saw his back parts, Ex. 33. A little beyond that, is
the top of Mount Horeb, where is built a little Chapel that has an Iron Door,
the Keys of which are in the Monks Custody of the Abbey of Saint Katherine. In
this place they say Moses received the two Tables of Stone; wherein the ten
Commandments were written by the Finger of God. Ex. 34. There is none that
enters into this Chapel but with great Reverence, barefoot and bare-legged,
and casting themselves upon the Earth, kiss it. About fifteen paces from this,
they show the Cave wherein Moses fasted forty days and forty nights, Ex. 24.
34. A little above that there is a Mosk, to which there daily resorts Arabians
and Saracens, in honor of Moses, whom they reverence as a Prophet. Between
these there lies a Well of cold wholesome Water, which is called Moses Well.
Here seems in times past to have been some Monastery; for there are diverse
Ruins of Walks and Buildings to be seen. This Mountain is round, and difficult
to Ascend: it is 7000 steps to the top, and from thence the Red Sea and the Arm
thereof (where Pharaoh was drowned when he followed the Children of Israel) may
easily be discerned.

Mount Sina is much higher than this, and lies two days Journey from the Red
Sea: Upon the top whereof are many Rocks and great Stones. From thence you may
see sundry places, as, a Mountain lying in Thebaidaes, the great Haven of the
Red Sea, the Desert of Elim and Sur, with many others. The Deserts round about
take the name from the height thereof; and are called the Deserts of Sina.

Of the Graves of Concu^iscence.
THese Graves are 112 miles toward the South from Jerusalem, where the
Children of Israel, lusting after Meat, were fed by the Lord with Quails; and
for their disobedience died miserably. It was also called ^abara^, which
signifies an inflammation, being derived from Baar, to Burn, because here the
Wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and he struck the uttermost parts
of their Tents with Fire from Heaven, and consumed them, Numb. 11.

Of Hazeroth.
THis is a place in the Desert, some 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
the name thereof being derived from Chazer, which signifies a Cave, about the
Mouth whereof there grows long Grass; And therefore from hence Chazer is also
taken for Grass. Here Miriam the Sister of Moses and Aaron was struck with
Leprosy.

Of Rithmah.
RIthmah takes name from Iuni^er; for Rothaem in Hebrew signifies Juniper. It
is distant from Jerusalem 112 miles toward the South-eas^. Here the Children of
Israel pitched their Tents, Number. 33. and here it is very likely the Angel of
the Lord appeared to the Prophet Eliah, and brought him meat and drink.

Of Rimmon Parez.
IN this place the Children of Israel, the sixteenth remove, made their
abiding, being an hundred and eight miles from Jerusalem, toward the
South-east. Here, it is thought, the Children of Israel found great store of
Pomegranates, whereof division was made amongst them. For Rimmon is as much as
a grained Apple, or a Pomegranate; and Parez, He has divided.

Of Libnah.
LIbn^h is the seventeenth place where the Children of Israel stayed, and was
so called from the abundance of Frankincense that was found there; for Libnah
signifies white Frankincense. This is an 104 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west.

Of Rissa.
HEre the Children of Israel pitched their Tents, being about an 100 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-east; it took the name from the fruitfulness and
abundance of Flowers and Herbs that grow there; and is derived from Rasa, which
signifies to make moist, for there were usually exceeding pleasant and sweet
dews.

Of Chehelah.
CHehelah was the nineteenth place where the Children of Israel made their
abiding in the Desert, being 92 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west,
Number. 33. and signifies a Congregation, or Church, being derived from Rahal,
that is, He has assembled. This was a type of the Church, where all the Elect
and Faithful People of God travel through the Wilderness of this wicked world.

Of Saphar.
SAphar is a mountain in the Desert of Arabia Petraea, 88 miles from Jerusalem
toward the South-west. This was the twentieth Remove; the name of the place
being so called, partly of their Tents, partly of the roundness of the
mountains.

Of Harada.
HArada was full of wild Beasts, which struck the People into a mighty fear; so
called, as being derived from Charada, which signifies Terror or trembling.
Here the Children of Israel stayed the one and twentieth time, it being 80
miles from Jerusalem, toward the South-west.

Of Thahath.
THIS is a certain Valley 68 miles from Jerusalem, toward the Southwest, and
is derived from Tachath, which signifies a certain Plain, or low place.

Of Maceheloth.
THIS was the two and twentieth abiding of the Israelites, being 72 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Southwest. Here a Congregation of the Tribes of Israel
was called; for Maccheloth signifies a Congregation or meeting together.
Sometimes it is taken for the Church, being derived from Rahal, i. He
assembleth together.

Of Tharah.
THIS was a memorable place in the Wilderness, where the Israelites had a
breathing time; for now growing near to the Borders of the Land of Canaan,
after so many Journeys, they began to rest themselves, because of the Wars they
were shortly to undertake. And it is derived of Roah and Tarah, which
signifies a breathing-time. Here was the 24th Mansion of the Israelites.

Of Mithca.
HERE was the twenty fifth Mansion of the Israelites, being but 56 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-west, in the utmost Borders of the Land of Canaan,
and no doubt took the name from the delightful and pleasant taste of Grapes:
For Mitka signifies the same that Mithetk, that is to say, sweetness and
pleasantness.

Of Cades Barnea.
CAdes Barnea, a City of the Idumaeans, (being derived of Kadas and Barah, that
is, a holy place) is forty miles from Jerusalem toward the South; from this
place Moses sent Spies into the Land of Canaan, who brought of the Fruit of the
Land, but all of them discouraged the People, only Caleb: wherefore they
murmured, and the Lord was angry, and would not suffer them to enter into the
Land of Promise: So turning their Journey, they went to Ezeongaber, 148 miles,
so that they traveled in the Desert forty years, before they could enter into
the Land of Promise. Of this you may read, Genesis 14, 16, 20. Number. 13. 27, 33,
34. Deuteronomy. 1. Psalm. 29. Ezekiel. 47.

Of Chasmona.
IN this place the Children of Israel set up their Tents, a little before they
sent Spies into the Land of Canaan: it is not far from Cades Barnea toward the
South. For the twelve Spies were not sent from the City of Cades Barnea, but
from their Tents; and of this still distribution or sending, (for one out of
every Tribe was chosen) it took the name. For Casmona signifies, a still
distribution, being derived of Chasca and Manah, he stilly distributed.

Of Moseroth.
MOseroth was the twenty seventh Mansion of the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, and distant from Jerusalem 72 miles toward the South, where the
Lord caused them to return back for their murmuring, toward the South, that so
they might live just forty years in the Wilderness, Number. 14. 33. This place
seems to take the name thereof from Traditions, for there Moses repeated to
the Israelites the Law of the Lord; and for this cause their Tents were called
Moseroth, which signifies Traditions, and is derived of Masar, that is, to
Preach.

Of Benei Iaacon.
THIS was the twenty eighth Mansion of the Israelites, so called because there
their Tents were fairly set up, with pleasant Walks and places about them; for
Benei Iaacon signifies a Building or fair Walk; being derived of Bana and
Akah, that is, He has set up an House; and was 96 miles from Jerusalem
Southward, Number. 33.

Of Hor Gidgad.
AT this Mountain the Children of Israel stayed a while, because it was a
fertile and pleasant place, as Moses himself witnesses. It is an hundred and
twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the South; being derived of Harar, a
Mountain, and Glebam a Plow, Plin. l. 20. ep. 20.

Of Iotbatha.
THIS was the thirtieth Mansion of the Israelites in the Wilderness, being 132
miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and took the name from the pleasantness
and fertility of the Wilderness; being derived of Iatab and Batha, a certain
good and pleasant waste or wilderness.

Of Arbona.
THIS place being very discommodious and no whit profitable, the Children of
Israel were constrained to remove their Tents with great weeping and
lamentation; for Arbona, being derived from Abar and Naha, signifies partly to
remove, and partly to weep.

Of Aezion Gaber.
THIS was a Town of the Idumaeans, near the Red Sea, 148 miles from
Kades-Barnea, and 174 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. Here the
Israelites set up their Tents, and here Solomon made his Navy, which he sent to
Ophir to fetch Gold, 1 Kin. 9. This City no doubt took the name of the strength
and multitude of Trees, whereof these Ships were built; for they were very fair
Ships, and of excellent Workmanship. Aezion Gaber signifies a strong tree;
being derived of Ez and Gaber, that is a Tree of strength.

Of Zin-Kades.
THIS was a great Wilderness lying between Aezion-Gaber and Kades-Barnea, being
184 miles in length, abounding with thorns and high mountains. Upon the
North-side thereof lay Mount Seir, and Kades-Barnea, and toward the South the
Red Sea. It was called Paran and Zin, of the abundance of Thorns that grew
there; for Zin, of Zanan, signifies a sharp thorn; Zinnim, full of Thorns; and
Kadesh Sanctity or Holiness. Here Moses and Aaron having struck the Rock twice,
at length it brought forth Water; but for their murmuring and incredulity God
would not suffer them to go into the Land of Canaan. This lay an 120 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South.

Of the Mountain Hor.
HOR is a Mountain of the Idumaeans, eighty eight miles from Jerusalem toward
the South-east, and is derived of Harar, which signifies a great Mountain:
here Aaron died. The King of the Canaanites which dwelt toward the South, in a
Town called Arad, upon the Borders of Iudaea and Arabia Petraea, hearing that
Aaron was dead, invaded the Jews with a great Army, discomfited them, and took
some of them Captives. But after, the Israelites, to revenge this injury, took
and destroyed diverse Cities which belonged to the Canaanites, and put the
Citizens to the Sword. This Country is called Chormah, which signifies a
curse or desolation.

Of Zalmona.
THIS was a place in the Desert of Zin-Kades, where the Israelites pitched
their Tents, being 80 miles from Jerusalem to the South-east; and took the name
from shades, or little sheds under which the Israelites dwelt: for Zalmona
seems a compound of Zel and Mun, which signifies a shady place, and seems to
have affinity with Manah, to distribute here and there.

Of Phunon.
THIS was a City of the Idumaeans, situated in the Wilderness of Arabia
Petraea, 64 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east; and takes the name
from a fair and flourishing City. For Panan in Hebrew signifies an high
Pinnacle, from whence one might see all Parts of the World. Here Moses set up
the brazen Serpent.

Of Oboth.
THIS was the thirty seventh Mansion of the Israelites in the Wilderness, and
was fifty six miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east, and signifies a
Serpent called Python. Here the Arabians received an answer from the Devil by
way of Conjuration.

Of Igim.
THIS was the thirty eighth Mansion of the Israelites; so called, because of
the multitude which were assembled near to a Mountain called Abari^, 52 miles
from Jerusalem toward the South-east; for Igim signifies a Congregation.

Of Dib^n Gad.
THIS was the thirty ninth Station of the Israelites in the Desert, being fifty
two miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east, near to the Flood Zared,
bordering upon the Idumaeans and Moabites, running from thence into the Red
Sea, and, as it seems, takes name from descending into a strong place.

Of Almon Diblathaim.
THis place stands beyond the Red Sea, some forty miles from Jerusalem toward
the East; and takes name from a Frail of dried Figs; for Alam signifies, he
has hidden; and Debeleth, A Frail of dried Figs. Here was the fortieth Mansion
of the Israelites, and lay close by the River Arnon, Number. 21. and 23.

Of the Mountains Abarim.
THese Mountains lay 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, and takes the
name from Passing along; for Ab^r* is as much as to say, he went along. Between
these Mountains and the Lake Asphaltites, near to the Eastern River of the Dead
Sea, the Moabites inhabited.

Of Jahza.
THis was a City of the Levites, the Sons of Merar, in the Tribe of Benjamin,
24 miles from Jerusalem Eastward, Ies. 21. Here Moses overcame the King of the
Ammonites, and put them to death, Number. 21.

Of Chezbon.
THis was the Metropolis of Sehon King of the Ammorites, who held the Country
beyond Jordan; and because he would not suffer the Children of Israel to pass
through his Dominions, therefore Moses made War upon him, put him to death, and
gave all his Country to the Tribes of Reuben and Gad. This was a Fair Town,
and after fell to the Levites, Number. 21. 33. Deuteronomy. 1, 2, etc. and took its name
from Cheschebon, which signifies an Artificial understanding: for Chaschaf is
as much as excogitavit, that is, he has found out; and Cheschaef is, an
Artificial and ingenious Work.

Of Jaezir.
Jaezir was a City of the Priests in the Tribe of Gad, 36 miles from Jerusalem
toward the East, and in Ieroms time was a small Village, and s^gnifies, the
Lord is my help; being derived of Iah, that is, the Lord God; and Ez^er, the
helper.

Of Edrie.
THIS is a City in the Country of Gilead, beyond Jordan and the Galilean Sea,
thirty two miles from Jerusalem, South-eastward, near the Lake of Gaderin,
where Og the King of B^san was overcome by Moses; and after fell to the Tribe
of M^n^sses, Number. 21. Josh. 13. Deuteronomy. 13. S. Ierom says, that in his time this
Town was called Adar. Og signifies a Cook, or one that baketh Bread upon
coals. A^driae signifies an heap of bright Clouds; being derived of Adar and
Hi, that is, a clear heap.

Of Astoroth.
THIS was a Metropolitan City of Basan, four miles distant from Edrei, and 56
from Jerusalem toward the South-east. It stood beyond Jordan, and belonged to
the half Tribe of Manasses: of which you may read before in the Travels of Lot.

Of Pisgah.
THIS was an high Mountain in the Plain of the Mo^bites, against Jericho, 240
miles from Jerusalem, Eastward. It took the name from the Cities Pisg^h and
Nebo, and therefore is called sometimes Pisgah, sometimes Nebo* Here Moses
died. Nebo signifies a City of the Prophets: Pisgah, the top of a Hill.

The Travels of the Prophet Balaam.
THERE are many which think that this Prophet Balaam was of the Posterity of
Nahor the Brother of Abraham, and an Inhabitant o^ Charan in Meso^otamia, Genesis
11. Iose^hus says, he dwelt near to Euphrates: and St. Ierom, in a City called
Phatura, of which there is mention, Number. 22. and signifies an obscure Prophet,
or Oracle which interprets. For Pathar with the Hebrews, is the same that, He
has interpreted, is with us.

Wherefore this Prophet traveled from Pithora or Phatura in Meso^otamia, to
Abel, or the Plain of Vines, where his Ass spoke, Number. 22. which is 400 miles.

From thence he went to the Land of the Moabites, 40 miles, where, in the Mount
of Peor, he blessed the Children of Israel. So all the Travels of this Prophet
were 440 miles.

Of the Plain of the Vines.
THere is often mention of this place in the Scripture; and for the fertility
of the Country, and plenty of sweet Wines, there was a beautiful City built,
called Abel, of the Vines, some 56 miles from Jerusalem, South-Eastward, and
was placed just in the way as they went from Mesopotamia into the Country of
the Moabites. Whereby it appears, that near to this place the Ass spoke to
Balaam, Numb. 22. In St. Ierom's time there was found a little Village so
called, where there was great plenty of Vines. Here Ieptha overcame the
Ammorites, and made a great slaughter, Judge. 11.

The Travels of that Noble Captain Joshuah.
JOSHVAH and Caleb traveled with Moses from Raemsis out of Aegy^t through the
Red Sea, and came to Kades-Barnea, 268 miles.

From Kades-Barnea they were sent forth with other Spies to the Land of Canaan,
Number. 13. and went out of the wilderness of Zin and Paran, and came to the Town
of Rechob in Galilee, 140 miles.

From thence they went to the Town of Hamath in Syria, which was after called
Antiochia, 188 miles.

From Hamath or Antiochia they returned again to Hebron, 304 miles, where, upon
the side of the River Escol, they cut off a Bunch of Grapes, with the stalk,
which was as much as both they could bear upon their shoulders, Number. 13.

From Hebron they returned again to Kades-Barnea, twenty miles. There all the
People murmured against Moses, Number. 14. Hereby it is to be seen, that the
Spies, in forty days, traveled 648 miles in the Land of C^naa^, that is,
every day 16 miles and a little more.

After that, Ioshuah and Caleb traveled with M^ses and the Children of Israel
to Ezeon-Gabir, and from thence to the Town of Iahza, 464 miles.

From Iahza they passed through two Kingdoms to Mount Libanus, eighty miles.

From Mount Libanus they returned again into the Land of Sittim, that lay by
the hill Pisgah, in the field of the Moabites, 80 miles.

From the Land of Sittim they passed through the River of Jordan, and came to
Gilgal, six miles, where Ioshuah pitched his Camp, Numb. 21. Josh. 4. 5.

From Gilgal he went to Jericho, two miles: there he assailed the Town with the
sound of Basins, and won it, Josh. 6.

From Jericho he went to Ai, being four miles, and took and burnt the whole
Town, Josh. 7. 8.

From Ai he returned to Gilgal, four miles, and there upon the Hill of Ebal, he
built an Altar unto the Lord, and there were the Blessings and Cursings
pronounced, Josh. 8. Deuteronomy. 27.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles. There the Sun stood still during
the Battle against the three Kings, Josh. 10.

From Gibeon he went to Aj^lon, two miles; here the Moon stood still, Ios. 10.

From Aj^lon he went to Aseka, four miles: there it hailed upon the Enemies
that fled before Israel, Josh. 10.

From As^ka Joshua returned again into the Camp at Gilgal, twenty miles, Josh.
10.

From Gilgal he went to Makeda, where he hanged the five Kings, Ios. 10.

From Makeda he went to Libna, two miles, and took the Town, Josh. 10.

From Libna he went to Lachis, eight miles.

From Lachis he went to Eglon, eight miles.

From Eglon he went to Hebron, which is sixteen miles, Josh. 10.

From Hebron he went to Debir, one mile, Josh. 10.

After that, Ioshuah, with one continued War, won all that part of Iudaea which
lay toward the South, bordering Eastward upon the Dead Sea, Southward upon
Cades-Barne^, Westward upon Asdod and Gaza, and Northward upon Gibeon and
Gilgal: This circuit of Land contains about an hundred fifty and six miles.

From Gilgal Joshua went out with his Army about twenty two miles, to the River
of Merom, where he slew the rest of the Kings of the Canaanites in a memorable
Battle, Josh. 11.

From the River of Merom Joshua chased his Enemies, and followed them to Sidon,
which was 612 miles, Josh. 11.

From Sidon he went again to Hazor, 32 miles, which Town he burnt, Josh 11.

After that, Ioshuah at one time won all the Towns in the Holy Land, which lay
Northward in the Lands of Samaria and Galilea, from Gibeon to Mount Libanus,
and from the River of Jordan to the great Sea, called Mare Mediterraneum; which
Countries in circuit contain 280 miles.

After that Ioshuah returned again to his Camp at Gilgal, which lay 72 miles
from the Town of Hazor, where he made a division of the Land amongst the
Children of Israel, Josh. 14, 15.

From Gilgal he went to Shilo, twelve miles, where he made an end of dividing
the Land, Josh. 18.

From Shilo he went to Timnah Sera, eight miles, and there he dwelt; for the
Children of Israel gave him that Town for his own Inheritance, Josh. 19.

From Timnah Sera, Joshua, not long before he died, came to Sichem, forty
miles. There he assembled all the Tribes of Israel, Josh. 24.

From Sichem he returned again to Timnah Sera, forty miles, where he died and
was buried, Josh. 24. So all the Travels of Prince Ioshuah were 2392 miles.

The Description of the several Towns and Places to which Joshua traveled.
Of Rechob.
THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of A^hur, an hundred miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, Nu^. 13. and signifies a broad Street, being
derived from Radhab, that is, to extend out in length.

Of Haemah, or Chaemah.
THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Nephtali, and was an hundred
miles from Jerusalem, upon the utmost bounds of the Holy Land, at the foot of
Antilibanus, Number. 11. 34. Josh. 19. derived from Chamah, that is furious, or
burning with anger.

Of Gilgal.
THIS was a Town between Jordan and the City Jericho, twelve miles from
Jerusalem South-eastward; where the Children of Israel having past the River of
Jordan, first made War upon all the Nations of the Land of Canaan. Here they
solemnized the first Paschal Lamb. After they came into this Land, Manna
ceased, because they then did eat the Fruits of the Country. Here Joshua
taking twelve stones out of Jordan, pitched them up for a memorial. Here the
Tabernacle of God stayed for a time, which was the reason that afterward the
Israelites committed Idolatry in this place, Josh. 4. 5. Hos. 2. 4, 9. Amos 5.
Near to this place, Ehud the third Judge of the Children of Israel received
gifts of them to carry to Eglon King of the Moabites dwelling at Jericho, where
he killed him with a knife. Here Saul was the second time confirmed King of
Israel, 2 Samuel 10. and, as it seems, takes name of Roundness, Ioshuah at this
time building his Tent in a circular fashion: for Galal signifies a round Wheel
or Tent, compassed about with Ditches and Bulwarks.

Of Jericho.
THIS is a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, two miles from Jordan and six from
Jerusalem, South-eastward. Ioshuah overcame this with the sound of Horns or
Trumpets, Josh. 26. Heb. 11. Here Christ restored the blind man to sight, Mat.
6. converted Zachaeus, Luke 19. and was called the City of Palms, by reason of
the great plenty of Palms that grew there. You may read more of this hereafter.

Of Hai, or Ai.
HAI is a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, near to Bethel, toward the East, where
Abraham dwelt, Genesis 12. Ioshuah won this Town, Ios. 7. 8. It was so called of a
Prophet that dwelt there, and signifies, to be placed upon a heap: for Ai
signifies a heap, lying partly equally, partly unequally. The Ruins of this
Town were scarce to be found in St. Ierom's time.

Of Gibeon.
THIS was a Metropolitan City in the Tribe of Benjamin, the Inhabitants whereof
became Petitioners to Io^huah for Peace, I^s. 9. 10, 18. 2^ Sam. 21. Afterward
it was given to the Priests. It is derived of Gibeah or Gibeon, which signifies
a curled Hill. It was situated on a Mountain four miles from Jerusalem, toward
the North. Here stood the Tabernacle of the Covenant, and the brazen Altar.
Here Saul was first made King of Israel. Here he put the Sons of Abimel^ch the
Priest to death, 1 Samuel 12. Here Ios^uah overcame the five Kings of the
Ammorites. Here the Sun stood still. Of this you may read more hereafter.

Of Aj^lon.
THIS was a City of the Priests in the Tribe of Dan, four miles from Jerusalem
toward the South-east, and takes the name from an Hind; for A^ala signifies
an Hind, a Beast very strong and swift. Here the Moon stood still. Here
Jonathan tasted Honey, contrary to his Fathers command, for which he was judged
to dye, 1 Samuel 14.

Of Azeka.
AZeka was a City of the Ammorites in the Tribe of Judah, eight miles from
Jerusalem toward the West, near to Odullam, where David killed Go^^ah; and, as
it seems, takes the name from Munition, or a place compassed about with an
hedge; being derived from Itsek, he hedged about. This was a fair City in St.
Ierom's time.

Of the Valley of Achor.
THIS Valley is distant from Jerusalem twelve miles, and not far from Jericho
and Gilgal, toward the North, taking name (as it seems) of Achon, that Thief
mentioned in Ioshuah, who was stoned there; from whence it is called Achor,
which signifies Trouble, because of the terrible words that Joshua spoke unto
him there. You may read of this, Hos. 2. Esaias 25. Josh. 11. 15.

Of Makedah.
BEtween Eleuthero^olin and Bethlehem this Town stood, being in the Tribe of
Judah, some eight miles from Jerusalem, toward the West, and takes the name
of a Flower that hangs down the head, being derived of ^adad, which signifies
to hang down. Here Joshua hanged the five Kings of the Ammorites, which he had
formerly conquered, Ios. 10.

Of Libna.
LIbna is a City belonging to the Levites in the Tribe of Judah, and is
situated between Eglon and Makeda, ten miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west, where the fourteenth King that Io^hua conquered kept his Court; and
takes the name from the abundance of Frankincense that is found there. For
Lib^nah signifies white Frankincense. Zenacharib besieged this City. Some say
it takes the name from the Hebrew Lab^, which signifies white Bricks; because
there is found much matter whereof such kind of Bricks are made.

Of Lac^is.
LAchis is a City in the Tribe of Judah, and lies between Eleutheropolin and
Hebron, twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west, and two miles from
Rechila toward the North, Josh. 15. 2 Chr. 11. and takes the name from
Walking; being derived from Ialach, which signifies, He has walked. Ioshuah
took the King of this City and put him to death: and Zenacharib King of the
Assyrians besieged it, but to little purpose.

Of Eglon.
EGlon, was a City in the Tribe of Judah, twelve miles from Ierus^lem
Southward. Ioshuah took the King of this City and hanged him. It takes the
name from Aec^el, signifying a Calf.

Of Debir.
DEbir was a City of the Levites, twenty two miles from Jerusalem toward the
South, and almost half a mile from Hebron toward the North-west. Athniel the
Brother of Caleb won this Town, wherefore he gave him his Daughter Archsa to
Wife. Formerly it was called Kiriath-Sepher, i. a City of Scribes and Students;
for it was consecrated to Learning. From hence it was called Debir, which
signifies an Oracle, or an holy Altar; because the Lord there by his Priests
that were assigned for that purpose, did foretell and prophecy of things to
come: being derived from Debar, that is, He has spoken.

Of Asdod, or Azotes.
THIS was a City of the Philistims, situated upon the shore of the
Me^iterranean Sea, in the Tribe of Dan, and twenty two miles from Jerusalem
toward the West. This Town was conquered by Joshua, Josh. 11. 1 Reg. 5. It was
also taken by Psamniti^us King of Egypt, in M^nasses time, as Herodotus says,
it is now a little Town, and is called Azotus. In times past it was a fair
City, and took name from the fire of Love; being derived of Esh which signifies
a fire, and Dod beloved.

Of Gaza.
GAza was a fair City of the Philistims, upon the shore of the Red Sea, some 24
miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west, and signifies a strong Town,
being derived from Gazez, to confirm. Sam^son being enclosed within this Town,
took away the Gates and Bars thereof, and la^d them at the foot of Mount
Hebron, Judge. 16.

Of the River Merom.
THIS was a Lake not far from Dothan, some four miles from Tiberias, Westward,
and forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the North; and is so called from
the deepness of it, being derived of Rom, which signifies it was high, and
Marab, bitter; whence Merom, a high bitter Water. Here Ioshuah over-threw the
Kings of the Canaanites, Josh. 11.

Of Sidon.
SIdon takes the Name of Zod, which signifies, He has hunted, and was a famous
Mart Town in Phoenicea, being a place situated at the foot of that high Hill
Antelibanus, near to the shore of the Medi^erranean, sixteen miles from
Jerusalem Northward.

Of Libanus.
THIS is a Mountain of an extraordinary height, some 104 miles from Jerusalem
Northward, looking into Syria and Phoenicia. From thence the River Jordan
takes the beginning, being so called of two Springs or Wells, that is, Ior and
Dan, rising from the bottom of this Hill. It seems to take the Name from the
abundance of flowers and variety of sweet Smells or Dews that are there; and
also of Frankincense or Gum Olibanum found upon it: it is a very fruitful
Place, full of Springs and wholesome Herbs, so that no Serpent will abide in it:
it is divided into two parts, the one lies near Sidon Westward, called
Antelibanus; the other toward Damascus, upon the East, and is only called
Libanus. It is so high that it serves for a Sea mark, and so much the more
remarkable, for that (as some say) Snow lies continually upon the top of it,
so that a far off it seems white.

Of the River Jordan.
JOrdan is a pleasant sweet River watering the Holy Land (whereof you may read
before.) It is named Jordan at Caesarea Philippi, a little from the foot of
Antelibanus, 104 miles from Jerusalem, Northward: it passes through the Lake
Samachoniten, and divides it into two equal Parts; from thence, running through
a great part of Galilee, it falls into the Sea Tyberi^s, and there as it were
divides it into two parts, it waters that part of Iudaea called Samaria; and
about Easter, which is the beginning of that Harvest, it flows over the
Banks, and fructifies many Countries lying near it: at length it falls into
the Lake Asphalti^es and there ends, about fourteen miles from Jerusalem,
Eastward. So that from the first beginning of this River, to the end of it, is
ninety two miles. It is called Palah by the Hebrews, which signifies swift and
hidden; because it rises from a certain Well or Pit called Phiala, which is
always full of Water, but from whence it springs is unknown. Joshua about
Easter passed upon dry ground through this River, even then when it was fullest
of Water, Ios. 3. So did Eliah and Elisha, 2 Reg. Here Naaman the Leper washed
himself, 2 Reg. 5. Here Christ was baptized by S. John Baptist, Mat. 3. Luke 3.

Of Hazor.
THIS was a Town in the upper Galilee, belonging to the Tribe of Nepthali: it
was the chief Hold and City of the King of the Canaanites, being distant from
Jerusalem eighty miles toward the North. This Ioshuah destroyed with Fire and
Sword. Deborah also the Prophetess, besieged it, took it, and put Iabin the
King thereof to Death. In times past it was a very strong City, as the Ruins
thereof testify.

Of Siloh.
SIloh the City and House of God, was situate on a high Mountain in the Tribe
of Ephraim, four miles and somewhat better from Jerusalem toward the North.
Here the Ark of the Covenant continued from the time that the Israelites first
entered into the Land of Canaan, till Eli the Priest fetched it thence; in whose
time it was taken by the Philistims, and he for very Grief therefore fell down
and brake his Neck against a Stone, 1. Sam. 4. The Inhabitants hereabouts show
the Ruins of a certain Sepulcher standing upon the top of this Mount, where
they say Samuel was buried: but that cannot be true, for he was buried at
Ramath, which now is called Arimathea. Therefore it seems to be either the
Ruins of Eli's Sepulcher, who died miserably in that place; or else of the
House of the Lord, which many years past stood there. Schiloh signifies happy
and peaceable, being derived from Schalah, that is, to live at ease and in
peace.

Of Timnah.
Of this you may read in the Travels of Judah.

The Type and Mystery of Joshuah.
JOshuah and Jesus is all one in Signification, that is, Savior, or a
Defender; and did typically represent our Savior Christ; that as this Ioshuah
brought the Children of Israel through Jordan into the Land of Canaan, so Jesus
Christ, the true Ioshuah, and Savior of the World, through that Jordan of
Baptism, brings us into that place of Promise, Eternal Life.

Wherae the one and thirty Kings dwelt, overcome and slain by Joshuah, Josh. 10.
AS the Prophet Moses won all the Land upon the one side of Jordan, so Ioshuah
won all the Country on the other, from the Town of Baalgadan, beginning at
Mount Libanus, not far from Mount Hebron, till you come to the Town of Caesarea
Philippi, and to the Hill Seir, where sometime Esau dwelt: all which is 160
miles long, and 28 or 32 miles broad.

The first King that Ioshuah overcame, dwelt in Jericho.

The second King held his Court in Ai.

The third King dwelt in Jerusalem, and was called Adoni-bezec, that is, a Lord
of Righteousness. This King Ioshuah hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10.

The fourth King called Hoham, dwelt at Hebron, and was likewise hanged at
Makeda, Ios. 10.

The fifth King called Percam, dwelt at Iarmouth in the Tribe of Judah, twenty
miles from Jerusalem Westward.

The sixth King, called Japhia dwelt at Lachis, two miles from Iarmouth
Southward; he was also hanged at Makeda, Ios. 10.

The seventh King dwelt at Eglon, called Debir, and was also hanged at Makeda.

The eighth King was called Horam, and held his Princely Seat in the Tribe of
Dan, in the Town of Gezer, 16 miles from Jerusalem Westward: whom Ioshuah slew
with all his men, Ios. 10.

The ninth King dwelt at Debir.

The tenth King held his Court at Gerar in the Tribe of Judah, 14 miles from
Jerusalem Westward.

The eleventh King dwelt at Harma in the Tribe of Judah, which is upon the
borders of Arabia deserta, not far from Ziclag, forty miles from Jerusalem
South-westward: this Town in times past was called Zephal, that is a
Watchtower, because it stood upon a Hill. But when the Children of Judah had
overthrown the whole Army of the Canaanites, they called it Haram, a Curse,
Judge. 1.

The twelfth King dwelt at Arat, 22 miles from Jerusalem Southward, which was a
Town of the Ammorites, and took the name from the Asses that were in great
troops within the Woods thereabout. It lay in the Tribe of Judah.

The thirteenth King dwelt at Libnah in the Tribe of Judah.

The fourteenth King dwelt at Odullam.

The fifteenth King dwelt at Makeda. In this Town Ioshuah hanged five Kings,
Ios. 10.

The sixteenth King dwelt at Bethel.

The seventeenth King dwelt at Tapnah, not far from Jordan and Jericho, twelve
miles from Jerusalem North-eastward.

The eighteenth King dwelt at Hepher, six miles from Jerusalem Northward; part
of this Town was allotted to the Tribe of Zabulon. Jonas the Prophet was born
in this Town, 2 Reg. 14. and is four miles distant from the Town of Nazareth,
Southward.

The nineteenth King dwelt at Apheck; forty four miles from Jerusalem
Northward, and two miles from Iezreel. There also the Ark of the Lord was
taken, and there also the Sons of Eli the High Priest were slain, 1 Samuel 4.
This Town was in the half Tribe of Manasses.

The twentieth King dwelt at Lazaron, eighteen miles and half from Jerusalem
North-westward, not far from Ioppen and Lidda.

The one and twentieth King dwelt at Nadan, fourteen miles from Jerusalem
North-westward.

The two and twentieth King dwelt at Hazor.

The twenty third King dwelt at Simron, which Town was allotted to the Tribe of
Zabulon, Josh. 14. It lies sixty eight miles from Jerusalem Northward, not
far from the Town of Nazareth in Galilee.

The twenty fourth King dwelt at Achsap, eighty eight miles from Jerusalem
Northward, which Town was allotted to the Tribe of Aser.

The twenty fifth King dwelt at Tanaach, forty four miles from Jerusalem: this
Town belonged to the Levites, and stood in the Tribe of Manasses, six miles
from Iezreel Southward, Josh. 21.

The twenty sixth King dwelt at Megiddo, forty four miles from Jerusalem
Northward, scarce four miles from Tanaach. By this Town of Megiddo Josias King
of Judah was overthrown by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, 2 Reg. 23. In the
Travels of Josiah King of Judah I will speak of this Town more at large.

The twenty seventh King dwelt at Kades, Ios. 19. 21.

The twenty eighth King dwelt at Iaknedam, twenty seven miles from Jerusalem
Northward, being upon the Mediterranean Sea. This Town was allotted to the
Tribe of Zabulon, and given to the Levites, Josh. 21.

The twenty ninth King dwelt at Naphet Dor, which Town lay upon the Seacoast,
between the Hill Carmel and the Town of Cesarea Stratonis, forty eight miles
from Jerusalem Northward.

The thirtieth King dwelt at Gilgal, between Jericho and the River Jordan, and
was the first King that Ioshuah overcame, and slew all his host.

The one and thirtieth King dwelt at Thirtza, in the Tribe of Manasses, twenty
four miles from Jerusalem. In this Town Jeroboam, and after him, all the Kings
of Israel kept their Courts, before Samaria was built.

The Book of Judges.
The Travels of Caleb and Athniel.
CALEB and Athniel, with all the Children of Judah, went from Judah to Besek,
forty four miles, where they took King Adoni-Bezek Prisoner, and cut off his
Fingers and Toes, Judge. 1.

From Beseck they went to Jerusalem, forty four miles, which they took by
force, and burnt it, Judge. 1.

From Jerusalem they went to Hebron, 22 miles, which they took, and slew the
Giants that inhabited therein, Judge. 1.

Not far from Hebron lay the Town of Debir, which Athniel won, and therefore
Caleb gave him his Daughter Achsa for his Wife, Judge. 1.

From Debir they went to Zephat, sixteen miles, which Town they vvon, Judge. 1.

From Zephat they went to Gaza, four miles.

From Gaza they went to Ascalon, six miles, Judge. 1.

From Ascalon they went to Hebron, fourteen miles.

From Hebron they went back again to Debir, where Athniel dwelt, twelve miles.
So all the Travels of Caleb and Athniel were 132 miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places to which they traveled.
Of Beseck.
BEseck was a Metropolitan City of the Canaanites, near to the Water Merom,
where Adoni-Beseck kept his Court, forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, and took the name of Desaeck, or Bezeck which signifies Lightning. Of
this King you may read, Judge. 1.

Of Zephah.
THIS was a Town upon the Borders of the Tribes of Judah and Simeon; not far
from Siclag, Josh. 15. It takes the name from Zaphah, which signifies a
Watchtower: and was also called by the Sons of Judah, (who destroyed all the
Country) Chorma, which signifies a Curse, or a desolate place. To the Citizens
hereof David sent gifts, 1 Samuel 36.

Of Gaza.
OF this Town you may read more hereafter, in the Travels of the Ark of the
Covenant.

The Typical Signification of Caleb.
CALEB signifies An hearty man, or a man after Gods own heart, loving his
Neighbor with all his heart. For Col is as much as Omnius which signifies all;
and Cala, He forgiveth all; and Leb or Lebbah signifies an Heart the seat and
fountain of all Life. So that Caleb seems to take his name from a singular
hearty affection, whereby he forgiveth his Neighbor. For as this man being of
a noble Resolution and Courage, in the 29 year of his age won Hebron a strong
City, and put to death the three Sons of Anak, terrible Giants: so Christ the
Son of God, that so loved the World that he gave himself for it, with more than
humane resolution conquered Hell, and those three mighty Giants incident unto
it, the Sons of Satan, Sin, the World, and Death.

Of Athniel.
IN the year of the World 1503, and before Christ, 2565, Ioshuah died: after
whose Death, Caleb and Athniel Judged Israel; about which time the Israelites
committed Idolatry, and worshipped Baal and Asteroth: wherefore the Lord
suffered them to fall into the hands of Cushan Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia.
But because of their Oppression they cried unto the Lord, and he stirred up
Othniel the younger Brother of Caleb, who in the year of the World 2512
conquered Cushan, delivered the People, and governed Israel forty years, Judge.
3. Athniel or Othniel signifies the God of Time, being derived of Aeth; that
is, an Age: and is a Type of Christ, who is the God of Time; and in his due
time conquered the World, and Satan the Prince thereof, thereby delivering the
poor afflicted members of his Church out of his miserable Servitude and
Bondage: for which cause God has made him Judge over it, and given him full
power and authority to Rule and Govern it.

Of Ehud the third Judge of Israel.
EHVD was the Son of Gira of the Tribe of Judah, and dwelt in the City of
Jericho, or of the Palms. He was a valiant and resolute man, lame of his right
Hand, Iug. 3. and to the Judgment of man, not fit to be a Captain, being so
infirm. Yet it happened that this man growing in favor with Eglon King of the
Moabites, who at this time kept his Court in Jericho, (which Town he had but
eighteen years before conquered) took opportunity by the Children of Israel's
coming to Gilgal (for they came thither to offer unto the Idol, and to bring
gifts of the King) to present these Presents unto him; and because of his
former familiarity, was admitted to speak in private with him in his Summer
Parlour; where, as he was talking with him, he thrust him into the Belly with a
short Knife: and locking the door, he fled back to Seirah, and told the
Children of Israel what he had done. From thence they presently went to
Ephraim, there blew the Trumpet, and set upon the Moabites, and put them to the
Sword, Judge. 3.

The Travels of Ehud.
EHVD went from Jericho to Gilgal, two miles.

From Gilgal he went to Jericho, two miles.

From Jericho he went to Mount Ephraim, six miles.

From Mount Ephraim he went to Jordan, four miles, where he overthrew ten
thousand Moabites. So all the Travels of Ehud were fourteen miles.

Of Mount Ephraim.
THIS Mountain is about eight miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and
extends it self in Longitude to the City, near the Mediterranean Sea, called
Ioppa, which is distant from Jerusalem twenty miles toward the North-west.

The Travels of the Sons of Hobab the Kenite.
THE Sons of Hobab the Kenite (Moses Brother-in-law) went from Jericho to Arad,
a City in the Tribe of Judah, situated in the Desert, toward the South, 44
miles. Number. 10. Judge. 1.

Of Arad.
ARAD is a City in the Tribe of Judah, 22 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South, taking the name of a multitude of Asses that were found thereabouts in
the Desert, and is derived from Arod, which signifies a wild Ass, a rude
Creature.

The Travels of Jael, the Wife of Heber the Kenite, who killed Sisera the
Captain.
FROM Arad she and her Husband went to the Plain of Zaaenaim, and dwelt there,
near to a Town called Kades, a Town of Refuge of the Levites, in the Tribe of
Naphtali, 166 miles, there she killed Sisera. This Town lies 92 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North.

Of Deborah and Barak.
DEBORAH was the Wife of Lapidoth, and dwelt under a Palm Tree between Bethel
and Ramath, in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Jerusalem, toward the North:
the Inhabitants thereabouts show this Tree even to this day. Barak the Son of
Abineam, a Noble Captain, lived in her time at Kades, a City of Refuge
belonging to the Levites. She succeeded Ehud, in An. Mun. 2632. and before
Christ, 1336 years.

The Travels of Deborah and Barak.
BARAK went first from Kades Naphtali to the Palm Tree, where Deborah dwelt,
being 84 miles.

From thence he went with Deborah back again to Kades, being eighty four miles.

From Kades, with 10000 men, they went to the Hill Thabor, thirty six miles.
Here (as Josephus writes, lib. Antiq. 4.) there fell such a shower of Rain and
Hail upon the Enemies of the Israelites, that through the extreme violence
thereof, they were dispersed, and Sisera their Captain constrained to leave his
Chariot, and to save himself by flight, never staying till he came to the
Tabernacle of Iael, the Wife of Hebar the Kenite, situated in the Valley of
Zaaenaim, thirty six miles from the foot of the Mountain Thabor; where being
asleep, by reason of his great Journey, Iael struck a Nail into the temple of
his Head, so he died.

From thence Barak pursued the Enemies with great slaughter, to Haraseth of the
Gentiles, a City in the upper Galilee, near to the Lake of Samachoniten, 28
miles. This City is eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the North. Joseph. Ant.
lib. 5.

From Haraseth he went to the Plain of Zaaenaim, where he found Sisera slain in
the Tabernacle of Iael, as Deborah the Prophetess had told him.

From thence Barak with all his Army went to Hazor, where Iabin King of the
Cana^nites kept his Court, and of a sudden conquered the City, and put to death
all the Inhabitants, Joseph. Ant. lib. 5.

Of Thabor.
THABOR is a round and high Hill, situated upon the Borders of the Tribes of
Issachar and Zabulon, fifty six miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
extends it self to the River Kison, toward the South, and takes the Name of
Light, or a pure air, being derived of Bo, to go and come; Tebuah, to bring
forth fruit, and to give light. For this Mountain Thabor, by reason of the
Purity of the Air, is wonderful fertile and fruitful: There was also a Town at
the foot of it called by the same name. Here the Kings of the Midianites, Zeba
and Zalmuna were slain by Gideon.

Of Hazor.
THIS is a great City in the Tribe of Nepthali, eighty miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, which Ioshuah destroyed with Fire and Sword; So did Barak
also* The Ruins of this City is to be seen to this day.

The My^tery of Deborah.
THE word Deborah signifies a Be, and is a memorable Type of the Church. For
as a Be in all her actions sounds pleasantly; so the Members of Gods Church
in all their actions sing and sound forth the praises of God, or by continual
Prayers implore his aid and assistance; with the Be sucking from the Flowers
of the Holy Scriptures, the sweet and acceptable Doctrine of Faith, by which
the hope of everlasting Life is strengthened in us, with the sting of Gods Word
repulsing all vain delusions and idle imaginations, (the Temptations of the
Devil) and those waspish affections of cruel and wicked men; according to that
of Ecclesiasticus, the Be is but small, yet brings forth most pleasant
fruit, and presents unto man many memorable instructions. And as Plato says,
The King of Bees, although without a sting, yet Rules and Governs his
Commonwealth with great Severity and Justice. So Christ the head of the Church,
though he be a delectable Savior of Souls, and without any Sting of
Bitterness, yet does he Rule and Govern it with singular Justice and Sincerity.

Of Barak.
AFter Deborah was appointed Judge of Israel she ordained Barak for her chief
Commander or Captain. He takes his name from Thunder and Lightning typically
representing the Glory of Christ Jesus, as chief Captain of the Church, who
with the Thunder of the Law, and the Bright shining Glory of the Gospel,
destroyed the Enemies thereof; and by the Hosts of Angels and Saints at the end
of the World, will cast them down with thunder and lightning into that
Bottomless Pit, there to remain for ever.

Of the Travels of Gideon.
DEBORAH being Dead, Zaeba and Zalmuna (Kings of the Medeanites) cruelly
invaded the Land of Iudaea; but the Lord taking compassion upon his People,
sent them a helper* one Gideon the Son of Ioas, of the family of Abiezer, who
was born at Ophra or Ephron, a City in the Tribe of Manasses, not far from
Mahanaim on the East side of Jordan, some 44 miles from Jerusalem, toward the
North-East; and signifies, a Rooter out; from Gada, that is, He has rooted
out. This man, at the appointment of the Lord, took upon him the charge of the
People, and at Ophra, which signifies, Dust, he destroyed the Idol Baal,
pitching up in that place an Altar to the Lord: wherefore he was after called
Ieru-Baal, taking that name from Revenge, because he had destroyed the Idol. He
began to Rule in Israel in the year of the World, 2672, and before Christ 1296.

From Ophra, Gideon went to Harad, which stands in the half Tribe of
Manasseh, where he blew the Trumpet. From this place he sent back 22000 of his
Army, because the Lord had so appointed. But the Midianites hearing of this
preparation, provided a great Host, and pitched in the Valley of the Hill
Moreh: so Gideon taking only 300 with him, went over Jordan, and came to the
Town of Iesreel, (for Josephus says) sixteen miles from Harad, where he gave
the Midianites a wonderful Overthrow, Judge. 7. he also took there two Princes,
Oreb and Zeb, and returned to the River* Jordan, where he put them to death.

From thence he went to Succoth with his Army, in expectation to have refreshed
themselves, but the Inhabitants shut him out of the Town, and gave him many
despightful Words. This Town lay close by Jordan, and here Jacob sometime
pitched his Tent.

From thence he went to Penuel, which is two miles; there also they used him
unkindly and gave him bad Language.

From thence he went to Nobach with his Army, which is two miles.

From thence he went to Iagbetha, which is four miles, where he conquere^ Zaeba
and Zalmuna, Kings of the Midianites, who thinking themselves secure, made no
preparation for War till they were besieged. This was a memorable Battle, and
here the two Kings were put to Death.

From thence he followed the Enemy with a great Slaughter to Karkor, which is
four miles.

From thence he went back to Succoth, which is eight miles: here he put the
Inhabitants of this Town to the Sword, and all the Elders and Princes he tore
to pieces with Thorns, because they had formerly denied him Entrance into the
City.

From thence he went to the Castle of Penuel, which is two miles, and utterly
destroyed it, even to the ground, and put all the Inhabitants to death because
of their mocks.

From thence he went to Ophra, four miles, where, gathering together all the
Gold which he had taken from the Midianites, he made a rich Ephod, Judge. 8.

From Ophra he went to Sichem, where his Son Abimelech was born, which is ten
miles.

From thence he returned back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there he died,
after he had judged Israel ten years. So all the Travels of Gideon were eighty
two miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places to which Gideon traveled.
Of Iezreel.
JEzreel was a fair City situated upon a hill near to the Flood Kison,
bordering upon the Tribe of Issachar, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North; and signifies the Seed of God, being derived from El and Dara, the Seed
of the Almighty God. There was another of this name in the Tribe of Judah,
Josh. 15. In times past this was only the Seat and chief abiding-place of the
Kings of Israel. For Ahab and Iezabel kept their Court there, and Ioram their
Son, whom Iehu overcame: and here Iezabel was eaten up of Dogs. At this day
this fair City has in it but thirty Houses; and is called by the Inhabitants
of the Holy Land Sanatham, being situated at the foot of the Mountain Gilboah
Westward: in it there is a Watch Tower, upon the top whereof you may see
through all Galilee to Carmel, and the Mountains of Phoenicia, also to Mount
Thabor, and the Mountains beyond Jordan, called Gilead. Of this Town you may
read Ios. 17, 19. 2 Samuel 2.

Of Nobach.
THis was a City beyond Jordan, and stood in the half Tribe of Manasses, thirty
eight miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward. In times past it was called Kenah,
but after Nobach Prince of the half Tribe of Manasseh had conquered it, he
called it Nobach, Number. 23. and signifies a Prophet, being derived of Nabah, or
Nabach, he has prophesied, or cried out.

Of Jogbeha.
THis Town was built by the Children of Gad, and lies beyond Jordan, thirty
four miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward, and takes the name from the height
of the place where it stands; being derived from Gabah, which signifies, it
excels in height. Of this you may read, Judge. 8. Numb. 32.

Of Karkor.
KArkor is a City in the half Tribe of Manasseh, and is situated beyond
Jordan, foam 40 miles distant from Jerusalem North-Eastward, and takes the
name from Kir, which signifies he has destroyed, or subverted the Walls, for
here the two Kings Zeba and Zalmuna were taken. St. Ierom faith, in his Book de
locis Hebraicis, That in his Time it was a fair Town.

The Typical signification of Gideon.
THis Gideon (whose name signifies to root out) destroyed and subverted the
Enemies of the Jews: so Christ has destroyed the Kingdom of Satan, and daily
rooted out all his impious and wicked members, which are Enemies to his Church.

The Travels of Abimelech, the sixth Judge of Israel.
GIDEON being dead, Abimelech his Son went from Ophra to Sichem, which is ten
miles, and there was chosen by the Citizens to succeed his father in the
Government.

From thence he went back to Ophra, which is ten miles, and there put to death
his seventy Brethren, all Sons of Gideon, but by diverse Concubines; for God
permitted Bigamie, but did not command it.

From Ophra he went ten miles into the Land of Sichem, and there was chosen
King, about the Year of the World 2712.

From Sichem (which was the Seat of the Kingdom) he went to Ophra, being ten
miles, there he judged Israel three Years.

After that he went the third time back to the Sichemites, which is ten miles,
but they breaking promise with him, for very madness he caused the City to be
destroyed, and Salt to be Sown in the place, that so ever after it might become
Barren, accursed, and unhabitable.

From Sichem, he went with his Host to Thebets or Thebez, which is two miles,
where he was mortally wounded by a woman that flung a stone upon him at the
Siege of that Town, whereof he died, Judge. 9.

So all the Travels of Abimelech were 52 miles.

Of Thebez.
THis was distant from Sichem two miles Northward, and from Jerusalem thirty
eight miles; it took the name from Bitzah, which signifies a deep Pond.

Abimelech took his name from an hereditary Kingdom, or rather because he
obtained the Kingdom over Israel after his Father; and is as much as to say, My
father is a King; because good Princes differ little from good Fathers: for
Maelaech with the Hebrews signifies a King, Malechah, a Queen, and Malchech, a
Kingdom. So that this name Abimelech properly signifies a King, or one that is
a Father of his People.

Of the flight of Jotham, which was the Brother of Abimelech.
JOtham signifies a perfect and swift man, being derived from Iatham, that is,
perfect and swift. This Man, at such time as Abimelech put to death the rest of
his Brethren, to save his Life fled to Mount Gerizim, where he propounded the
Riddle mentioned, Judge. 9. And after, from thence he went to Beerah, where he
hid himself from the fury of Abimelech. All this was forty four miles.

Of Mount Gerizim.
GErizim or Garizim was a Mountain in the Kingdom of the Samaritans, and
extended it self in the Longitude as far as Jericho, near to Mount Hebal. In
these two Mountains the Blessings and the Cursings were recited, of which, more
shall be said hereafter; and it takes the name from the felling down of Trees,
being derived from Garaz, which signifies, to cut or to fell down: here Christ
spoke with the Samaritan, John 4.

Of Beerah.
BEerah was a Town in the Tribe of Judah, ten miles from Jerusalem, Westward.
Near to this City Judas Macchabeus fought a memorable Battle against Bacchides
and others, whom he conquered. It takes the name from a clear Well, being
derived of Beer, that is, he has made clear.

Of Thola the seventh Judge of Israel.
THola takes his Name from a Red Worm, In the third Year of this man's Rule,
Hercules, King of the Argives, (famous for his twelve Labors) began to reign.
Macrob. lib. 1.
or purple Color, which color is proper to Princes. He succeeded Abimelech in
the Government of the Jews, and began to rule An. Mun. 2715. and 1253 Years
before Christ. His Father's name was Puah, of the Tribe of Issachar. He dwelt
in Samir, a City of Mount Ephraim, not far from Jericho, twelve miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, and there he was buried, as you may see, Josh. 15.

Of Jair the eighth Judge of Israel.
JAir succeeded Thola, In the tenth Year of this Judge, An. Mun. 2747. and
before Christ 1221, Hercules died, and Priamus, King of Troy, began his Reign,
which he lost forty Years after.
and began his Government in the Year of the World, 2738, and 1230 Years before
Christ. He took his Name from the singular Worth and noble Disposition that was
in him. This Iair was one of the Tribe of Manasseh, he was lame of both his
Feet, and was a man of great Estimation among the Jews, for there were thirty
Castles and Towns that were called after his Name, Judge. 10. Number. 32. Deuteronomy. 3.
Ios. 13. 1 Chr. 1. He dwelt at Kamon, a Town in the Tribe of Gilead, some forty
eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North-East.

The Travels of Jephthah.
JEphtha was born at Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, and being driven into Exile
by his Brothers, he fled into the Land of Tob, 48 miles from Jerusalem, Judge.
11.

From thence he returned to Mizpah, 48 miles, and there was chosen Prince, and
began his Government Anno Mundi, 2760. and before Christ, 1208 Years, Judge. 11.

From Mizpah he went with his Army against the Ammonites to the City of Aroer,
where he put them to flight, which is twenty six miles, Judge. 11.

From Aroer he pursued the Enemies to Minneth, which is eight miles, Judge. 11.

From Minneth he went to the Plain of the Vines, which is twenty four miles,
Judge. 11.

From Abel, or the Plain of the Vines, he went to Mizpah, where he offered his
Daughter for a Sacrifice to the Lord, Judge. 11. At that time he and the
Ephramites got a memorable Battle, in which were slain 22000, Judge. 12.

So all the Travels of Iephthah were 322 miles.

Of the Cities and Places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Thob or Tob.
THob or Tob to which Iephthah fled, is in the half Tribe of Manasses, beyond
Jordan, not far from the Mountain of Antilibanus, a hundred and four miles from
Jerusalem North-eastward: this was a very fair and plentiful Country, and
therefore called Thob, being derived from Thobah, which signifies, Good and
Rate.

Of Mizpah.
MIzpah was a City in the Land of Gilead, in the half Tribe of Manasses,
eighteen miles from Jerusalem North-eastward, and signifies a Watchtower, of
Zaphah, to look out. In this Town Gideon dwelt, and after him, Samuel. It was
afterward destroyed by Judas Macchabeus: you may read more of it, 1 Samuel 7. 10.
Ier. 40, 41. Josh. 8. 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 6. Nehem 3.

Of Aroer.
THIS was a City of the Moabites, beyond Jordan, near the River Arnon, and sell
to the Tribe of Gad, Josh. 12. 13. Deuteronomy. 2. and takes the name from Turpentine,
being derived from Arar, that is, He has destroyed and rooted out; and was so
called, because Iephthah won a memorable Battle near to this place, Iud. 11.
This is often mentioned in the Scriptures. There was another Town of this Name
close by Damascus.

Of Minueth.
IN S. Ierom's time (forty years after Christ) this Town was called Menneth, of
Mercury, which the Syrians call Meni, from Manah, to distribute; being a Town
of Merchants, which disperse their Commodities here and there; and stood beyond
Jordan in the Tribe of Reuben, thirty two miles from Jerusalem toward the East.

Of the Plain of Vines.
Of this you may read more in the Travels of Balaam.

Of the Death of Jephthah.
THIS Iephthah was a famous Captain, and from thence took his Name; for
Iepthack signifies, To make him an open way with the Sword, being derived of
Patach, to open; and after he had judged Israel six years died: the manner of
whose Death is diversely reported; some say, that because he performed not his
Vow effectually, therefore God struck him with a grievous Ulcer, so that as he
was passing from City to City, in every place he left a Member. Others say,
that he died in the City of the Gileadites, and that in memory of his singular
Actions and noble Exploits, which by God's special Aid he achieved, his Body
was cut into pieces, and into every City of Gilead a Member sent, and there
buried; which, as I take it, is the better Opinion.

Of Ebzan.
EBzan was the tenth Judge of Israel, and succeeded Iephthah; he began his
Government in Anno Mundi 2666, and before Christ 1402. He was a Bethlemite of
the Tribe of Judah; and as the Hebrews think, Boez, the Grandfather of King
David: he had thirty Sons and thirty Daughters, and lived to see them all
married, and took them home unto him into his own Family, (which doubtless was
a great Blessing of God) and from thence took his Name; for Ibsan, or Abezan,
signifies, The Father of a Flock, or Multitude. He lived, dwelt, and was
buried in Bethlem Judah, Judge. 12.

Of Elom.
IN the Year of the World 2773, In the fifth Year of this man's Rule, the
Trojan War began, Ann. Mun. 2777, before Christ, 1190.
and before Christ 1195. Elom the eleventh Judge of Israel, began to rule, and
dwelt in Ajalon in the Tribe of Zabulon, who after he had governed ten Years,
died, and was buried in the same Town. There was another City of the same Name
in the Tribe of Dan, some four miles from Jerusalem, toward the West; where,
at the Prayer of Joshua, the Sun stood still.

Of Abdon.
ABdon, the twelfth Judge of Israel, In the fifth Year of this Man's Rule Troy
was taken.
succeeded Elom; and began to rule, Anno Mundi 2782, and before Christ 1185. He
dwelt in the Tribe of Ephraim, in a Mountain of the Amalekites, sixteen miles
from Jerusalem, Northwards. He ruled full eight Years, and then died, and was
buried in Pirithon. Abdon signifies a Servant: for he was a good Prince, but
that in obeying others he lost himself. This Abdon was a great man, had forty
Sons, thirty of which he saw married; and for his greater honor, had his
Chariot drawn with seventy Asses; for they used them as we do Horses.

The Travels of Sampson.
SAmpson was born in the City of Zarea, and brought up in the Tents of Dan and
Estahol, Iud. 13. From thence he went to Timnah, which is twelve miles; there
he fell in love with Judah the Daughter of a Philistine, Judge. 14.

From Timnah he went back to his Father to Zarea, and revealed his Affection;
which is twelve miles.

He and his Father went back again to Timnah, to see the Maid, and by the way
as he went he killed a Lion; which is twelve miles, Judge. 14.

From thence he returned back again, which is twelve miles, Judge. 14.

Within a while after, Sampson and his Friends went again to Timnah, and by the
way he found Honey in the Lion that he had slain, and gave it to his Friends to
eat; and when he came to the Philistines House he propounded the Riddle,
whereof you may read, Judge. 14. These things happened in Anno Mundi 2791, and
before Christ 1176, at which time, he succeeded Abdon in the Rule of the Jews.

From thence he went to Ascalon, a City of the Philistines, and killed thirty
of their men, and took away their Garments; which is 24 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Timnah, and delivered the Philistines
which had unfolded the Riddle, those change of Garments, Judge. 14.

From thence (being angry that his Wife had disclosed the Riddle) he returned
to Zarea to his Friends; which is twelve miles, Judge. 14.

Within a while after, when his Anger was over, he returned back to his Wife to
Timnah, which is twelve miles, it being then Wheat Harvest, and carried with
him a Goat, that so he might be merry, and be reconciled to her: but her Father
shut him out of doors, (because he had married his Wife to another Man)
wherefore he took a Company of Foxes, and tying them Tail to Tail, put
Firebrarnds to their Tails, and turned them into the Wheat of the Philistines,
and they set fire of all the Wheat and Vines, and Olives thereabout, Judge. 15.

From thence he went to a Cave in the Rock Eta, and there dwelt, which is
twelve miles, Judge. 15. At the Rock Eta Sampson was bound with two new Cords by
the Israelites, and from thence led to Ramah Lehi, which is six miles, where he
killed 1000 Philistines with the Jaw Bone of an Ass, that he found in the way.

From thence he went to Gaza, a City of the Philistines, which is forty two
miles: here he carried away the Gates of the City.

From Gaza he carried these Gates, with the Posts, to the top of a Hill near
Hebron, which is twenty miles, Judge. 16.

From Hebron he went to the River Soreck, where he dwelt with Dalilah the
Harlot, and by her was deceived and taken of the Philistines, which are twelve
miles.

Being taken of the Philistines, they put out both his Eyes, and bound him in
Chains, and led him from thence to Gaza, which is thirty two miles: there they
brought him into the House of their God Dagon, to make them sport; but he
pulled down the House, and a multitude of them were slain, where he also died,
and was buried in the Sepulcher of Manoah his Father, between Zerea and
Esthaol, twenty eight miles from Gaza, and almost twenty from Jerusalem toward
the West. This was in the Year of the World 1811, and before Christ, 1157.

So all the Travels of Sampson were 240 miles.

The Description of the several Towns and Places to which Sampson traveled.
Of Zarea.
THIS is a City in the Tribes of Judah and Dan, near the River Soreck, and
takes the Name from a Cole, or Leprosy; being derived of Sarag, that is, He
was Leprous; it stood eighteen miles from Jerusalem Westward.

Of Esthaol.
THis was a Town in the Tribe of Dan, two miles from Zarea, and stood near the
River Soreck, some twenty miles from Jerusalem, toward the West, and takes
the name from a Woman, and Fortitude; for Isca signifies a Woman, and El, or
Ol, strong and powerful. Here Sampsen was brought up. In St. Ierom's time this
was called Asto, not far from whence Sampson lies buried.

Of Timnah.
You may read of this in the Travels of Judah.

Of Ascalon.
THis was a City of the Philistines, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, some thirty miles from Jerusalem Westward, and to this day
retains the figure of half a Circle: it takes the name from an ignominious
Fire, being derived of Esh and Kalon, an ignominious light.

Of Gaza.
Of this Town you may read in the Travels of Ioshuah.

Of the River Soreck.
THis was a very pleasant River, upon the Bank whereof, grew great plenty of
Vines and Palms, from whence it seems to have taken the Name; for Soreck in
Hebrew signifies a Myrtle Branch, which brings forth a pleasant Berry
whereof excellent Wine is made. It takes the beginning at a Fountain in the
Tribe of Judah, some twelve miles from Jerusalem, toward the West, where there
is a very fertile Valley, in which, Dalilah, that betrayed Sampson dwelt: and
from thence it runs through the Land of the Philistines, and falls into
the Mediterranean Sea.

Of the Rock Eta.
IN this Rock there was a Cave wherein Sampson dwelt, as in a strong Tower: it
stood in the Tribe of Judah, near to the River Soreck, twelve miles from
Jerusalem, toward the West, and seems to take the Name from Fowls; for before
that Sampson inhabited there, a multitude of Fowls bred upon it, and therefore
it was called Eta; for Aith signifies a Fowl. This Rock growing to decay was
repaired again by Jeroboam, that Idolatrous King of Israel.

Of Sampson.
SAmpson or Schimpson, according to the Hebrew Text, taking his Name from the
Sun: for Schaemas in Hebrew signifies the Sun, and seems to have some
Affinity with Hercules, which ^ignifieth, The glory of the Air, for what can be
said to be the glory of the Air but the Light of the Sun, without which it
would become exceeding dark? Wherefore, as some think, this Sampson was the
true Hercules; and those noble Exploits that he did the Graecians attributed to
their Hercules.

The typical Signification of Sampson.
HE typically represents Christ diverse ways; first, in his Person, he was a
mighty Man; secondly, in his Profession, he was a Nazarite; thirdly, in his
Calling, he was a Prince and Judge; fourthly, in his manner of living, for he
went from place to place, to revenge himself upon the Enemies of God's People,
the Children of Israel; and in his Death: even so our Savior Christ is that
strong man, who being mightier than the Devil, has dispossessed him of his
tyrannical Jurisdiction over the Souls of Mankind; has taken away those gates
of Death, by his Mercy opening unto us the door of Life, that so being set at
Liberty from that hellish Imprisonment, we may be made Partakers of everlasting
Happiness: he was also a Nazarite even from his Mothers Womb, born and bred
there, tying himself to a Vow of Bondage, that we might be made free: he is a
Prince for ever, and a Priest after the Order of Melchisedeck: during the
continuance of his Life in this Vail of Misery, his chiefest Actions were to go
from place to place, to teach, to do good, and to rescue and relieve the poor
distressed Members of the Church, who lay miserably afflicted under the hands
of Satan; healing some, relieving others, and bringing a third sort into the
state of Grace: so that as Sampson delivered the Israelites from the Bondage of
the Philistines, Christ, our Prince and Judge, delivers his from the Slavery
of Satan; by his Death saving more Souls than in his Life. And thereby pulling
down the strong Buildings (the Temptations of Satan) has laid them level with
the Ground, that they shall never be restored again. And lastly, after this
Life ended, he shall be our Prince and Judge, and bring us to that place of
Promise prepared for us in his everlasting Kingdom.

The Travels of the Spies of the Danites.
SHortly after the Death of Sampson, the Spies of the Danites went from Zarea
and Esthaol to Mount Ephraim, to the House of Michah, which is twenty four
miles, Judge. 18.

From thence they went to Lais, which is a hundred and four miles, Judge. 18.

From thence they returned to Zarea and Esthaol, which is 126 miles, Judge. 18.

So all their Travels were 244 miles.

Of Lais.
LAIS was a City situated at the Foot of Mount Libanus, some 104 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, and was sometimes called Belenus: this, because it
stood so far from Aid, was quickly conquered by the Danites, and by them
utterly destroyed: it signifies, a roaring or devouring Lion. But after, being
rebuilt by the Danites, they called it Dan, and the Canaanites, Lesem Dan;
being derived of Laeschaem, which signifies a Lion.

The Travels of the Danites.
THE Army of the Danites went from Zarea and Esthaol to Kiijath-jearim, and
there pitched their Tents; which is sixteen miles, Iud. 15. From thence they
went to Mount Ephraim, to the house of Micha, and took his carved Image and his
Levite from him, which was eight miles, Judge. 15.

From thence they went to Lais, 104 miles.

So all the Travels were 128 miles.

Of Kirjath-jearim.
KIrjath-jearim was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Judah, upon the
Borders of the Tribe of Benjamin, about a mile from Jerusalem, Westward. It
sometime belonged to the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. and signifies a City of the
Desert or Woods; being derived from Kiriath, which signifies a City, and Iaar,
a Wood or Forest. Here stood the Ark of the Covenant, after it had been in the
Land of the Philistines seven months, and stood in the house of Abinadab, whose
Son, Eleazer, (because he was of the Family of the Levites) by consent of the
Children of Israel was consecrated Priest thereof, to attend and keep it: here
it remained forty eight Years, till David fetched it thence with great Joy, 1 Samuel 7. and 2 Samuel 6. 1 Chr. 14. Here Saul was anointed King by Samuel; here
the Company of the Prophets (that is, the Scholars of the Wise) came down from
the more eminent places where the Ark of God was, with holy Songs and
Instruments of Music, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon Saul, and he sung
and praised God with them. They called this the Hill of God, because the Ark of
the Covenant stood in it, 1 Samuel 10. Here Jonathan the Son of Saul thrust out a
Garrison of the Philistims, which held this Town in Subjection, 1 Samuel 14. Near
to this place was the Valley ^ephaim or of the Giants; where David won a
memorable Battle against the Philistims, and pursued them with great S^aughter
even to the Plain of Perizim, 2 Samuel 15.

The Travels of the Levite, whose Concubine the Inhabitants of Gibeon most
wickedly abused.
THIS Levite dwelt in Ramath in Mount Ephraim, from whence he went to Bethlehem
Judah, which is sixteen miles, to fetch back his Concubine, or rather his Wife,
which was the Daughter of a certain Citizen in Bethlehem, but a Bond-servant,
not free; such they called Concubines, because they had neither the honor to
be Mistress of the House, neither could their Posterity inherit the Lands or
Goods of their Fathers, although before God they were lawful Wives, Judge. 19.

From Bethlehem they returned back again on foot to Jerusalem, which then was
called Iebus, because the Iebusites inhabited there; which is six miles, Judge.
19.

From thence they went to Gibeah, not far distant from the City Gibeon, where
after Saul kept his Royal Seat. 1 Samuel 22. Here the Gibeonites abused the
Levite's Concubine: which was almost four miles.

From thence he went home to his own City Ramath in Mount Ephraim, and there
cut the dead Body of his Wife in twelve parts, and sent them throughout all the
Tribes of Israel: which is eight miles.

So all his Travels were thirty four miles.

Of Ramath.
THIS was a City in Mount Ephraim, some eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, and signifies a high and lofty City, being derived of Rom, that is, It
was high. This Town Baesa King of Israel would have fortified and repaired,
after it had been decayed; but he was hindered by Benhadad King of the Syrians,
that he could not finish what he had begun. There were many Towns and Cities of
this Name, as Ramoth where Ahob dwelt, 1 Reg. 22. Ramathaim Sophim, or
Arimathea, where the Prophet Samuel dwelt, 1 Samuel 1. and there where the Ark of
God stood, not far from Gibeah, was called Ramah also, Judge. 19. There was
another Ramath in the Tribe of Naphtali, Ios. 19. all of them being so called
because they stood upon very high Mountains.

The Travels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites.
FRom Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, where they appointed to meet, (for in the
Enemies Land they could not assemble themselves) the whole Army of the
Israelites went to the Ark of God in Shilo, which was about 48 miles.

From thence they went with their Army to Gibeah, where they lost 22000 of
their men, which is two miles.

From thence they returned to Shilo, and entreated God for Aid, which was two
miles, Judge. 20.

From thence they went a second time to Gibeah, and entered Battle again with
the Enemy; but because they trusted in their own Strength, therefore in this
second Expedition there were slain 18000 of their men; which was two miles,
Judge. 20.

From thence the whole Army of the Israelites returned back again, and before
the Lord in Shilo lamented the Overthrow they had twice sustained, and with
earnest Prayers implored his Aid, that they might obtain the Victory; which was
two miles, Judge. 20.

From thence they returned the third time to Gibeah, and there with great
Expedition renewed the War; and because they trusted in God, and not to their
own Strength, they put to the Sword 25000 of the Benjamites, and won a notable
Victory, Judge. 20. which was two miles.

Having taken and burnt the City of Gibeah with Fire, they returned back unto
the Town of Shilo, which is two miles; and there before the Lord they began to
lament the Calamity of the Tribe of Benjamin, saying, Wherefore has this thing
happened, that one of the Tribes should be rooted out before thee, Judge. 21.

From thence they went to Iabes in Gilead, and besieged and took it, and
destroyed it to the Ground, which is fifty two miles.

From thence they returned back again to Shilo, and with them brought 400
Maids, which they gave to the Benjamites to be their Wives, Judge. 21. which was
fifty two miles.

So all the Travels of the Children of Israel were 164 miles.

Of Jabes.
THis was a City in the Land of Gilead, fifty two miles from Jerusalem toward
the North-east; the Inhabitants whereof buried the Bones of Soul and Jonathan
his Son, 1 Samuel 31. it is derived of Iabesh, which signifies a dry City.

Here ends the Book of Judges.
The Travels of Elimelech, and his Wife Naomi.
ELimelech and his Wife went from Bethlehem Judah, into the Land of the
Moabites, where he died, which is forty miles.

From thence she returned with her Daughter-in-Law Ruth to Bethlehem Judah,
where Boaz married Ruth; which is forty miles. So their Travels were eighty
miles.

The first Book of SAMVEL.
The Travels of Hannah, the Mother of the Prophet Samuel.
HER Husband Elkana and she went from Ramathaim Sophim in Mount Ephraim to
Shilo, the House of the Lord, which was twelve miles; where, by earnest
Prayers, she obtained of the Lord a Son, 1 Samuel 1.

From thence she returned back again to Ramathaim Sophim, and there Samuel was
born, 1 Samuel 1. which was twelve miles.

From thence she went to Shilo, to present her Son before the Lord, and he
remained there with Eli to serve God all his Life, 1 Samuel 1. which is twelve
miles.

From Shilo she returned back again to her house, and bare Elkana a Son, and
two Daughters more; which is twelve miles.

So all her Travels were forty eight miles.

Of Ramathaim Sophim.
THis City stood in Mount Ephraim, not far from Lidda and Ioppa, some sixteen
miles distant from Jerusalem North-eastward; and was sometimes called Ramah.
Here Joseph (whose Addition was Arimathea) dwelt, that demanded the Body of our
Savior to bury in his own Sepulcher. It seems to be called Ramathaim Sophim
(which signifies, the high places of the Prophets) because there was an Academy
or public School of Prophets, which served for the whole Land, in this City.
At this day it is called by the Name of Ramath, having some Affinity to the
ancient name Ramah.

How the Ark of God was borne from place to place, after it was won from the
Children of Israel by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. 5, 6.
THE two Sons of Eli the Priest, Hophni and Phineas, carried the Ark of the
Lord to Ebenezer, which signifies, the stone of my help; which was forty two
miles, and is not far from Apheck, some forty eight miles from Jerusalem
Northward. Here the Ark of God was taken, and Hophni and Phineas died: old Eli
also broke his Neck at this time, about the ninety eighth Year of his Age, and
the fortieth of his Rule; for he ruled from the time of Sampson until then, 1 Samuel 4. This happened Anno Mundi, 2850. and before Christ 1117. The Prophet
Samuel succeeded him in the Government of the Church, and ruled 40 Years.

From Apheck the Philistines carried it to Asdod, or Azotus, and set it in the
Temple of their God Dagon, but the Idol fell down in the Night, and was broken
to pieces before the Ark of the Lord, 1 Samuel 4. which was 160 miles.

From thence to the City Gath, which was four miles.

From Gath to the Sea-town Gaza, twelve miles.

From Gaza to Ekron, thirty two miles.

From Ekron, they placing it upon a new Cart drawn with two new milch Kine, it
was brought back again to Bethsemes, which was twelve miles.

From thence it was carried to Kirjath-jearim, and placed in the house of
Abinadab, where it was kept until David's time, who fetched it thence to
Jerusalem with great Joy, about the Year of the World 2900, and before Christ
1068, which was two miles.

So all the while the Ark was from Shilo, it was carried hither and thither
some 276 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which the Ark of the Lord was carried.
Of Apheck.
THis was a City of Samaria, allotted to the half Tribe of Manasses, some half a
mile from Israel toward the South, and forty four miles from Jerusalem
Northward. It signifies an impetuous or violent Act; being derived of Aphak,
which is as much as, He works violently, or offers Violence. In this City,
Benhadad King of the Syrians, going from one place to another to hide himself,
was at length constrained to fly to Ahab King of Israel, to save his Life, and
crave his Aid, 1 Reg. 20.

Of Asdod, Ascalon, and Gaza, you may read before.
Of Gath.
THIS was a Haven Town situated upon the Banks of the Mediterranean Sea,
distant from Jerusalem thirty four miles toward the West. It seems to take
the name of the Abundance of Vines that grow thereabouts; for Gath signifies a
Press; or such an Instrument wherewith Grapes are pressed. This was Goliah's
Country. Here Achis, to whom David fled, governed, 1 Samuel 21, 27. and it is
very like that all the Kings of this City were called Achis, as sometime the
Emperors of Rome were called Caesar's. There were other Kings of the
Philistines that were also called by this Name.

Of Ekron.
THIS also was a City of the Philistines not far from the Mediterranean Sea,
and near to Asdod, some sixteen miles from Jerusalem Westward. At this day it
is but a small Town, and called by the Name of Accaron, having some Affinity
with the ancient Name Ekron. The Inhabitants of this Town worshipped Baal-zebub
for their God. It takes the Name from Extirpation, or such a Town as Penitus
distruit, has rooted out even the Foundation; being derived of Akar, which
signifies, to extirpate.

Of Bethsemes.
THIS was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. 21. four miles
from Jerusalem Westward; and signifies, the House of the Sun. Of this you may
read more before.

The Travels of the Prophet Samuel.
SAmuel's Mother brought him from Arimathea to Shilo, being twelve miles, where
he was to serve the Lord God all his Life.

From Shilo Samuel went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead; forty eight miles. Here
Samuel called a Congregation, and made a solemn Sacrifice unto the Lord of a
sucking Lamb; and the Lord at the same time thundered from Heaven, and dispersed
the Army of the Philistines, so that they fled, 1 Samuel 7.

From Mizpa he went to Arimathea, 56 miles; there he dwelt, and built an Altar
unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.

From thence he went yearly to Bethel, sixteen miles, 1 Samuel 7.

From Bethel he went to Gilgal, two miles, 1 Samuel 7.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles, 1 Samuel 7.

From Mizpah he went again to Arimathea, 56 miles. Thither came unto him the
Elders of the Children of Israel, desiring him to choose them a King, 1 Samuel 8.

Therefore he went out of the Town of Arimathea, about sixteen miles, to
Ramath, which lies in the Land of Ziph, not far from Bethlehem Euphrata, and
there Samuel anointed Saul the Son of Kish to be their King, 1 Samuel 10.

From Ramath he went to Gilgal, sixteen miles. There he offered, and showed
Saul what he should do, 1 Samuel 10.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpah in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles: there
Saul, by casting of Lots, was chosen King, 1 Samuel 10.

From Mizpah he returned to Arimathea, fifty six miles, 1 Samuel 10.

From Arimathea he went to Bezeck, 44 miles, where Adoni-Bezeck was taken,
whose Fingers and Toes the Children of Israel cut off. There Samuel and Saul
caused an Army of Men to issue out against the Children of Ammon, 1 Samuel 11.

From Beseck Samuel and Saul passed over Jordan to Iabes in Gilead, sixteen
miles, and there overthrew Nahaz King of the Ammonites, and all his Host, which
done, Samuel said unto the Soldiers, Let us now go unto Gilgal, and there
renew the Kingdom.

From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, thirty six miles. There Saul was
placed in his throne Royal, 1 Samuel 11.

From Gilgal Samuel went to Arimathea, which is twenty miles.

From Arimathea he went again to Gilgal, twenty miles, and there he sharply
rebuked King Saul, because he had offered a Sacrifice contrary to his command,
1 Samuel 13.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles, 1 Samuel 13.

From Gibeon he went to Arimathea, twelve miles.

From Arimathea he went to Gilgal, twenty miles; there he rebuked King Saul,
because he did not wholly destroy the Amalekites, and Samuel himself hewed the
Body of Agag King of the Amalekites in pieces, 1 Samuel 16.

From Gilgal he went to Arimathea, twenty miles.

From Arimathea he went to Bethlehem, sixteen miles, and there he anointed
David King, 1 Samuel 16.

Then he returned again to Arimathea, sixteen miles, where he died, and was
buried, 1 Samuel 28.

So all the Travels of the Prophet Samuel were 364 miles.

Of Arimathea, Mizpah, Ramath, and the rest of the Towns mentioned in his
Travels, you may read before.
The typical signification of Samuel.
SAmuel is derived of Shemuel, that is, desired of God: and was a Type of God
the Father: For as Samuel anointed David, so God anointed his beloved Son with
the Oil of Gladness, and of the Spirit, Psalm. 45. Esa. 61.

The Travels of King Saul.
SAVL went from the Town of Gibeon to Mount Ephraim, four miles, to seek his
Father's Asses, in An. Mund. 2870, and before Christ, 1908.

From Mount Ephraim he passed through the Land of Salisa, to the Borders of the
Town of Salem, 12 miles.

From Salem he went to the Land of Gemini in the Tribe of Benjamin, sixteen
miles.

From the Land of Gemini he went to Rama, four miles; there by Samuel he was
anointed King, 1 Samuel 10. This Town lay not far from Bethlehem, and close by it
lay Rachels Grave. There certain men met with Saul in the Borders of Benjamin
at Zelach, and showed him that his Fathers Asses were found; which was about a
mile from Jerusalem.

From thence Saul went about two miles to Zilzah; there three men met him (that
traveled to Bethel) and gave him two Loaves of Bread, 1 Samuel 10.

Then he came to the Mount of God, which is the Town of Kirjath-jearim; there a
company of Prophets met him, and prophesied; then the Spirit of God came upon
Saul, and he began to prophecy: which was about six miles from Bethlehem.

From Kirjath-jearim he went again to Gibeon, which is four miles, 1 Samuel 10.

Then he went again from Gibeon to Gilgal, and there he offered, and Samuel
showed him what he should do: which is 12 miles, 1 Samuel 10.

From Gilgal he went to Mizpa in the Land of Gilead, thirty six miles, where he
was chosen King.

From Mizpa he went again to Gibeon, forty eight miles.

From Gibeon he went to Beseck, forty miles; there he gathered certain
Soldiers, and led them against Nahas King of the Ammonites, 1 Samuel 11.

From Beseck he went with his Army to Iabes, sixteen miles; there he overthrew
Nahas with all his Host.

From Iabes in Gilead he went to Gilgal, thirty six miles. There he was placed
in his Princely Seat, 1 Samuel 11.

From Gilgal he went to Michmas, four miles: there he sent 3000 men out of
Israel, to his Son Jonathan to Gibeon.

From Michmas he went to Gilgal with his Army, four miles. There he offered,
for which Samuel rebuked him, 1 Samuel 13.

From Gilgal he went to Mount Benjamin, about twelve miles, not far from Gibeon.

From Gibeon he went to Michmas, eight miles. There Jonathan overcame the Army
of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.

From Michmas Saul followed the Enemy to Ajalon, twelve miles. There he would
have slain his Son Jonathan, because he had eaten a little Honey, 1 Samuel 14.

From Ajalon he went to Gibeon, four miles, where he kept Court.

From Gibeon he went to the Land of the Moabites, 28 miles; which he overcame.
1 Samuel 14.

From the Land of the Moabites he went into the Country of the Ammonites, 40
miles; which Country he overcame, and took in all their Towns.

From the Land of the Ammonites he went to Gibeon, 60 miles, 1 Samuel 15.

From Gibeon he went into the Land of Edom, or Idumaea (as it is commonly
called) forty miles, and overcame all the Country.

From Idumaea he returned again to Gibeon, forty miles.

From Gibeon he went with an Army about 600 miles, to Zoba in Armenia, which he
overcame, 1 Samuel 14.

From the Kingdom of Zoba he returned to Gibeon, 600 miles.

After that, he went out against the Philistines, 12 miles, and as the History
shows, Saul had Wars with the Philistines during his life, 1 Samuel 14.

From the Philistines he returned again to Gibeon, unto his Palace, twelve
miles.

From Gibeon he went into the Wilderness of Sur, 160 miles; there he overcame
the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.

Also he overcame the whole Country, from the Town of Peluso to the Red Sea,
which is 92 miles.

From thence he went again into Jury, to the Town of Carmel, 140 miles, 1 Samuel
15.

And from thence he went unto Gilgal, 32 miles. There the Prophet Samuel
rebuked him, because he did not wholly destroy and consume the Amalekites: and
there Samuel hewed the Body of Agag King of the Amalekites into small pieces, 1 Samuel 15.

From Gilgal he went to Gibeon, twelve miles.

In the eleventh year of Saul, An. Mun. 2881, and before Christ, 1807, David
being then about twenty years of age, was anointed King by Samuel. Within a
while after, Saul was vexed with an evil Spirit: then David played unto him
upon the Harp, by which he was eased. Soon after he went forth with his Army
toward Socho and Asekah, which was some eight miles distant from Gibeah. There
David killed that famous Champion Goliath, 1 Samuel 15.

From thence the Israelites followed the chase of the Philistines to the Valley
and River Soreck, four miles; and thence unto the Gates of their Cities, that
is, to Ekron, which is eight miles; to Ascalon twenty miles; and to From the
place where David killed Goliath
Gath, which was twenty four miles, all the way putting the Philistines to the
Sword. So that there died in this Fight 30000 of them, 1 Samuel 17.

Then they returned back again, and spoiled and burnt the Philistines Tents,
where they found great Riches, twenty four miles.

From Socho and Aseka he returned again to Gibeon, eight miles: there the Women
came out of all places in the Town dancing, and with loud voices singing, Saul
has slain a thousand, but David ten thousand, 1 Samuel 18.

From Gibeon he went to Arimathea, two miles, minding to kill David, and came
to Naioth in Ramoth, where Samuel and David were: but the Spirit of God came
upon Saul, and he prophesied, falling down upon the ground before Samuel and
David, all that day, and the night ensuing, 1 Samuel 19.

From thence he returned again to Gibeon, twelve miles: there he thought to
have killed his Son Jonathan with a Spear, because he excused David. There also
he caused eighty five Priests to be put to death, because the High Priest
Abimelech at Nob had given David of the Shewbread to eat, and had delivered
him Goliah's Sword, 1 Samuel 21, 22.

From Gibeon he went to the Levitical Town Nob, twelve miles, where he spared
neither man nor woman, young, nor old, no not the innocent Children, but put
them all to the Sword, and wholly destroyed the Town, 1 Samuel 12.

From the Town of Nob he returned to Gibeon, twelve miles.

From Gibeon he went to the Wilderness of Moan, Southward, 20 miles.

From the Wilderness of Moan he returned again to Gibeon, 1 Samuel 23. twenty
four miles.

From Gibeon he went to Engedi, where David in a Cave cut off a piece of his
Garment, which was twenty four miles, 1 Samuel 24.

From thence he returned again to Gibeon, twenty four miles.

From Gibeon he went to Ziph, twenty two miles, and as he lay asleep upon the
Hill Hachila, David came secretly into the Camp, and took his Cup and his Spear
from his Head, and would not kill him, 1 Samuel 26.

From the Hill Hachila he returned unto Gibeah, 22 miles.

From thence he went to fight with the Philistines at Mount Gilboa, forty miles.

From Mount Gilboa, having changed his Apparel, he went to Endor, which was
four miles: There he asked counsel of a Witch, and the Devil appeared unto him
in the likeness of Samuel, 1 Samuel 28.

From thence he returned again to Mount Gilboa, to the Camp, four miles, and
the next day he fought against the Enemy, in which Battle his three Sons were
slain, and he himself put to flight, 1 Samuel 31. 1 Chronicles 11.

From Mount Gilboa he fled eight miles to Bethsan, where he killed himself, 1 Samuel 31. 1 Chr. 11.

From thence the Body of Saul was brought to Iabes in Gilead, where it was
buried, 2 Samuel 31. 1 Chr. 11.

So all the Travels of Saul were 2428 miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
OF Gibea, Salem, Ramath, and Iabes, you may read before being memorable places
to which Abraham, Ioshuah, and the Children of Israel traveled.

Of Bethsaliza.
THE Land of Salisa, with the City Bethsaliza, was situated in Mount Ephraim,
eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west. This was also called
Baalsaliza, 2 King 4. and signifies the Trinity, being derived of Schillesch,
to make threefold.

Of Michmas.
THIS was a City in Mount Ephraim, in the Borders of the Tribes of Benjamin and
Manasses, not far from Jericho, some ten miles from Jerusalem toward the
North. Near to this City, Jonathan and his Armor-bearer put the Army of the
Philistines to flight, 1 Samuel 14. You may read of this Town in Esd. 2. Isa. 10.
This was a strong City of the Moabites, and seems to take the Name of Kemosch
or Chamos, which was a God which they worshipped in their Banquets and Meetings
for Mirth: as Bacchus sometime was amongst the Romans. To this Idol Solomon
built a Temple, 1 Reg. 11. Ier. 48.

Of Zoba.
THE Kingdom of Zoba, which Josephus calls Sophenam, was in Armenia, near to
the Mountains Antitaurus and Masius, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, extending it self on both sides of the River Euphrates. It was a very
large, fruitful, and pleasant Country, wherein inhabited many Kings. This place
Saul conquered, and David retained it, 1 Samuel 14. 2 Samuel 8. and signifies an
aspiring Kingdom; being derived of Zabah, He has aspired.

Of Carmel.
CArmel was a City in the Tribe of Judah, situated in a fertile Mountain, some
eight miles from Hebron toward the East, but twelve miles from Jerusalem
toward the South-west, in the Wilderness of Moan, where that foolish and
covetous Fellow Nabal dwelt. There is likewise another Town called by the same
Name, in the Tribe of Issachar, not far from Ptolomais, which is upon the shore
of the Mediterranean Sea, sixty four miles from Jerusalem toward the North,
standing upon a Promontory which extends it self into the Ocean; of which you
may read, Ios. 19. Ier. 46. In this City the Prophets Elias and Elizeus dwelt,
who put the Priests of Baal to Death in that place, 1 Reg. 18. 2 Reg. 4. Carmel
signifies Spike, or a fertile Field bringing forth Vines, Herbs, and diverse
kinds of Flowers and Fruits; and is oft-times used for a pleasant place, Esaias
29. 32, 37. Ier. 24. There are a Sect of Monks, that of this Mountain are
called Carmelites, who built for themselves an Abbey there close by the Church
of St. Mary's, about the Year of the World 5170, and in the Year of our Lord
1170.

Of Azekah.
AZekah and Socho were two Towns in the Tribe of Judah, eight miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-west, Of these you may read before.

Of Nobe or Nob.
THIS was a City of the Priests, in the Tribe of Benjamin, where Abimelech,
High Priest of the Israelites, dwelt; who at such time as David fled from Saul,
he gave him of the Shewbread, and the Sword that he took from Goliath: for the
which cause, Saul commanded fourscore and five Priests to be slain, and the
City, with all the Inhabitants thereof, to be put to the Sword, 1 Samuel cap. 22.
At this day (as Bernard Brittenbaccus says) it is called Bethenopolis, and is
in the way between Jerusalem (from whence it is distant some sixteen miles
toward the North-east) and Dyospolim. It takes the Name from Naba, which
signifies, He has prophesied. Of this you may read, 1 Samuel 20. 21, 22. and
Esaias 10.

Of Maon.
THIS was a Town in the Wilderness of Iudaea, some 24 miles from Jerusalem
Southward, near Ziph and Carmel, where Saul had besieged David and all his men,
and would have either put them to the Sword, or taken them Captives. But the
Philistines on a sudden invaded the Land, so that Saul was constrained to leave
the Siege to oppose their Incursions. It takes the Name from a fruitful
Habitation, and a firm and safe Mansion, 2 Samuel 23. Ios. 15.

Of Engedi.
THIS was a Castle or Town situated in a Mountain near to the shore of the
Dead Sea, a little beyond Sodom, six miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-east, and in the Tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. In times past it was a fruitful
place both of Vines and other Fruits: there also grew a kind of Balsam. But
Cleopatra, in the time of Mark Anthony, brought the Roots of it into Egypt,
and there made a pleasant Garden, where now Christians inhabit. There are yet
some small Stalks here and there of this Balsam to be found upon this Hill
Engedi, but the Saracens do not regard it, neither dwell any Christians near to
dress it, so that it grows to decay. Engedi signifies the Fountain or Well
of a Goat or Lamb. These Mountains are very high, and of a wonderful Nature; in
some places great ragged Rocks appearing, in others, plain and fruitful
Valleys; insomuch, as they are fearful and horrible to Strangers that behold
them.

Of Ziph.
THIS was a Town in the Desert of Ziph, placed in a certain Mountain not far
from Hebron, in the Tribe of Judah, some twenty two miles from Jerusalem
toward the North-east, Josh. 15. Unto this Desert (near to this City) David
often times resorted, and at last was betrayed by the Inhabitants of this Town.
It seems that the Town and Wilderness took that Name of the abundance of
Pitch that was found in it; for Zaephaeth in Hebrew signifies Pitch.

Of Gilboa.
THIS was a Mountain in the Tribe of Manasseh, near to Sichem and Apheck, forty
miles from Jerusalem toward the North; it extends eight miles to the City
Bethsan, and two miles toward the North to Mount Hermon. It seems to take the
name from the bubling forth, or springing up of Water; for the River Kison
begins at the foot of this Mountain, and divides it self into diverse parts
until it comes to the Hill Hermon, and then it runs into two principal
Streams, the one passes toward the East into the Sea of Galilee, the other to
the West, toward Carmel, and so into the Mediterranean Sea. There be some that
are of Opinion, that neither Rain nor Dew falls upon this Hill, because when
Saul was slain David cursed these Mountains, saying, Let neither Rain nor Dew
fall upon you, O ye Mountains of Gilboa, because the strong men of Israel were
slain there, 2 Samuel 1. But this was but a figurative Speech, whereby David
would express the greatness of his Sorrow; for Borchardus, the Monk, speaking
of this Mountain, says, That as he was ascending upon it, there was such a
violent shower fell, that he was wet through his Clothes, and the Waters in
great abundance ran into the Valleys. And in the Year of our Lord 1283,
sleeping upon this Hill on the Eve of All Saints, there was a great dew fell
upon his Clothes; only some parts of it were very stony and barren, as are many
other Mountains in that Country.

Of Endor.
THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Manasses, near the River Kison, Ios. 17. where
Saul asked Counsel of a Witch, 1 Samuel 28. It seems to take the name from a
Fountain of Durance; for D^r signifies, He has made sure. It is distant from
Jerusalem forty four miles toward the North. In S. Ierom's time this was but a
small Village.

Of Bethsan.
THIS was a City in the Tribe of M^nasses, between Beth^lia and the Sea of
G^lilee, some forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Io^. 17. It
takes the name from a Churchyard, or a place of Rest: for B^th signifies a
House, and Iaschan, he has slept. Here Saul killed himself, and the
Phili^^ines cut off his Head and set it upon the Wall of this City. Afterward,
about St. Ierom's time, Ptolomy called this Scytho^oli^. You may read in the
Second Book of the Macchabees, how it was the Town of the S^^thians; for the
Scythians which dwelt some 800 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, came
with a great Army into the Holy Land, and by force won this City, and dwelt
there; of whom it was called the Scythian Town. Ios^ph. in lib. 2. de Bell.
Iud. cap. 18. remembers a strange Accident that happened near this Town; for the
Jews besieging it, there were of their own Nation that dwelt within the City,
who (that they might make a private Gain) took wages of the Scythians to oppose
their Brethren and Countrymen: by which means, the Scythians got the better.
But after a while, the Scythians considering that the number of the Jews was
great, and fearing some sudden Insurrection or Innovation, gave them warning to
depart and leave the Town: they, though with great Grief, as being pressed with a
twofold necessity, (their own Wants and the hatred of their Kindred) did so,
relying merely upon the Courtesy of Strangers. But, about some two days after,
in the night time, the Inhabitants of Scythopolis breaking out of the City
unawares, fell upon them, and in recompense of their Kindness, put to the Sword
some thirteen thousand: many slain unawares, some as they were eating, and most
in their Sleep. After they had committed this Massacre, they compassed about
the Wood where they were, took away all their Substance, and suffered not a Man
to depart alive. Wherefore, one Simon the Son of a certain ancient and noble
Citizen, called Saul, perceiving their present Misery, and that there was no
hope to escape imminent Death and utter Ruin, in a cruel and desperate manner
breaks out into these Words: O miserable Wretch that I am, that against my own
Conscience have lift up these Impious Hands against my Country, committing
daily Massacres to pleasure them, who at this day lay violent hands upon all we
have; die therefore, thou that art thus profane, and with thine own hands make
an end of thy wretched Life, since thou do not deserve to die honorably in
the face of the Enemy, but wretchedly in a corner, and for thine own offense.
So soon as he had ended these words, he turned him about with a fierce
countenance, and falling upon his Father, Mother, Wife, and Children, put them
all to the Sword; after, burnt his Goods; and to make an end of the Tragedy,
ran himself upon his own Weapon. These things happened but a little before
Vespasian came into the Land of Iudaea. At this day this City Scytho^olis is
called after the ancient name Bethsan.

The typical representation of Saul.
SAVL, if it be properly taken, does sometime signify a Grave or Sepulcher,
and sometimes Hell; being derived from Scheuol, which may be taken for both. As
therefore Saul persecuted innocent David with an inveterate malice, even unto
the death; so the Sons of Satan (evil and wicked men) persecute Christ and his
Members, with an immovable malice, sparing neither Prophets nor Apostles,
neither such as are Religious, no nor Christ himself; but with cruel torments
put them to lingering deaths, till they be utterly extirpate (as they think:)
and then wanting objects to satisfy their Savage minds, they follow their own
devilish councels, till with Saul they come to desperate ends. Sch^ul, or
Saul, if it be taken in the better part, sign^fieth, He has desired, or called.

The Philistines Travels from their Camp to Michmas.
THE Philistines encamped themselves at Michmas, upon Mount Ephraim, some ten
miles from Jerusalem Northward: and out of the Philistines Camp there issued
three Armies to spoil the Country.

The one marched toward Ophra, and went from Michmas to Salem, twenty eight
miles.

From thence they went to Ophra, four miles.

The second went from Michmas to Bethoron, eight miles.

The third went from Michmas to the Valley of Zeboim, eight miles.

So all the Travels of the Philistines were fifty eight miles.

Of Zeboim.
THis Valley is not far from Jerusalem, in the Tribe of Benjamin, Nehem. 11.

The Travels of Jonathan Readiness Son.
JONATHAN went from Gibeah to Kirjath-jearim, which was two miles, where he
drove the Philistines out of their Camp, 1 Samuel 13.

From thence he went back again, two miles.

From thence he went to Michmas, which is eight miles, and there, by the help
of his Armor-bearer, he gave the Philistines a great overthrow, 1. Sam. 14.

From thence he followed the Enemy to Ajalon, which is twelve miles; there his
Father would have put him to death because he had tasted a little Honey, 1.
Sam. 14.

From Ajalon, Saul and his Son Jonathan returned to Gibeah, his own City, which
was two miles.

From Gibeah he went with his Father to Socho and Asekah, which was eight
miles; where, after David had slain Goliath (for that singular Virtue and
Heroical Spirit which Jonathan saw in him) he loved him as he did his own Soul,
and preferred him before his own Life and Honor, 1 Samuel 18.

From thence he went with his Father to Gibeah, some eight miles, where Women
with great mirth and joy met him, saying, Saul has slain his thousand, and
David his ten thousand: for which cause Saul, out of mere envy, (for then he
did not know that he had been anointed by Samuel) would have slain him, and his
Son Jonathan also for excusing him, 1 Samuel 18, 19.

From Gibeah Jonathan went into the Desert of Ziph, some 22 miles, to comfort
David: there they swore a solemn Oath of mutual friendship, to continue as long
as they lived, 1 Samuel 23.

From thence Jonathan returned, which was 22 miles, 1 Samuel 23.

At last he went to the Wars with his Father to Mount Gilboah, forty miles:
there he, his Father, his Brothers Abinadab and Melchisuah were slain.

So all the Travels of Jonathan were 126 miles.

The Travels of Abiathar, Abimelech's Son.
WHEN Doeg the Idumaean, at the command of Saul, had slain the Priests of the
Lord, this Abiathar, the Son of Abimelech the High Priest, fled to the Wood
Hareth, not far from Kegilah, some twenty miles, and came and told David of all
that had happened, 1 Samuel 22, 23.

Of Kegilah.
THis was a City in the Tribe of Judah, four miles Hebron, toward the East,
and twenty from Jerusalem toward the South-west. From which Town David drove
away the Philistines that had besieged it, 1 Samuel 23. You may read of it Josh.
23. Nehem. 3. In St. Ierom's time it was but a small Town, where the
Inhabitants show to Strangers the Sepulcher of Habakk^k the Prophet. Not far
off, toward the West, lies Hareth, that Wood where David was when Abiathar
came to him. Kegila in Hebrew signifies a Tent.

The Travels of King David.
DAVID was anointed King by Samuel, when he was twenty years old, Anno Mundi
2881, and before Christ, 1807. Within a while after, he was sent by his Father
Isay, or Iesse, to Gibeah of Saul, which was eight miles; there he played to
Saul upon the Harp, 1 Samuel 16.

When Saul went out with his Army against the Philistines, David returned back
to Bethlehem, his own Country, which was about eight miles. There he fed his
Father's sheep, 1 Samuel 17.

From thence he went to Socho and Asekah, and killed Goliath, which was four
miles.

From thence he carried the Head of Goliath to Jerusalem, which was eight miles.

From thence he went with King Saul to Gibeah, which was four miles.

From Gibeah he went twelve miles into the Land of the Philistines, and to
perform the promise which he had made, put to the Sword 200 of them.

From thence he returned, and brought their fore-skins unto Saul; in recompense
of which noble Exploit, he was married to Readiness Daughter: which was twelve
miles.

A while after, he made an incursion upon the Land of the Philistines, and in a
sharp and cruel War got a famous Victory, and returned with glory to Gibeah,
which was at the lest twenty four miles.

But when David perceived that Saul went about to take away his Life, and that
(he was so narrowly pursued) he had no way to escape, but to be let down by a
cord through a window; he made haste and went from Gibeah to Arimathea, where
he complained unto Samuel of the Injuries of Saul, and laid before him in what
a miserable condition he was, and to what straights brought. Wherefore Samuel,
to comfort him, brought him to Naioth; which seems to be so called, of the
fair situation and pleasantness of the place: for Mabah signifies, a laudable
and comely place: this was a College of such as were Professors of that sacred
study of Divinity. Now Saul hearing that David was in this place, came with
some of his Servants on purpose to make him captive. But at the sight of Samuel
he began to sing Psalms and Hymns after the manner of the Prophets.

From thence David returned back unto Gibeah, some twelve miles, where, at the
Stone of Ezel (not far from Gibeah, toward the South) Jonathan went to David,
and counseled him to depart with all speed, for that his Father meant evil
toward him. So they took leave either of other with Tears, 1 Samuel 20. Ezel
signifies an Angle, as was a Stone full of Angles or corners.

From thence he went to Nob, which was twelve miles.

From thence he went to Gath, a City of the Philistines, where he ^eigned
himself mad, because of Achis whom he feared, 1 Samuel 21. being twenty four
miles.

From thence he went to the Cave of Odullam, twenty four miles, and thither
resorted unto him many of his Kindred, and such as were indebted and in danger,
to the number of forty Persons. In this place he wrote the 57 and 142 Psalms,
as may appear by their Titles.

From thence he went to Mizpah in the Land of the Moabites, where, at this
time, the King kept his Court, and there he carefully commanded his Friends and
followers to his safe Protection, till such time as the fury of Saul was
assuaged, 1 Samuel 22.

From thence, by the counsel of the Prophet Gad, he returned by the Wilderness
of Hareth to Kegila, and rescued it; forty miles. Here Abiathar the Priest came
to him, 1 Samuel 23.

From thence, fearing the coming of Saul, he went into the Wilderness of Ziph,
whither Jonathan came to him, 1 Samuel 22. which was four miles.

From thence he went to the Town of Moan; four miles.

From thence he went to the Hold of Engedi, thirty six miles.

From thence he went six miles to Carmel in Iudaea, where he determined to have
destroyed Nabal for his churlishness, 1 Samuel 25.

From thence he went to Hackilah, two miles.

From Hackilah he went to Gath, where Achis King of the Philistines kept his
Court, sixteen miles. This Achis was very courteous, and bountifulminded; he
entertained David, and gave him freely the City of Zicklag to inhabit in, 1 Samuel 27.

Wherefore David went thence to the Town of Ziclag, which was twelve miles, 1 Samuel 27. and there inhabited one year and seven months.

From thence David went often toward the South, and made incursions upon the
Amalekites, wasting and destroying their Land which lay in the Desert of Sur,
about eighty miles distant from Ziclag, and a hundred and twenty miles from
Jerusalem toward the South-west.

From the Desert of Sur he returned back again unto Ziclag, which was eighty
miles, and sent part of the Prey which he had gotten to the King of the
Philistines; Of which you may read more, 1 Samuel 27.

From Ziclag David went with the Army of the Philistines to fight against Saul,
eighty eight miles, even to Sunem: for the Philistines pitched between Iesreel
and Sunem, 1 Samuel 28, 29.

But because the Princes of the Philistines durst not trust him, therefore, by
the consent of Achis their King, he returned back to Zicklag, eighty eight
miles, 1 Samuel 29.

Whilst David was gone with the Philistines to fight against Israel, the
Amalekites invaded Ziclag, took it, and burnt it with fire, and carried away
Ahinoam and Abigal (David's Wives) Captives. Wherefore, when David came to
Ziclag, and perceived what had happened, with all speed he pursued the Enemy;
and in the way as he went he found an Egyptian, who, a little before, the
Amalekites had left there, because he was unable to follow them. This Egyptian
guided David to the Tents of the Amalekites, who, suspecting no such evil, were
making merry with the Booty that they had taken. But David with the rest of his
Company so manfully behaved themselves, they gave the Amalekites a sudden
overthrow: and, as it often happens to such as are negligent and careless, he
took away from them their former Booty, and put most of them to the Sword. This
Battle was fought some eight or twelve miles from Zicklag, as by the
circumstance of the History may appear.

From this slaughter he returned back to Ziclag, being twelve miles, and
repaired it; to every neighboring City sending a part of the prey. Here he had
certain intelligence of the Success of the Israelites in their Wars against the
Philistines, and of the death of Saul and Jonathan, which he bitterly lamented,
1 Samuel 30. 2 Samuel 1. These things happened in the tenth year after Samuel had
anointed David King.

From Ziclag he went to Hebron, a Metropolitan City of the Tribe of Judah,
being a Town of Refuge belonging to the Levites, which was sixteen miles.

At this time David was about the age of thirty years, and was anointed King by
the Tribe of Judah, in the year of the World 2891, and before Christ 1077. Here
he kept his Court seven years and six months. From hence also he sent
Messengers to Iabes in Gilead, forty four miles, to signify his gracious
acceptance of that favor which they showed unto Saul, in burying of his Body
there, 2 Samuel 1. 1 Chr. 12.

From Hebron David went to Jerusalem, twenty two miles, which then was called
Iebus, being possessed of the Iebusites; but he won it with strong hand, and
thrust them out of it; and in Mount Sion set up the City Millo, which was
afterward called the City of David, and signifies a place of Plenty. He began
his Reign in Jerusalem in the thirty eighth year of his Age, and seventh of his
Reign. In this place also he set up his House made of Cedar-wood, of which,
H^ram, King of Tyrus, sent him great Plenty from Mount Libanus, distant from
thence, 104 miles, 2 Samuel 5. 1 Chapter 12.

From thence he went to the Valley of Rephaim, some three miles from Jerusalem,
in the way that leads to the City of Bethlem, where he fought a memorable
Fight against the Philistines, and overcame them; for which cause, it was also
called Baal-Perizim, because, by the Help and Assistance of God, he had
conquered the Army of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5.

After he had dispersed the Enemies, he returned to Jerusalem, which is ^our
miles.

The Philistines came the same Year into the Valley of Rephaim again, and
pitched their Tents within three miles and a half of Jerusalem: and the Lord
gave David a sign, that when he heard a noise in the Mulberry-trees he should
set upon the Enemy; so David went forth, and close by the Town of Gaeba and
Kirjath-jearim, about two miles from Jerusalem Westward, he set upon the
Enemy, and gave them the second Overthrow, 2 Samuel 5. 1 Chr. 15.

From thence David followed the Enemy to Gaza, which was eighteen miles, 2 Samuel
5. in the tenth Year of his Reign from his first beginning in Hebron. David
assembled all the Princes, Priests, and chief men of Israel, to the number of
30000, which inhabited from Sechor till you come to Chaemah, a City of
Naphtali, at the foot of Mount Libanus, even 163 miles off. These men assembled
themselves in the City of Jerusalem, and from thence, they with David, went to
Kirjath-jearim, which was about a mile, to fetch the Ark of the Covenant from
thence into the City of David, 1 Samuel 6. 1 Chr. 14.

From Kirjath-jearim, David and all his Train returned back again to Jerusalem,
which was about a mile; and they placed the Ark of the Lord in a new Cart, and
caused it to be drawn with Oxen, which turned out of the way to the
threshing-floor of Nachon, where Vzza rashly and inconsiderately touching the
Ark of God, contrary to the Divine Law, was presently slain by the Lord in the
way, and that place was called Paeri-Vza, that is, The Breach of Uza: for he
was not of the Tribe of Aaron, to whom it was only lawful to touch the Ark, and
therefore the Lord struck him that he died miserably: wherefore David being
terrified by this example of God's Severity, would not that day bring the Ark
of the Lord into Jerusalem, but carried it to the House of a certain Nobleman
called Obed Aedom a Gittite, who dwelt not far from Jerusalem; but, when it was
told David that the Lord blessed the House of Obed Aedom, and all his Family,
because the Ark was there, David went from Jerusalem with a great multitude of
People, to the House of Obed Aedom, who (as is said before) dwelt not far from
Jerusalem, (yet there are some that say he was an excellent Musician in
Jerusalem, and dwelt in Mount Acra, that is in the lower City) and from thence
David fetched the Ark of the Lord into the upper City, which stood upon Mount
Sion; but I hold the other Opinion to be the more probable.

When the Ark was carried by the Priests, David girt himself with a linen
Ephod, (which kind of Garment the Priests of the inferior Order used to wear)
and danced before it, singing Psalms and Hymns to the praise and glory of God,
and with great State brought it to the City of Jerusalem, with the sound of
Trumpets and Instruments of Music, and placed it in the middle of the
Tabernacle, which they had curiously erected in Mount Sion, in the upper City,
which was also called the City of David. This happened in the tenth year of his
Reign; at which time, Michal, Readiness Daughter, despised him in her Heart, and
laughed at him: but God gave her a due Recompense, as you may read, 2 Samuel 6.
and him a just Reward; for, he promised by the Prophet Nathan, That of his
Posterity and Blood the King of Kings and Savior of the World should be born.

In the Year following, David invaded the Land of the Philistines, and the City
of Gath, which with strong hand he won: this was thirty four miles from
Jerusalem.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 34 miles.

In the twelfth Year of his Reign he afflicted the Moabites with cruel War, and
destroyed two of their Armies with the Sword, and the rest of the multitude he
made Tributary; which was 24 miles, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chr. 9.

He returned thence to Jerusalem with great Triumph and Joy, twenty four miles.

In the thirteenth year of his Reign, Anno Mundi, 2903. and before Christ 1065,
he made an Expedition unto Zoba, which Josephus calls Sophenam, and is in
Armenia, near to Masia or Mount Taurus, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North; of which you may read before. David in this place won a memorable Battle
against Hadad Ezer the King thereof, near to the River Euphrates: he took 700
Horse and 20000 Foot, burnt their Chariots, took 100 Castles, conquered all the
Towns and Country round about, and went away with a great Booty, as well of
Gold as Silver, Brass, and other things; which Brass, for the Excellency
thereof, was like unto Gold, and (as Josephus says) afterward Solomon made
the Molten Sea of it. When Gadarezer, King of the Syrians, (he that built that
famous City of Damascus) heard of the overthrow of Hadad-Ezer, he sent a great
Army to his Aid; which King David, near to the River Euphrates, smote with the
Sword, so that 20000 of them were slain, and he carried away a glorious
Victory, extending his Government from Jerusalem, 600 miles toward the North,
that is, into Armenia, and beyond the River Euphrates, and made these two
Nations tributary unto him, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chr. 19.

After David had won these two memorable Victories near Euphrates, he went
thence with all his Army toward the South, and invaded the Land of Syria; in
which Journey, Ioram the Son of Tohi, King of Antiochia, (which City at this
time was called Hemath) met David with Gifts and Presents in the Name of his
Father, returning him many Thanks because he had destroyed the common Enemy
Hadad-Ezer, and by strong hand subdued and quelled the Fury of that mighty
Tyrant, who was also a trouble and vexation to the Kingdom of Antiochia. David
entertained this Message kindly, and thankfully received his Gifts, (which was
of Gold, Silver, and fine Brass) and so gave Ioram an acceptable Dispatch, and
from thence with his Army went to Damascus, the Metropolitan City of Syria,
where, in the Valley of Salt, he got a great Victory, in which 18000 Syrians
were slain, and soon after, the City of Damascus taken; in which, David placed
a Garrison, and compelled them to pay Tribute, 2 Samuel 8. This was distant from
the Kingdom of Soba 520 miles.

From Damascus he went with his Army into the Land of the Ammonites, 100 miles,
in the way that leads out of Syria to Jerusalem, all which he conquered, and
all the Cities and Towns thereabouts, and compelled them to pay Tribute, 2 Samuel
8.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was sixty miles, and all the Booty
that he had gotten in his Journey he dedicated unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 8.

A while after, he, with his Army, made an Incursion into the Land of Idumaea,
and compelled the Inhabitants to pay Tribute. Moreover, he destroyed the City
of Midian, the Metropolitan of that Country; of which, you may read before: it
was distant from Jerusalem 160 miles toward the South. So that the extent of
David's Kingdom, from the North to the South, was 800 miles, even from the
Kingdom of Soba to the Red Sea; and from the East to the West 120 miles; from
Tyrus and Sydon reaching to Damascus. Thus by the singular Blessing of God he
obtained a spacious and powerful Empire, 1 Samuel 8. 1 Reg. 11. 1 Chr. 19. He
made his Expedition into Idumaea about the fourteenth year of his Reign.

From Midian in Idumaea, he returned with great Glory and Praise to Jerusalem,
which was 160 miles.

In the fourteenth year of his Reign, and in the year of the World 2904, and
before Christ 1064, Nahas, King of the Ammonites, died, and Haron his Son
succeeded him: this Man contemptuously abused the Messengers of David, 2 Samuel
10. and to justify that Injury, he gathered an Army out of Soba, Syria, and
Mesopotamia, even a mighty Host, to oppose David; who in the fifteenth year of
his Government met him with his Army at Helam, some twenty miles from
Jerusalem, where he obtained a notable Victory, and destroyed 700 Chariots, and
40000 Horse, 1 Chr. 20.

David after this, with great applause of the People, was entertained into
Jerusalem, which was 20 miles distant; where, being puffed up with Prosperity, he
forgot his former Piety and Sanctity, and by degrees fell into unlawful Actions
and unjust desires: whence it happened, that soon after he committed Adultery
with Bathseba: and after that, to hide his Fault, caused her Husband to be
slain. This was kept secret, till the Lord, by Nathan sharply reprehends him,
lays before him what he was, and what his present estate is, from whence that
came, and then concludes, that he is most unthankful, careless, and negligent
toward God and Man, in committing those Insolences; neither left he there,
but told him that God would severely punish him for his Offense, which after
happened as you may read, 1 Sa. 11, 12. 14, 17. David being nipt in his
Conscience with this sharp reprehension, fell into great Lamentation, the
extremity of whose Passions may very well appear in the Penitential Psalms,
which at this time and soon after he wrote, and left to future Ages.

After this, about the end of Summer, he gathered an Army, and went into the
Land of the Ammonites, some sixty four miles, where he took the Metropolitan
City, (which at that time was called Rabba, because of the Multitude of
Citizens that were in it; but after being restored by Ptolomeus Philadelphus
King of Egypt, he called it after his own name, Philadelphia) and there took
the Crown from the Head of the King of the Ammonites, which weighed a How much
this was, you may read hereafter in the quantity of weights
Talent of Gold, being (as Josephus says) richly adorned with fair Sardonick
Stones; of which you may read, 2 Samuel 12.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, which is sixty four miles, where he
married Bathseba, and by her had four Sons, Simeon, Sobab, Nathan and Solomon,
1 Chr. 3. Soon after this, Amnon defloured his Sister Thamar: Not long after
that, his Son Absalom killed his Brother Amnon, being then about eighteen years
of age; which David took so heinously, that he would not suffer him to come
into his sight for three years, 2 Samuel 13. Then Ioab, by the subtilty of the
Woman of Tekoa, reconciled him to the King his Father: yet nevertheless, he
came not to his Court of two years after; This Absalom was a goodly man,
affable, for which cause, even at that time, the People began to affect him.

Afterward, in the year of the World 2950, and before Christ 1408, Absalom
being then about twenty five years of Age, moved Sedition against his Father. A
matter remarkable, that although he had slain his own Brother, being disgraced
and absent from the Court almost five years, yet within short time after, he so
strongly united the Affection of the People to him, that he constrained David
(standing in fear of his greatness) all his former Acts and worthy Victories
notwithstanding) to forsake his own City, and for safety to fly to the Mount of
Olives, being three quarters of a mile from the City.

There he stayed a while to see the condition of the Tumult, but Necessity
constrained him to take his way to Bahuzim. And as he was going, Zimri the Son
of Gesa of the house of Saul, cursed him, every man's Enemy then making himself
apparent when he is in Adversity, and his best friends commonly forsake him.

From thence he went to Jordan, fourteen miles, where the Priests Jonathan and
Ahinaaz brought him certain Intelligence of that wicked and perverse Counsel of
Achitophel, a man in those times famous for his Wisdom, but perfidious in his
Actions, as commonly such are that hope after Honors, or seek to benefit
themselves by Innovation and Change.

After he had Intelligence hereof, he went over Jordan with those few men that
he had, and with all possible speed went to Bethabara, some 16 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North-east. At this place Ioshuah led the Children of
Israel through Jordan on dry ground, Ios. 3. 4. and here John the Baptist
taught, and baptized Christ. Mat. 1. and Luke 3.

From thence he went to Makanaim, which is 28 miles, where he sent forth his
Army by bands against Absalom, who at this time had assembled a great Host near
the Wood Ephraim, not far from that place where Joshua won a memorable Battle
against the Canaanites; and that the place might be made more famous, David's
men, though few in number, gave Absalom and his Host as great. Thus Absalom
being left in danger, to save himself, fled; but in his flight the Hair of his
Head being long, and blown with the Wind, took hold of the branch of a Tree, by
which, he hanged between Heaven and Earth, as unworthy of either: and Ioab, who
but a little before was his Friend, in that very place, with three Darts, put
him to death, a just end for so unjust a Man. 1 Samuel 18.

David, notwithstanding, took the Death of Absalom mavelous heavily, till by
Ioab he was recalled from that Grief; and then in the Company of Barzillai, and
of his Son Chimea, of Mephiboseth the Son of Jonathan, and Zeba his Servant,
Shimei also that before cursed him, (who to leave a memorable Token of a base
Sicophant) after this Victory, came first down to crave Pardon for his Offense,
with many others, went along with him from Makanaim to Bethabara, which was 28
miles. To this place there came a great Multitude of People to meet David, 2 Samuel 19. This Barzillai was one of the eighteen that held the Principality of
the City of the Giliadites, and had a Son called Chimea, whom David took with
him to Jerusalem, that he might make evident his Thankfulness toward him for
that Courtesy which he had received of his Father.

From Bethabara David passed Jordan, and went back to Gilgal, which was four
miles, 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, being twelve miles, in the same year that he
was exiled by his Son, which was about the thirteenth year of his reign. The
next year, Saeba the Son of Bicri, taking example of Absalom, and observing the
mutability of the Peoples Affections, moved a Sedition against David, but Ioab
his Captain, overcame him, 2 Samuel 20. After this there followed three years of
Famine. About the end of the third year of Famine, and in the thirty fourth
year of his Reign, David went to Iabes Gilead, which was fifty two miles, to
fetch the bones of Saul and Jonathan, to bury them in the Sepulcher of his
Fathers, 2 Samuel 21.

From Iabes in Gilead, David brought the Bones and Relics of King Saul, and
Jonathan his Son, to Gibeah of Saul, which was 52 miles, and there he
honorably buried them in the Sepulcher of his Father Kish, 2 Samuel 21.

From thence David returned to Jerusalem, which was four miles.

In the thirty fifth year of his Reign, he went forth to fight against the
Philistines, near to the Levitical Town of Nob, or Nobe, which is twelve miles
from Jerusalem, upon the Borders of the Countries of the Philistines, in the
Tribe of Dan.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, twelve miles.

So all the Travels of David were 2904 miles.

The Description of the Places to which David traveled.
OF the Cities of Socho, Asekah, Gibeon, Gibeah of Saul, Nob, Ziph, Moan,
Engedi, Arimathea, Gath, the Cave of Odullam, Kegila, Paran, Apheck, and
Makanaim, you may read before in the Travels of Saul, and the Judges of Israel.

Of Ziclag.
ZIclag, was a Town in the Kingdom of Judah, near to the River Besor, forty
miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west; not far from Gaza, a City of the
Philistines. In St. Ierom's time, it was but a small Town, 1 Samuel 27.

Of Sur.
SVR is a Desert in the Wilderness of Arabia Petraea, extending it self from
the utmost Borders of Iudaea, to the Red Sea, even unto Egypt; and signifies a
Bulwark, or place of Defense; and is derived of Schor, which signito see, or
contemplate: because from Bulwarks men may see into Neighboring Countries.
This was a place of Defense of the Egyptians, Genesis 16. 20, 25. Exodus 15. 1 Samuel
15. 17.

Of Sunem.
THis was a City in the Tribe of Issachar, ^orty eight miles from Ierusasalem
toward the North, not far from Naim, where Christ raised the Widows Son to
life, Luke 7. So did Elizaeus the Prophet also, 2 King. 4. And seems to take
the name of a Purple or Scarlet color; being derived of Schanah, which
signifies, He has changed and interated a color.

Of Gazer.
GAzer is a Town lying upon the Borders of the Philistines, not far from Ekron,
sixteen miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Of this you may read before.

Of Sichor.
THe River of Sichor was in the Desert of Sur, not far from Rhinocura, (of
which it took the name) and runs thence into the Mediterranean Sea: from
whence also it is called the River of Egypt, 1 Chronicles. 13. It is seventy two
miles from Jerusalem South-west-ward. Of the Hebrews it is called Schichor, or
Sichor, because of the blackness of the Water.

Of Bahurim.
BAhurim was a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin, a mile and something more from
Jerusalem, toward the North-east. To this place Phaltiel followed his Wife
Michael, 2 Samuel 3. Here also Shimei cursed David, 2 Samuel 16. At this time it is
a fair Castle, strongly fortified, standing in a high place. Near unto it, in
the Valley, just in the Kings way, there is a stone called Bohen, taking that
name of Bohen the Son of Reuben, and is of an extraordinary greatness, shining
like unto Marble. Of this you may read in the 15th of Ioshuah. Bahurim or
Bachurim, signifies, a City of Electors, being derived of Ba^har, to elect or
choose.

Of David's name.
DAvid is as much as to say, my dear, my beloved, my chosen one: being derived
of Dod, which signifies, a friend or beloved. For which cause, he was said to
be a man after Gods own Heart.

How David was a Type of Christ.
DAvid represented Christ diverse ways; First in his Name, (he was beloved) So
God testifies of Christ, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
Secondly, in the place of his Birth, he was born at Bethlehem, so was Christ.
Thirdly, in his employment, he was a Shepherd; so was Christ: I am the true
Shepherd, for a good Shepherd gives his Life for his Sheep, etc. Fourthly,
in his Music; David was cunning upon the Harp, and by that comforted the
afflicted Spirit of Saul: so Christ, by the Music and Harmony of his Doctrine
(the glad tidings of Salvation) comfort the afflicted Members of his Church.
Fifthly, David got his Glory and preferment by the death of Goliath: so Christ
was glorified by conquering Death and the Devil. Sixthly, David was persecuted
by Saul, and pursued from one place to another, so that he had not where to
hide his head with safety; so Christ was persecuted by his own Countrymen the
Jews, shut out from the Society of Man; and, as he said, Mat. 8. The Foxes have
Holes, and the Birds have Nests; but the Son of Man has not where to hide his
head. Seventhly, in the dangers that David sustained, by Gods providence he was
mercifully delivered: so Christ was enclosed and in danger of the Jews at
Nazareth, Luke 4. in Jerusalem; in the Temple also, Ioh. 8. but he escaped them
all, because then his time was not come, Io. 7. 8. Eighthly, as Absalom
rebelled against David, being his Father; so the Jews rebelled against Christ,
although he was their Creator: according to that of Esa. 61. I have fed and
brought up Children, but they have forsaken me. Ninthly, as David fled to Mount
Olivet for refuge, being brought to a straight; so Christ upon Mount Olivet
(his Heart being pressed with an intolerable Agony) fled to his Father by Prayer,
for comfort in that extremity. Tenthly, as all the Friends and Familiars of
David forsook him at such time as Absalom rebelled against him, and followed
him with Persecutions, Mocks and Taunts; so Christ, at such time as Judas
betrayed him into the hands of the Jews, was forsaken of all his Followers, and
many of those which a little before he had done good unto, mocked and derided
him as he was upon the Cross. Lastly, as David was restored, notwithstanding
the former miseries and troubles, to his ancient Glory and Eminency; so Christ,
after he had suffered the due punishment for Sin, Death, and (before that)
extreme Misery, yet at length conquered both, and by his Divine Power restored
himself to his former estate, Eternal Glory.

The Travels of Abner, one of Saul's Captains.
HE went with King Saul from Gibeah to the Wilderness of Ziph, which was twenty
two miles. Here he was rebuked by David for his negligence.

From thence he returned to Gibeah; twenty two miles, 1 Samuel 31.

From thence he traveled to the Hill Gilboa, where Saul killed himself; forty
miles.

From thence he went to Machanaim, where he made Ishbosheth (Saul's Son) King,
who kept his Court there seven Years; sixteen miles, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went to Gibeon, where he slew Asahel, Ioabs Brother, in Battle;
which was forty four miles, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went over Jordan to Bythron; twenty eight miles.

From thence he went back to Machanaim, sixteen miles, 2 Samuel 2.

^astly, he went thence to Hebron to David, and made a Covenant with him; where
he was treacherously Slain by Ioab: and was sixty eight miles. So all the
Travels of Abner were 256 miles.

Of Bithron.
BIthron or Betharan was a Town beyond Jordan, in the Tribe of Gad, some 28
miles from Jerusalem, North-eastward, lying between Dibon and Jordan. It takes
the name from a House of singing, being derived of Both, which signifies a
House, and Ron, He sung joyfully.

The Travels of Joab.
JOAB, David's Captain, was the Son of Zerviah David's Sister, for he had two,
Zerviah and Abigal; Zerviah had Ioab, Abishai, and Asael; Abigal had only
Amasa, all which were great men in King David's time. Now when Ioab heard that
Abner had brought down his Army to Gibeon, he went from Hebron thither, which
was 24 miles; and there his Brother Asahel was slain, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he went to Bethlehem, 16 miles, where he buried his Brother, 2 Samuel 2.

From thence he returned to Hebron, 20 miles. Here under the Gates of the City
he traitorously killed Abner, 2 Samuel 3.

From thence he went with David to Jerusalem, where he won Sion, and drove
thence the blind and the lame, being 82 miles.

From thence he went with his Army against the Ammonites and Syrians, whom he
conquered in a cruel Fight, 60 miles, 1 Samuel 20.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 60 miles.

From thence he went with David into Idumaea, 160 miles from Jerusalem
Southward; there he won the Town of Midian, and conquered the Idumaeans or
Edomites, 2 Samuel 8.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with his Army, being 160 miles.

From thence he went and besieged Rabba, the Metropolitan City of the
Ammonites, being sixty four miles from Jerusalem North-eastward. Here Vriah was
slain, 2 Samuel 11.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with King David, 64 miles.

From thence he went into the Kingdom of Gesur, which lies beyond Jordan upon
Mount Libanus, by the Town of Caesarea Philippi, some eighty miles from
Jerusalem North-eastward. This Country was called Trachonites. From this Land
Ioab brought Absalom again to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 14.

From thence he returned back again with Absalom to Jerusalem, eighty eight
miles.

From thence he went with David (when he fled from his Son Absalom) to
Machanaim, being forty four miles. Not far from hence he slew Absalom, 2 Samuel
18.

From thence he came again with King David to Jerusalem, 44 miles, 2 Samuel 10.

From thence he went to Gibeah, where he killed Amasa, which was four miles.

From thence he went to the Town of Abel-Bethmaacha in the Tribe of Naphtali,
being about 88 miles. This Town he straightly besieged.

From thence he went again to Jerusalem, 88 miles.

Afterward he went, as David commanded him, to number the People at Aroer, a
Town beyond Jordan, which was 24 miles, 2 Samuel 24.

From thence he went to Iaezer, which is sixteen miles.

From thence going through the Land of Gilead, and passing by the Territories
of the lovver Country of Hadsi, he came to the Town of Dan, near to the place
where the Fountains of Jordan are, which is accounted 116 miles.

From thence he went to that famous Mart Town Sidon, which was 24 miles.

From that great Town Sidon he went to the Walls of Tire, to which place,
great multitudes of Ships resorted; which was 16 miles.

From thence he went toward the South till he came to the City Beersaba, which
was the utmost Bounds of the Holy Land South-vvestvvard, and was reckoned 132
miles.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, where he delivered to David the
number of those that were chosen Soldiers, 2 Samuel 24. but the Lord struck the
Country and City of Jerusalem with a great Plague, because he did contrary to
his Command, 2 Samuel 24.

So all the Travels of Ioab were 1348 miles.

The Description of the places to which he traveled.
MAny of those Cities mentioned in the Travels of Ioab, are already described
and set forth; therefore I account it needless in this place again to repeat
them, but only such Towns as yet have not been mentioned.

Of Gesur.
GEsur was a Country near to Caesarea Philippi, in the Land of Basan beyond
Jordan, near Libanus, in the Tetrarchy Trachonitides, 88 miles from Jerusalem
North-eastward. With the King of this Country, Absalom remained in Banishment
for three years space, after he had slain his Brother Ammon; and with us may be
termed the Valley of Oxen, 2 Samuel 13.

Of Hadsi.
THE lower Country of Hadsi stood near to the City Corazin in the half Tribe of
Manasses, fifty two miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east, and signifies a
new Land; being derived of Chadasch, that is, New.

Of the Fountain Rogel.
THIS was near Jerusalem Eastward; to which place, Jonathan and Ahimaaz (
David's Intelligencers) brought him News of Absalom's Counsels and Intentions,
2. Sam. 17. It seems that Travelers usually washed their Feet in it, from
whence it was called the Well of Feet, being derived from Raegael, signifying a
Foot. Near to this place was the Stone Zochaeleth, where Adonijah (at such time
as he affected the Kingdom, contrary to his Fathers liking) called an Assembly
and made a great Feast, 1 Reg. 1.

The Travels of Baena and Rechab.
THese two went out of the Tribe of Benjamin over Iordon to Machanaim, 40
miles. There they murdered their Master, King Ishbosheth, in his Chamber, as
he lay upon his Bed, and after cut off his Head. The Head they brought to King
David to Hebron, 68 miles. But David was not pleased with their Treachery,
wherefore he caused them both to be put to Death. So their Travels were 108
miles.

The Travels of Absalom.
ABsalom was born in Hebron, and went with his Father to Jerusalem, 22 miles, 2 Samuel 13.

From thence he went to Baal-hazor, eight miles, where he caused his Brother
Amnon to be slain.

From thence, for fear of his Father, he fled into the Land of Gesur, 88 miles,
2 Samuel, 14.

From thence he came back with Ioab to Jerusalem, which was 88 miles, 2 Samuel 14.

From thence he went to Hebron, 22 miles, and made himself King, and rebelled
against his Father.

From thence he went back again to Jerusalem, which is 22 miles. There he lay
with his Fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16.

From thence he pursued his Father to Machanaim, 40 miles, and there was hanged
by the Hair in an Oak tree, where Ioab put him to death, 2 Samuel 18. So all the
Travels of Absalom were 290 miles.

Of Baal-hazor.
IN this City Absalom made a great Feast for his Sheep-shearers, and invited
all his Brothers to it, where he caused Amnon to be slain, because he had
abused his Sister Thamar. It lies in the way some eight miles from Jerusalem
toward the North-east, as you go to Jericho, near to Mount Epraim, 2 Samuel 13.
and is derived to Baal, which signifies a Lord or Husband; and Chazir, a Den or
Cave.

Of the Name Absalom.
ABsalom signifies a Father of Peace, although he was the Author of all
Discord and Sedition against his Father.

The Travels of the wise Woman of Thecoa.
THis woman went from Thecoa to Jerusalem, eight miles; and spoke with King
David; and with her sweet words she persuaded him that he would recall his Son
out of Exile, who then remained in Gesur, 2 Samuel 14.

Of Thecoa.
THecoa was a City in the Tribe of Judah, some eight miles from Jerusalem toward
the South-east: near this City Iosaphat by Prayers and the sound of Trumpets,
without drawing Sword, got a memorable Victory; and for that cause it
signifies the sound of a Trumpet. In this place the Prophet Amos dwelt, and
there lies buried; whose Sepulcher was to be seen four hundred Years after
Christ, as S. Ierom observes. It was from Bethlem-Iuda six miles. Near to
Thecoa was the Lake Aspher, where Jonathan and Simon (Judas Machabeus's
brothers) pitched their Tents, 1 Match. 9. Of this City you may read, Ier. 6.
Am. 1. 2 Chr. 11.

Of Achitophel.
THis perfidious and wicked Man was born in the Town of Gilo, not far from
Hebron and Debir, in the Tribe of Judah, Ios. 15. 2. Sam. 15. twenty miles from
Jerusalem South-Eastward; who when his Counsel would not take place, he went
home to his won House, and there desperately hanged himself.

The Travels of wicked Shimei.
SHimei went from Bahurim (where he cursed King David) to Bathabara upon the
River Jordan, which was eighteen miles; where he got Pardon of David, 2 Samuel 9.

From thence he went back with King David unto Gilgal, four miles 2 Samuel 19.

From thence he went with King David to Jerusalem, twelve miles, 2. Sam. 19.

From thence he went to Bahurim, three miles.

From Bahurim King Solomon sent for him again to Jerusalem, three miles.

There he was constrained to build him an House, and not to depart thence upon
pain of Death, 1 Reg. 2.

But Shimei transgressing the commandment of the King, went to Gath, a City of
the Philistines, twelve miles.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, twelve miles, where he was
slain by the command of King Solomon, in the third year of his Reign, 1 Reg. 2.
So all the Travels of Shimei were 104 miles.

The Books of KINGS and CHRONICLES.
Of Abishag, the Virgin that lay with David.
THIS Maid was accounted the fairest in all Israel, for which cause, she was
brought to Jerusalem for King David, that she might lie with him in his old Age
to procure Heat: she was born at Sunem, a Town some forty four miles from
Jerusalem, 1 Reg. 1. Of Sunem you may read before in the Travels of David and
Saul.

The Travels of King Solomon.
SOlomon the Son of David King of Israel, entered upon the full Government of
the Kingdom of Israel, An^mundi 2931. and before Christ, 1037. when he was
about twenty years old. After, he went from Jerusalem to Gilgal, four miles,
and there offered upon the Altar which Moses had made, 1000 burnt offerings, 1
Reg. 2. 2 Chr. 1.

From thence he went back to Jerusalem, four miles, and built a Temple to the
Lord, in Mount Moriah, I Reg. 6. This was begun about the fourth year of his
Reign, and 480 years after the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, in the
Month Ziph, which answers to our May. So that the Temple began to be built in
An. Mundi 2934. and before Christ, 1034. To the building whereof, Hiram King of
Tire sent Cedar Trees from Mount Libanus, 120 miles to Jerusalem, 1 Reg. 5. 2.
Chr. 2. This Temple Solomon within plaited over with Gold and set with precious
Stones, and finished it in the Month of November, about the eleventh year of
his Reign, 1 Reg. 6. The Dedication whereof, was about the twelfth year of his
Reign, and in the thirty second year of his Age, Anno Mundi, 2942, and before
Christ, 1026. The Temple being finished, he began to build his own house, which
was thirteen years a building, and was finished about the 44 year of his Age,
and in the 24 of his Reign, 1 Rg. 7. 8.

After 20 Years, in which time he had finished the House of the Lord, and his
own House in Mount Sion; that he might manifest his Thankfulness to the King of
Tire, he went to Cabul, a City in the Tribe of Ashur, some 80 miles Northward,
where he gave to the aforesaid Hiram 20 Towns or Cities, with all the Country
round about; wherefore King Hiram called this Cabul, that is, Displeasant and
Dirty, 2 Reg. 9. You may read of Cabul, Ios. 19.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 88 miles.

From thence he went to Hazor, and restored the City, which was 44 miles.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles.

From thence he went to Megiddo, which is not far from Iesreel in the Tribe of
Manasses, 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. This City Solomon
fortified, 1 Reg. 9. and Josiah King of Judah, a long time after, was there
wounded to Death, 2 Reg. 9.

From Megiddo he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles.

After that Pharaoh King of Egypt had conquered Gaser, and destroyed it with
Fire, he gave it to his Daughter the Wife of Solomon, who rebuilt it. This Town
was situated in the Tribe of Ephraim, 28 miles from Jerusalem Northward, 1
Reg. 9.

From Gaser Solomon returned back again to Jerusalem, being 28 miles.

From thence he went to the higher Bethoron, which he fortified; and stood 28
miles from Jerusalem Northward, 2 Chr. 8.

From thence he went to the lower Bethoron, 16 miles from the upper, toward the
South, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr. 8.

From the lower Bethoron he went to Jerusalem, which was eight miles.

After, Solomon built the City Belath, which was 12 miles from Jerusalem
North-vvestvvard, 1 Reg. 9. 2. Chr. 8.

From thence he returned back to Jerusalem, 12 miles, and it is very like that
Solomon often visited those Towns that he built and restored.

From Jerusalem he went to Hemath (afterward called Antiochia) which was 320
miles, and compassed it about with a Wall, fortified it, and afterward
constrained all the Kingdoms thereabout to be obedient to his Government, 2
Chr. 8.

From thence he went with great State into the Kingdom of Zoba, which is 600
miles, and fortified all the great Cities and Castles of that Country, that
with the greater Facility they might oppose the Invasions of neighboring
Countries.

From thence he returned to that famous City Thamar, which was also called the
City of the Palms, 400 miles: this he rebuilt and fortified, 1 Reg. 9. 2 Chr.
8.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, which is 388 miles.

From thence he went to Ezeong^ber, near to the Red Sea, in the Country of
Idumaea, where he built a company of stately Ships, and sent them to India to
fetch Gold, which was 176 miles from Jerusalem Southward, 1 Reg. 9.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which is 176 miles. But of his Riches
and great Prosperity he grew Proud, (for he excelled all the Kings near him)
and gave himself to unlawful Pleasures; he took unto him 300 Concubines and 700
Wives, by whose persuasions he began to worship the Gods of the Gentiles, which
Idolatry was evil in the sight of the Lord. After he had reigned forty years
(which was about the sixtieth of his Age) he died, and was buried by his Father
David in Mount Sion, the City of David, An. Mundi 2770, and before Christ 998.

So all the Travels of Solomon were 2544 miles.

The description of the places to which he traveled.
Of Gazer you may read before in the Travels of David.

Of Bethoron.
THe upper and the lower Bethoron were two Cities in the Tribe of Ephraim,
built by Saaerah the Daughter of Ephraim, 1 Chronicles. 7. The inferior Bethoron
was not far from the Castle of Emmaus, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-West. The Superior was twenty miles distant toward the North. These
Towns Solomon repaired. Near to the lower Bethoron the Lord put the Enemies of
Ioshuah to flight with Thunder and Hail, Ios. 10. Here also Judas Macchabeus
overcame the Army of Antiochus, 1 Mac. 3. Here also he put Ni^anor to death, 1
Mac. 7. and signifies, A white house; being derived of Beth, which signifies
an house; and Chor, he has made white.

Of Baaelath.
THis is a City twelve miles from Jerusalem North-westward, in the Tribe of
Dan. This City Solomon repaired at such time as he fell in Love with many
Women: from whence it seems to take his name: for Baaeleth signifies, his
beloved Lady.

Of Thamar.
THamar, Tadmor, or Palmira, stood partly in the Desert of Syria, and partly in
a fruitful Soil; being compassed about on the one side with a Wood, on the
other with fair and pleasant Fields. It was the Metropolitan City of all Syria,
not far from Euphrates, some 388 miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward; and, as
Pliny says, lib. 5. cap. 25. although it lay betwixt two mighty Empires, Rome
and Parthia, yet it was subject to neither; fairly situated, a Free City,
adorned with fair and sumptuous Buildings, and contented with their own
Government. The Wildernesses called after this Towns name, Pal^arnae, or the
Deserts of the Palms, extend themselves to Petra, the Metropolitan City of
Arabia-Petraea, and to the borders of Arabia-Foelix, one days journey from
Euphrates, two from the upper part of Syria, and six from Babylon, as Josephus
observes, Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 5. This City Solomon made Tributary to him, and
fortified it with strong Walls, 1 Reg. 9.

Of Ezeongaber you may read before.

The Typical Signification of Solomon.
SOl^mon is as much as FREDERICK in High Dutch, which signifies a Peacemaker;
being derived of the Hebrew word Schel^moh, or Schalom, to bring glad tidings
of Peace. Typically representing Christ the Prince of Peace, who has
reconciled us with his Heavenly Father, and merited an eternal place of Peace
and Happiness for all such as trust in him, Esaias. 9. And as Solomon built up
the Temple of the Lord with great majesty and glory; so Christ has built up
that heavenly Temple, the Church of God, and adorned it with the Gifts and
Graces of his holy Spirit, in this World, that so it might be capable of
eternal Glory in the World to come, 2 Cor. 6.

The Travels of Solomon's Ships.
THis Navy of Solomon's went unto Ophir, that is, India, which was accounted
from the Mart Town 4800 miles.

From India they returned back again, 4800 miles: so all their Travels were
9600 miles.

This Journey was finished in three years to and again; so that every year they
went 3200 miles, and brought home plenty of Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
Ebony, etc.

Of India.
MOses called this Country Havilah, Genesis 2. and Ios. li. Antiq. 8. c. 7. Ophir:
which name (says he) it took of two Brothers so called, which inhabited and
governed the Country all along the River Ganges. But more Modern Writers derive
it from Indus, a River passing through it. It is a spacious and fruitful
Country, pleasant to inhabit; and as Pomponius says, has in it 5000 Cities,
being divided into two parts; the outward and inward.

The Travels of the Queen of Saba.
FRom Saba in Ethiopia she came to Jerusalem, 964 miles.

From Jerusalem she returned back again, which was 964 miles.

So all her Travels were 1928 miles.

Of Aethiopia.
THIS Country, by the Hebrews, is called Chus, of Chus the Son of Cham, who was
the Son of Noah: and after, Aethiopia, (ab aestu torrida) because of the great
heat wherewith oftentimes the habitable Land and People, as also the
Wilderness, were sorely scorched and burned; for it is situated in the third
part of the World called Africa, lying under the torrid Zone, and the Equator,
which two, by common Experience, are found to be extreme hot.

Of Saba.
SAba is a metropolitan City in Aethiopia, lying beyond Egypt, 846 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South; and took the name from a certain precious Stone
called Achates, wherein might plainly be discerned in certain distinct Colors,
the rising of Fountains, the Channels of Rivers, high Mountains, and sometimes
of Chariots and Horses drawing them. It is reported, That Pyrrhus King of the
Epirots had one of them, wherein was lively represented the Nine Muses, and
Apollo playing on the Viol, portrayed by natural Stains and Colors, so
artificially, as if they had been done by some curious Workman. Of this Stone
you may read more in Pliny, li. 37. ca. 1. 10. It was first found in Achates a
River of Sicilia, whence it took the Name. Afterward in India or Phrygia, and
of the Hebrews was called Schaeba or Saba. In this City that Queen dwelt who
came to hear Solomon's Wisdom, and gave him for a Present 120 Talents of pure
Gold, which at three pounds at ounce comes to 270000 pounds Sterling.
Afterward Cambyses King of Persia over-came it and all the Country round about
it, and after his Sisters Name called it Meroes. It is a stately City to this
day, situated in a plain Country, and compassed about with the River Nilus,
like an Island, being now called Elsaba, having some affinity to the ancient
Name Saba.

The Inhabitants of this Town go naked, all but their privy Parts, which they
cover either with Silk, Cotton, or some more costly matter; and are of a black
Color, which as some think, happens by reason of the extreme Heat. The Land
also is marvellously scorched, and turned in many places to Sand and Dust: so
that the Country is thereby wonderful barren.

About Meroes or Saba, which is made fruitful by the Inundation of Nilus, there
is ^ound plenty of Salt, Brass, Iron, and some precious Stones. Their Sheep,
Goats, Oxen, and other Cattle, are of less Stature than in other Countries.
Their Dogs are very fierce and cruel.

In times past there were mighty Princes that had the Government and Command of
it, and the Country round about it. But after (as Pliny says, lib. 6. cap.
29.) it was in the Jurisdiction and Government of Queens, who for their noble
Resolutions and Courage were called Candaces. One of which name in Tiberius the
Emperors time was famous, both for the extent of her Dominions (in which she
exceeded all the rest of her predecessors) as also in regard of her manly
presence and noble Spirit. The Eunuch which Philip baptized, Acts 8. was
Treasurer or Chamberlain to this Queen: and it is to be thought, by him the
Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ was first made known in Saba, and in the
Country of Aethiopia; which afterward was more largely propagated and
dispersed by the Evangelist St. Matthew, who taught there.

This City lies to the longitude of 61 degrees and 30 scruples, and in the
elevation of the Pole Artick to the Latitude sixteen Degrees and twenty five
Scruples. So that it seems, the Inhabitants have two Winters and two Summers,
or rather a continual Summer, because their Winter is much hotter than our
Summer. But when the Sun attaineth to the fifteenth Degree of Taurus and Leo,
and in the Dog Days, it then lies perpendicular over that Country, and neither
their Bodies nor Houses give any shadows.

In the sixty first of Esaias it is said, They shall come from Saba, and bring
Gold and Frankincence to praise the Lord. From whence some have concluded, that
those Wise men which came unto the Child Jesus, and brought Gold, Frankincence,
and Myrrh, were Aethiopians, and came thence. But this agrees not well with
the words of Matthew, ca. 2. where it is written, that the wise men came out of
the East, that is, from the rising of the Sun, to Jerusalem. For Saba,
according to our Saviors words, Mat. 12. lies toward the South; for he
says, The Queen of the South (that is, of Saba) shall come forth in the day of
Judgment against this Generation, and condemn it, for she came from the end of
the World to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, etc. But if Saba lie upon the South,
as here it plainly appears, then it must needs follow they came not thence,
but rather from Persia, which from Jerusalem lies Eastward. For at Susa, the
Metropolis of that Country, there was an Academy for the whole Kingdom; in
which were chiefly studied Divinity, the Mathematics, and History. So that it
is likely, by their Art they might attain to the knowledge of this Divine
Mystery, and from thence come to Jerusalem, which was 520 miles Eastward.
Therefore this place of the Prophet Esaias is rather to be referred to the
propagation of the Church through the whole World, where some of every Nation
shall bring Presents unto the Lord.

There is also another Saba in Arabia-Foelix, so called from Zaeba the Son of
Chus, the Son of Cham, the Son of Noah; and it is distant from Jerusalem 1248
miles toward the South-East. In Hebrew it signifies the City of Drunkenness,
or of Mirth; but with the Syrians, Antiquity. Some would have it in the Arabian
Tongue to signify a Mystery. But St. Ierom interprets it, to sound their
Conversion. It is the Metropolitan City of Arabia-Foelix, and by Strabo, lib.
6. called Meriaba, being situated in a high and pleasant Mountain full of
fruitful Trees.

There inhabiteth in it the King of that Country (a mighty Prince) his
Governors, and most of such as have Authority under him. The Land is called
the Kingdom of the Sabaeans, but generally Arabia-Foelix, because of the
Fertility of the place; for it yields twice every year great plenty of
Frankincence, Myrrh, Cinnamon, Balsams, and other odoriferous Herbs. The Tree
out of which this Myrrh comes, is five Cubits high, hairy, and full of
prickles, and when you cut the Bark, there comes forth a bitter Gum, wherewith
if you anoint a dead Body, it will continue long without rotting. The
Frankincence also that is found there droppeth from the Cedar-trees, like a
glewy substance, and so congealeth into a Gum. This happens twice every year,
and according unto the season it changes color: in the Spring it is red, in
the Summer white. This is the best Frankincence in all Arabia-Foelix. Through
the whole Country there is a very delectable smell, by reason of the Myrrh,
Frankincence and Cinnamon, that is found in it; insomuch, that if the Wind
blows amongst the trees, it carries the smell unto the Red Sea, and they that
sail can easily discern the sweetness of the Air. There is Gold also found
there, very fine and pure, insomuch as for the goodness of it, it is called
Arabian Gold. The Phoenix is found there, of which there is but one in the
World. Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 35. describes her to be as big as an Eagle, with a
list of Feathers like Gold about her Neck, the rest are of a Purple color;
therefore from Phoenicia and the purple color of her Wings she is called
Phoenix. She has a tuft of Feathers upon her head like unto a Crown. She
lives 660 years; at the end of which time she builds her a Nest of Cassia,
Cinnamon, Calamus, and other precious Gums and Herbs, which the Sun, by the
extremity of the heat, and the waving of her wings, fires; and she taking
delight in the sweetness of the savor, hovers so long over it, that she
burns her self in her own Nest. Within a while after, out of the Marrow of
her Bones, and the Ashes of her Body, there grows a Worm, which by little and
little increases to some bigness, and after to a purple bird. Then her wings
extend themselves to a full greatness, till such time as she comes to a
perfect Phoenix.

This bird does lively represent our Savior Christ, who only and alone is the
true Messiah, and through whom we must expect everlasting life, who in the
fullness of time offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, sustaining the
punishment of Sin at the time of his Passion, putting on a purple Robe, being
all be sprinkled with his own blood, Ioh. 19. And as the Phoenix is burnt in
her own Nest, so likewise was he consumed in the fire of Gods wrath, according
to that in Psalm. 22. My heart is become like melting wax in the midst of my
body. And as the Phoenix of it self begets another of the same kind; so
Christ by the power of his Deity raised up his Body from the dust of the Earth,
and ascended up into Heaven a glorious Body, to sit at the right hand of his
Father in that everlasting Kingdom of Glory.

Thus (gentle Reader) I thought fit to describe unto you these two Towns, that
when you shall read of them in the holy Scripture (the one being in Aethiopia
toward the South, the other in Arabia-Foelix, and called Seba) you might
discern the one from the other: of both which there is mention in the 72 Psalm,
The Kings of the Seas and of the Isles, shall bring presents; the Kings of Saba
and Seba, shall give Gifts.

The Travels of King Pharaoh out of Egypt, when he overcame the Town of Gazer,
1 Reg. 9.
IN the sixteenth year of King David, Anno mundi, 2906, and before Christ,
1602, Chabreus King of Egypt began to reign, and reigned fifty six years,
Diod. lib. 2. cap. 2. Herodotus calls this man Chephrines, in his second
book; and Eusebius, Nepher Cherres. He went from Memphis, the chief City of
Egypt, with a great Army, 268 miles, even unto the Tribe of Ephraim, and there
took Gazer, a City of the Levites, and burned it with fire, I Reg. 8. Ios. 21.

After he came to Jerusalem, twenty eight miles. And this City which he had
thus destroyed he gave to his Daughter, the Wife of Solomon, 1 Reg. 9.

From thence he returned to Memphis in Egypt, 244 miles. So all the Travels of
King Pharaoh were 244 miles.

Of Memphis.
MEmphis is a great City in Egypt, where commonly the Kings of that Country
keep their Courts; and lies from Jerusalem 244 miles So^^h-west-ward. This
City was built a little before the Flood, but repaired and enlarged by a King
called Ogdoo, who in love of his Daughter, after her Name, called it Memphis.
You may read of it in the ninth of Hosea, called there by the name of Moph; for
thus he says, The people of Israel are gone out of the land of Ephraim,
because of their Idolatry, into Egypt: but Egypt shall gather them up, and
Moph (that is Memphis) shall bury them. Moph, or Mapheth in this place
signifies, a prodigious Wonder: but the rest of the Prophets call it Noph, for
the fertility and pleasantness of the Country, as you may read, Esaias. 19. The
Princes of Zoan are become foolish, and the Princes of Noph (or of Memphis) are
deceived. See also Ierom, 2. 44. 46. Ezech. 30. in which places you may find it
called after this name. Zoan is the City Tanis, where Moses wrought all his
Miracles: But Noph, or Moph, is this Memphis; a beautiful Town, large and
spacious, situated in the strongest and profitablest place in Egypt; divided
into two parts by the River Nilus, so that any kind of commodities or
merchandise might with ease be brought thither by Water: for which cause the
Kings of that Country (for the most part) kept their abiding there. Strabo
says, lib. 17. that upon the East part of this City, there stands a Tower or
Castle called Babylon, built by certain Babylonians, who leaving their own
Country, by the permission of the Kings of Egypt, dwelt there: in after times
there was placed a Garrison in it, one of the three which were for the defense
of Egypt, and by Ptolomy was called Babylon, through both which, viz. Memphis
and Babylon, Nilus passed; the one standing upon the East side, the other upon
the West. Zoan, or Tanis, stood about some four miles from this Town, and was a
fair and spacious City also, situated toward the South, upon the East side of
Nilus, to which the Kings of that Country often resorted; and Heliopolis,
another fair City, stood some six miles off that, toward the North-East. All
these four Towns were so wonderfully inhabited (by reason of their pleasant and
profitable situation) that in process of time they became all one City; and in
this Age is called Alcaire, containing in Circuit sixty miles: so that it
seems to Spectators to be like a Country replenished with nothing but fair
Houses, goodly Churches, and strong Towers; exceeding all the rest of the
Cities of Egypt, as well for the beautifulness of the place, as the extent and
largeness of it. It is reported, that in the year of our Lord 1476, there was
such an extreme Pestilence in it, that there dyed 20000 a day, from whence may
be gathered, how infinitely it is peopled. Near to this Town stood the
Pyramides, which are held to be one of the Wonders of the World (as Strabo
says, lib. 17.) the height of one of them was 625 foot, and square on each
side 883 foot; it was twenty years a building, a hundred thousand Workmen
employed about it: whence it may be easily gathered, how hard and difficult it
was in those times to get Stone (it being for the most part brought from
Arabia) and at what an excessive charge they were that set them up.

Of Gazar.
This City is described in the Travels of Solomon.

The Travels of Hadad King of Idumaea*
WHen David conquered Idumaea, Hadad the King of that Country, with some few of
his Courtiers, being then but young, fled from Midian to Paran, the
Metropolitan City of Arabia Petraea, which was 84 miles, 1 Reg. 11.

But because he thought himself scarce safe in that place, he fled thence to
Cheopes, that impious and Tyrannical King of Egypt, that built the greatest of
the three Pyramides at Memphis. He (hating King David) gave him kind
entertainment, assigned him a part of the Kingdom of Egypt to dwell in, and
after married him with his Sister Ta^hpenes, by whom he had a Son called
Genubath, who was brought up in Pharaohs, or King Chopes Court, where he
continued all the Life of David, being twenty seven years; 120 miles.

David being dead, he returned into his own Kingdom of Idumaea, which was 200
miles.

From thence he went back to Damascus, which was 240 miles, where he was
created King of the Syrians, by Reason and other fugitives, which had conspired
against Solomon, by which means he grievously troubled that Kingdom, and became
an utter Enemy to the Israelites all the Life of Solomon. And of him is the
original and stock of the Kings of Syria. So all the Travels of Hadad were 644
miles.

Of Midian and Paran, you may read before: in the one dwelt Iethro, Moses
Father-in-law; in the other Ishmael, that being the chief City of his
Dominions, as you may read, Genesis 21. Ex. 2.

Of Reason, Solomon's Adversary.
AFter David had conquered Hadad-Ezer King of Zoba, Reason, his chief Captain,
gathered up his dispersed Soldiers of his Army, and fled from him to Damascus,
which was 120 miles, and besieged it: the Citizens whereof (when neither David
nor Solomon could suppress his Rebellion) entertained him for their King, which
Principality he held.

The Travels of the Kings of Israel; and first, of Jeroboam.
THis man was the Son of Nebat, and born at a Town called Zared, not far from
Bethlehem-Euphrata, some eight miles from Jerusalem: from whence he came to
Solomon, who made him Captain, that he might collect the Tribute of Manasses
and Ephraim, 1 Reg. 11. which was eight miles.

From Jerusalem, as he went to Shilo (which was four miles) he met the Prophet
Ahijah the Shilomite, who told him that he should be King of Israel, 1 Reg. 11.

From thence he went to Memphis in Egypt, which was 224 miles, (because
Solomon sought his life) where he remained with Sesak King of Egypt, all the
Life of Solomon. Eusebius calls this King Osochores, who that same year
succeeded Maerenius (Solomon's Father-in-law) in that Government.

From thence he returned to the Town of Sichem in Israel, which was 280 miles,
where the Israelites made him chief Captain against Rehoboam, Solomon's Son.
Wherefore Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, began to Reign over Israel, An. mundi,
2971, and before Christ, 997, and reigned twenty two years, 1 Reg. 12. His
first Seat was at Sichem, which he repaired and enlarged.

From Sichem (in the first year of his reign) he went to Penuel, and there set
up many fair Buildings, which was twelve miles, 1 Reg. 12.

From Penuel he went twenty four miles, to the Town of Bethel, where he caused
a Golden Calf to be set up for the People to worship.

From thence he went to Thirza, which is sixteen miles. This City he built and
there kept his Court, 1 Reg. 14.

From thence he went to the Mount Zemaraim, which is Mount Ephraim, eighteen
miles; where he had a great Battle with Abia King of Judah, and lost 500000 of
his Soldiers, all chosen men of Israel, 2 Chr. 13. ver. 17.

Having lost this Battle, with all possible speed that he could went thence to
Thirza, which is eighteen miles: there the Lord struck him with a grievous
Disease that he died miserably, 1 Reg. 14. 2 Chr. 13. So all the Travels of
Jeroboam, first King of Israel, were 623 miles.

The Description of the Towns and places to which Jeroboam traveled.
Of Zemaraim.
THis was a certain Plain in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Jerusalem toward
the North, near to the Town of Bethel, in the Tribe of Manasses: for Mount
Ephraim is divided into diverse parts and Tribes. It seems to take the name of
certain Trees that abound near that place, whereon Cotton-wooll grows, for
Zaemaer signifies Wool, which by little and little, upon such Trees does
increase and grow to perfection.

Of Thirza.
THis was a fair and beautiful City, situated in a high and pleasant Mountain,
in the Tribe of Manasses, some twenty four miles from Jerusalem toward the
North. In this place the Kings of Israel used to keep their Courts, until
Samaria was built: it was so called because of the Excellency and
delectableness of the place: for Thirza does denote, An acceptable and thankful
City; being derived of Razah, he received thankfully.

Of the Years of the Iniquity of Israel.
THe years of the Iniquity of Israel (mentioned in Ezekiel. 4.) is to be accounted
from that day wherein Jeroboam first erected the Golden Calves: wherefore the
greatest part of the first year of the Iniquity, agrees with the second year
of Ieroboams Reign. From whence may be gathered, that from that time, till the
destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, were 390 years full ended.

Of Jeroboam's Wife, Queen of Israel.
SHE went from Thirza to Zilo, which was about twenty four miles; there she
asked counsel of Ahijam the Prophet concerning her Son Abia, for he was sick:
but he told her heavy tidings, 1 Reg. 14. 7. Wherefore being pensive, and
troubled in her mind, she returned back again to her Husband to Thirza, 24
miles 1 Reg. 14. So these two Journeys were 48 miles.

The Journey of the Man of God which came out of Juda.
THis man of God (as Josephus writes, l. Ant. 8.) came from Jerusalem to
Bethel, which was eight miles; and was called by the name of Iadon, which
signifies, The Judge of the Lord. When he came thither, he reproved Jeroboam
with an extraordinary Spirit: Of whom you may read more, 1 Reg. 13. But being
deceived, as he was returning, a Lion met him in the way, where he was slain,
and after buried in a Sepulcher in Bethel.

The Travels of Nadab, the second King of Israel.
NAdab, or Bonifacias, succeeded his Father Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel,
and was anointed while he was yet living; a liberal and free-hearted Prince. He
began to reign in the second year of Asa King of Judah, Anno Mundi 2992, and
before Christ, 977. He reigned during the Life of his Father, a year and
somewhat more: but when he had reigned two years, he went from Thirza with a
great Army, to the City of Gibithon, which was thirty six miles: this Town he
besieged very straightly, but at length was slain by one of his Captains called
Baesa; so he lost both his Life and Kingdom in that place, 1 Reg. 15.

Of Gibithon.
THis was a City of the Levites in the Tribe of Dan, not far from Ekron in the
Land of the Philistines, sixteen miles from Jerusalem toward the West, and
signifies, a Royal or lofty Gift.

The Travels of Baesa King of Israel.
BAesa is as much as to say, An industrious and prompt man in doing any thing.
This man having slain his Master near unto Gibithon, usurped upon the Kingdom
of Israel about the end of the third year of Asa King of Judah, and began his
Reign, An. Mund. 2992, before Christ, 974, and reigned over Israel almost
twenty four years; two of which he reigned with his Son, 1 Reg. 15. He went
from Gibithon to Thirza, thirty six miles, where he utterly rooted out the
whole stock and Family of Jeroboam. After, falling into Idolatry, he was
sharply reprehended for it by Iehu the Prophet, the Son of Hanani; of whom you
may read more, 1 Reg. 15.

From Thirza he went to Ramah, which is sixteen miles: this Town he built, and
fortified it very strongly, 2 Chr. 29.

But when he heard that Benhadad King of Syria had invaded Israel, he left his
Building at Ramah, and with all possible speed that he could went to Thirza,
where he died, and was buried, 1 Reg. 15. 2 Chr. 16. So all the Travels of
Baesa were 68 miles.

Of Ramah.
Of this City you may read before.

Of Ella, or Elah King of Israel.
ELAH signifies, a cruel man. This was the Son of Baasha King of Israel, who
was crowned King (his Father yet living) about the beginning of the twenty
sixth year of Asa King of Judah, at such time as Benhadad King of Syria invaded
and wasted Galilee. He reigned two years, one of them during the Life of his
Father, the other alone in Thirza; at the end of which he was slain by Simri
his Servant, 1 Reg. 15, 16.

Of Zimri King of Israel.
ZImri signifies a Singer, and was a Captain over King Elah's Chariots; he
reigned seven days in Thirza, in which time he put to death, and utterly
rooted out all the Posterity of Baasha; and then Omri besieged the City so
straightly, that he had no hope to escape, wherefore he set the City and Palace
on fire, in which he also perished, 1 Reg. 15, 16.

The Travels of Omri King of Israel.
OMRI signifies a Soldier, or one that deserves his Pay. He was made King by
the Israelites in his Tent, while he was at Wars near to Gibithon: from whence
he went to Thirza, which was thirty six miles, and besieged the same upon the
very day that Zimri had put the Posterity of Baasha to the Sword, and took it.
He began to reign in Thirza, Ann. Mund. 3017, and before Christ, 951. and
reigned over Israel twelve years, the first six in Thirza, that latter six in
Samaria, 1 Reg. 16.

From Thirza he went to Mount Semer, six miles; there Omri built Samaria, and
made it the Seat of his Kingdom. He went thither about the seventh year of his
Reign, 1 Reg. 16. So these two Journeys were forty two miles.

Of Samaria.
SAmaria, the chief Seat and Metropolis of Israel, was built by Omri, in Mount
Semer, 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and took that name of Semer,
who was Lord of that Mountain, of whom King Omri bought it for two Talents of
Silver, which amounts to 1200 Crowns. In this City, fourteen Kings of Israel
kept their Courts, viz. Omri, who was the first Founder of it, Ahab, Ahazia,
Iehoram, Iehu, Ioachas, Ioas, Jeroboam, Zacharias, Sallum, Menahem, Pekahia,
Pekah, and Hosea, who was the last of the Kings of Israel that reigned in this
City, and lost it, together with his Liberty. Of all these Kings there were but
five that died naturally, for, the Lord being moved to wrath by reason of their
Impiety and Idolatry, either gave them up into the hands of Foreign Enemies, or
by Civil War amongst themselves they cruelly murdered one another, until such
time as the Assyrians destroyed the Land, and and led the People captive. Thus
the Lord punished with a sharp and severe punishment this obstinate Nation,
because they contemned the Admonitions and Doctrines of the Prophets, amongst
which, Elias and Elizeus were the chief. So that although Samaria was a fair
and beautiful City, and the Country for that cause was called the Province of
Samaria; yet notwithstanding, that great God, the Judge of all things, for the
Iniquity of the People, caused this fair City to be left desolate, the
Inhabitants of the Land to be dispersed, and the Earth, for want of due usage,
to lie as a Wilderness, 2 Reg. 17. This City, in the Old Testament (according
to the Hebrew Phrase) is called Shaemaer, of Schomron, which signifies to keep,
or a Tower of strength. You may read of this, 1 Reg. 2. 2 Reg. 1, 7. The Greeks
and Latins call it Samaria, which signifies the Castle of Jehovah, or of God.
You may read more of this in the second Volume.

Of Hiel that built Jericho again.
AFter the death of Omri King of Israel, when Ahab his Son began to reign,
Hiel, a very rich man in the Town of Bethel, (that he might leave behind him an
eternal memory of his Name, went to Jericho, which had been formerly destroyed
by Ioshuah, the Son of Nun, and had lain waste for the space of 536 years,
where, contrary to the Commandment of the Lord, and curse of Ioshuah, he caused
the said City to be rebuilt, (such was the impious Security and Incredulity of
this man) but the Lord was angry with him, and he struck all his Children that
they dyed. The eldest Son, called Abiram, at the laying of the Foundation, and
his youngest Son, called Segub, at the hanging on of the Gates, Ios. 6. 1 Reg.
16.

The Travels of King Ahab.
AHab went from Samaria to the Hill Carmel, where Elias put to death the
Priests of Baal, which was about thirty two miles 1 Reg. 18.

From thence he went to Iezreel, which is sixteen miles, there he told his Wife
how Elias had put the Priests of Baal to the Sword, 1 Reg. 18.

From Iezreel he went again to Samaria, eighteen miles, where being pressed with
a hard Siege by Benhadad King of Syria, he broke out of the City for his better
safety, and by Gods great providence and assistance, he assailed the Syrians,
put a great multitude of them to the Sword, the rest fled, and he went away
with a noble Victory, as the Prophet of the Lord had formerly told him, 1 Reg.
20.

From Samaria he went with his Army to Apheck, which was fourteen miles, where
he renewed a second Battle, and therein had good success, so that he took
Benhadad alive, and put to the Sword 100000 Syrians.

In this place the Prophet of the Lord reproved him for his ingratitude and
obstinacy; wherefore Ahab being angry, he went from Apheck to Samaria, which
was eight miles, 1 Reg. 20.

From Samaria he went to Iezreel, sixteen miles, where that perfidious Queen
Iesabel caused Naboth to be put to death, and took possession of his Vineyard,
1 Reg. 21.

From Iezreel he went to Ramoth-Gilead, twenty four miles; and there, in a
fight that he had against the Syrians, was so sore wounded with an Arrow, that
he was constrained to leave the Battle. 1 Reg. 22.

And as he went back again to Samaria, which was twenty four miles, he dyed of
his wound. Of this man you may read more, 1 Reg. 21, 22.

So all the Travels of Ahab were 152 miles.

The Description of Carmel, Apheck and Ramoth, you may read before.

Of Iezreel.
JEzreel is a City in the Tribe of Issachar, situated upon a rising ground,
some forty eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North, where Ahab sometimes
kept his Court. Here Naboth the Iezreelite dwelt; an honest and Religious man,
one of good Esteem and Authority, that feared God, and would not suffer the
Inheritance of one Tribe to be transferred to another; because God had
commanded the contrary, Number. ult. For which cause he would not sell his
Vineyard to Ahab, wherefore Iezabel (that wicked Woman) to satisfy the Kings
desire, caused him to be stoned. Iezreel signifies, the Seed of God, being
derived of Sera, Seed, and El, the Almighty God. Though in former times this
has been a fair Town, yet at this day, there is no past thirty houses in it,
and is called Charity; standing at the foot of Mount Gilboah: they show at this
day the field of Naboth the Iezreelite, lying toward the West, as you go into
the City, a little before you come at it. This Town stands upon a fair
prospect; for you may see from thence through all Galilee to Carmel, the
Mountains of Phoenicia and Mount Thabor; also from Mount Gilead by Jordan and
Mount Salem [where John baptized] near by Mount Hermon, upon the North side of
Mount Gilboah, there lies a fair and plain way to the City Iezreel; by which
Iehu came, when he made Wars upon Jeroboam King of Israel; of which you may
read more, 2 Reg. 9. It stood not far from the River Kison, as you may read,
Ios. 17. 19. 1 Samuel 2. 1 Reg. 4. 18.

Of Ahaziah the Son of Ahab.
AHaziah was crowned King of Israel during the Life of his Father; a cruel and
wicked man: he began his Reign in the 17th year of Iosaphat King of Judah, Anno
Mundi, 3049, and before Christ, 919. about such time as Ahab went down to
Ramoth Gilead to recover it from the Syrians. Within a while after the death of
his Father, he fell through the Lattice-window in his upper Chamber, which was
in Samaria, of which hurt he died. Of this you may read more, 1 King. 1.

The Travels of Jehoram King of Israel.
JEhoram succeeded his Brother Ahaziah in the Kingdom of Israel; who began his
Reign in the eighteenth year of Iosaphat King of Judah, and as Josephus says,
lib. Ant. 9. about the fifth year of his Reign, went from Samaria to Jerusalem,
which was 32 miles. There he told Iosaphat how the King of Moab had rebelled
against him, therefore desired him to go along with him to the War, 2 Reg. 3.
Then Iehoram and Iosaphat, and the King of Edom, went from Jerusalem, and
compassed about through the Wilderness of Idumaea, by the space of seven days,
so that they and their Army for want of Water had almost perished; but, at the
Prayers of the Prophet Elisha, they were miraculously preserved. At length they
came to Petra, the Metropolitan City of the Moabites, and is distant from
Jerusalem an hundred seventy two miles, which they took, and consumed it with
Fire and Sword. 2 Reg. 3.

From the City of Petra, Iehoram King of Israel returned back to Samaria, which
was 104 miles; where, within a while after, he was so sorely besieged by
Benhadad, King of Syria, that the Famine grew very great within the Town,
insomuch as a certain Woman eat her own Child, 2 Reg. 6.

From Samaria he went to Ramoth in Gilead, with his Army, which is 24 miles,
where he was overcome by Asahel King of the Syrians, and wounded even to the
death, 2 Reg. 8.

From the Fight of Ramoth Gilead, he was carried in his Chariot back to
Iezreel, which was 24 miles, where he lay to be cured of his Hurts. But Iehu,
one of his chief Captains, rebelled against him, and as he was in his Chariot,
shot an Arrow, and wounded him the second time, whereof he died in the Field of
Naboth the Iezreelite, 2 Reg. 9. So all the Travels of Iehoram were 356 miles.

The Travels of Jehu, King of Israel.
JEHV signifies a constant man in himself, and was the Son of Iosaphat, the Son
of Nimschi, he was anointed King of Israel in the Castle at Ramoth in Gilead,
by Elisha, Anno Mun. 3063. and before Christ, 905. he reigned 28 years, 2 Reg.
9.

From Ramoth in Gilead, in his Chariot he went to Iezreel, which was 24 miles;
where, in the Field of Naboth the Iezreelite, he killed Iehoram with an Arrow.
And when he came to the Gates of the City, he caused Iezabel to be thrown from
a Tower, whom he trampled under his Horse feet; and after, in that same place,
she was eaten up with Dogs. Then he sent Messengers to Samaria, commanding the
Samaritans that they should put to death the 70 Sons of Ahab, which they
immediately did, and sent their Heads unto him in Baskets. 2 Reg. 10.

From Iezreel he went to Samaria, which is sixteen miles. In that Journey he
caused to be slain by his Ministers, the 42 Brothers of Ahaziah King of Judah,
near to the Well which was beside the House where Sheep were shorn. And when he
came to Samaria, he caused all the Posterity of Ahab to be utterly destroyed
and rooted out. And to conclude the Tragedy, by a cunning Policy, put to death
all the Priests of Baal, 2 Reg. 10. So all the Travels of Iehu were 40 miles.

Of Jehoahas, King of Israel.
JEhoahas was the Son of Iehu, and succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of
Israel; he began his Reign in the 33 year of Ioas King of Judah, in the Year of
the World 3091, and before Christ 876. He reigned over Israel seventeen Years.
God stirred up against this wicked King, Asahel King of the Syrians, who with
10000 Foot, and five hundred Horse besieged Samaria very strongly; put to the
Sword many of his Subjects, and got many Cities and Towns from him, as the
Prophet Elisha had before told him, 2 Reg. 8. 13.

The Travels of Joas, King of Israel.
JOAS succeeded his Father Iehoahas, and while he was yet living, was anointed
King of Israel, in the thirty seventh year of Ioas King of Judah, and reigned
two years with his Father; after his Death fifteen; so all the Reign of Ioas
was seventeen Years. This Man was a great Soldier, and went from Samaria with
an Army against the City of Apheck, which was fourteen miles: there he smote
the Syrians, and in three several Battles carried away the Victory; recovering
the Cities which his Father Iehoahas had lost, according to the Prophecy of
Elisha, 2 Reg. 17.

From Apheck he returned to Samaria, being 14 miles.

From thence he went with his Army to Bethsemes, in the Land of Judah, where, in
a sharp and cruel War, he conquered Amasia, and took him alive, 2 Reg. 14.
which was 32 miles.

From Bethsemes he went to Jerusalem, and carried the King thereof with him
Captive, being four miles. He won the City, and broke down the Walls of it,
from the Gate of Ephraim till you come to the Angle-Gate, four hundred Cubits
in length, 2 Reg. 14.

From the City of Jerusalem, Ioas the Conqueror returned to Samaria, with the
spoil of the Temple, and of the King's House, with many Captives, and a great
Prey, being thirty two miles; where, at the end of the seventeenth year of his
Reign, he died, and was buried. In this man's time Elisha the Prophet died, 2
Reg. 13. 14. So all the Travels of Ioas were ninety six miles.

Of Bethsemes.
Of this City you may read before.

The Travels of Jeroboam, the second of that Name, King of Israel.
THIS Jeroboam succeeded his Father Ioas in the Kingdom of Israel, and began
his Reign, Anno Mundi, 3123. and before Christ, 845. which, according to the
Text of the Bible, happened about the 15th Year of Amasia King of Judah, and he
reigned 41 Years, 2 Reg. 14. He kept his Court at Samaria, where the Prophet
Jonas told him, that he should recover not only the Towns and Cities of the
Land of Israel that had been lost, but also the Cities of Hemeth and Damascus:
wherefore he gathered a great Army out of the City of Samaria, and went thence
unto Hemeth, or Antiochia in Syria, which was 248 miles. This City he
conquered, and all the Country thereabout; so that he recovered all the ancient
Towns and Cities that belonged to David and Saul, even to Hemeth in Syria, to
Soba in Armenia, with all the Cities, Towns, Castles and Countries near
adjoining to them, 2 Reg. 14.

From Hemeth or Antiochia, he went to Damascus, which is 140 miles This City he
also took, and all the Country of Syria round about, he made tributary to him,
2 Reg. 14.

From Damascus he went to the Red Sea, even 320 miles: and also recovered all
the South part, which in times past belonged unto the Kingdom of Israel, 2 Reg.
14.

After this, he returned to Samaria, his own Country, which was 192 miles:
where, in the one and fortieth year of his Reign, he dyed, and was there
buried. After his death, the Kingdom of Israel was oppressed with Tyranny,
until it was destroyed by Foreign Nations: and for the space of twelve years
there was no King that succeeded him. In the Reign of this King (a little
before his death) there happened a horrible Earthquake; of which you may read,
Amos 1. which without doubt did fore-shew some eminent changes that should
happen in that Kingdom, as did afterward, Zac. 41.

So all the Travels of Jeroboam, (the second of that name) were 900 miles.

Of Zachariah King of Israel.
TWelve years after the death of Jeroboam, Zachariah his Son began his Reign in
Israel, in the thirty eighth year of Azariah King of Judah, which was An. mundi,
3975, and before Christ, 723: he reigned six months, and then was miserably
slain by Sallum his Friend, 2 Reg. 15. Joseph. lib. Antiq. 9.

Of Sallum King of Israel.
SAllum began to reign after he had slain Zachariah, in the thirty ninth year
of Azariah King of Judah: and when he had reigned scarce a Month, he was slain
by Menahem, losing his Life and Kingdom together, 2 Reg. 15.

The Travels of Menahem.
MEnahem was born in Thirza in the Tribe of Judah; who began to reign in the
same year that he slew Sallum: he reigned ten years 2 Reg. 10.

From Thirza he went to Samaria with his Army, which was six miles; (where,
having slain Sallum his Lord and King) he usurped upon the Kingdom, 2 Reg. 15.

From thence he went to Thipsa; which is six miles. This Town he cruelly
destroyed with Fire and Sword, and all the Towns thereabout, because they
refused to open their Gates unto him.

From Thypsa this cruel Tyrant went back again to Samaria, six miles, where he
grievously afflicted the Children of Israel ten years. Wherefore the Lord being
offended with him for his exceeding Cruelty, stirred up Phul Belochus King of
Assyria, who came from Babylon to Samaria, being 624 miles, and put King
Menahem to such an exceeding great straight, that he was constrained to buy and
procure his peace with What this was in our Money, you may read after in the
quantity of Moneys.
1000 Talents; which money being received, he suffered him to enjoy his
Kingdom, and returned back to Babylon with all his Army, 2 Reg. 15. So all the
Travels of King Menahem were 18 miles.

Of Thypsa.
THIS was a Town near to that Kingly Seat Thirza, situated in the Tribe of
Manasses, twenty four miles from Jerusalem Northward. But because the
inhabitants thereof denied to open their Gates to this cruel Tyrant Menahem,
therefore he utterly destroyed it even to the Ground. Thypsa signifies, The
Paschal Lamb, or a Passover; being derived of Pasach, he passed over.

Of Pekahia King of Israel.
PEkahia reigned two years after his Fathers Death; at the end of which term,
he was slain by Pekah the Son of Remalia, who succeeded him in the Government.
Joseph. lib. Antiq. 9. says, that this Murder was done at a Banquet.

The Travels of Pekah King of Israel.
PEkah the Son of Remalia began to reign in Samaria, Anno mundi 3189, and
before Christ 779. in the two and fiftieth year of Azariah King of Judah, and
reigned over Israel twenty years, 2 Reg. 15. 16.

From the City of Samaria he went with Resin King of Syria to Jerusalem, which
was 32 miles, and besieged it, but could not take it: nevertheless he overcame
Ahaz King of Judah in a great Battle, and put to the Sword in one day above
12000 Soldiers that bare Armor. In this War there were taken 200000 Women,
Children and Maids; all which, he carried Captives to Samaria, 2 Reg. 16. 2.
Chr. 28.

From Jerusalem he returned to Samaria, with a great Booty, being 32 miles; and
at the Command of Obed the Prophet set at liberty all his Captives. After,
about the end of the twentieth year of his Reign, he was slain by Hosea, his
chief Captain, who succeeded him in the Government. 2 Reg. 15. So all the
Travels of Pekah were 64 miles.

Of Hosea, the last King of Israel.
HOSEA began to reign in the fourth Year of Ahas King of Judah, Anno Mundi,
3209, and before Christ 759. He kept Court at Samaria, and was a cruel and
wicked King. Wherefore God stirred up Salmanasser, Emperor of the Assyrians,
who about the end of the seventh Year of his Reign came to Samaria, and
besieged it for the space of three Years; at the end of the third Year, with
great Labor, he won it, and all the Country round about; so that he took King
Hosea Prisoner, and led him, together with a great Multitude of the Jews
(amongst which were Gabriel and Raphael the Friends of Toby the Elder) thence
to Nineveh Captives, being 652 miles. From Nineveh he sent them to a place
called Rages in Media, being 752 miles, and in that Country peopled many Towns
and Cities with them; so that there were many of the Israelites led into
Captivity above 1396 miles, for so many miles is Rages and the Cities of the
Medes from Jerusalem North-eastward.

This Captivity of the ten Tribes happened Anno Mundi, 3227. and before Christ,
741.

Of the Cities of Rages and Nineveh you may read in the Travels of Toby and the
Angel Gabriel.

The Travels of the People which Salmanasser, Emperor of the Assyrians, sent
to dwell in the Land of Israel.
SALMANASSER, after he had carried the Children of Israel away captive into
Assyria, sent (as it is said) part of them into Media, and part of them into
Persia, and so di^persed them here and there about the Country. But because the
Land of Israel, by reason of this Captivity, became desolate and without
Inhabitants, therefore he caused those People which dwelt about the River
Cutha, in Persia, to go thence, and dwell in Samaria, and in all the Country
round about, to till the Land, and dress the Vines, lest some other People,
that were strangers to his Government, should usurp upon that Kingdom, it being
thus without Inhabitants, Ios. li. Ant. 9. You may read of this also, 2 Reg. 7.
In whose place, and near to the said River of Cutha, a multitude of Jews, with
great shame and grief were constrained to dwell. He also gathered a great
multitude of other People out of Babylon, Hamath, or Antiochia, some out of his
own Dominions of Assyria, also out of Media, and the People of Ava and
Sepharvaiim, which People are mentioned, Esaias 37. and sent them to inhabit in
Samaria, and all the Cities and Countries round about, because it was a Fertile
and pleasant Country, and to defend it against the incursions of strangers.
From whence may be gathered, that in this behalf, the Policy of this Emperor
was much greater than that of the Romans, for the retaining of this Kingdom;
but especially than that of Titus Vespasian; for he, having conquered the Land,
wasted it and destroyed it with Fire and Sword, put thence the Inhabitants, and
dispersed them here and there, left the Country bare and naked, only a few
Garrisons were placed in the strongest Cities, to keep it to their use. Which
not being able enough to oppose the incursions of the Saracens, that in great
Troops brake out of the Deserts of Arabia-Petraea, they soon lost all that they
had gotten; and the Turks joining with them, they have now gained into their
possession that pleasant and fruitful Land of Iudaea, and inhabit therein even
to this day, to the great detriment and scandal of the Christians.

But to return to the People sent to inhabit this Kingdom, who, as they were of
diverse Nations, so were they of diverse Religions, and every Family had his
particular God. Wherefore the Lord sent a Multitude of Lions among them; which
daily vexed them: from whence it happened that Salmanasser was constrained to
send back unto them a Levite (one of the Priests that had been carried away
Captive) to show them the true Worship of God. He came to Bethel, and there
taught them the Doctrine of the Lord, and the Customs and Ceremonies of the
Mosaical Law: whereby it happened that they began to worship God and their
Idols, in neither observing their Ancient custom. For which cause they became
so abominable unto the Jews, that they refused their company and familiarity,
(as that Samaritan woman confessed to Christ at Jacobs Well, Ioh. 4.) so that
when the Jews could call a man by any ignominious or odious name, they would
term him a Samaritan, Ioh. 8. Do we not say rightly that thou art a Samaritan
and ^est a Devil. But of all the People which Salmanasser sent into the
Holy Land, those that came out of the East part of Persia from Cutha (called
Cutheis) dwelt in Samaria, and got the chief command and Government over the
rest.

The Travels of the Kings of Syria, that made Wars upon the Kings of Israel.
And first of the Travels or Incursions of Benhadad.
BEnhadad King of Syria, went from Damascus, the chief City of his Kingdom, and
came to Samaria, and straightly besieged it in the time of Ahab King of Israel, 1
Reg. 24. being 132 miles.

From thence (being overcome and put to flight by Ahab) he returned back to
Damascus, which was 132 miles.

The second time he came from thence, and invaded the Land of Israel, even unto
the City of Apheck, 124 miles, which he besieged. But Ahab King of Israel
overcame him in a great Battle, and put 100000 Syrians to the Sword; and when
the rest of the multitude would have fled into the City, the ruins of a Wall
fell down upon them, so that there dyed 27000.

This put Benhadad in such a fear, that he was constrained to fly from one
chamber to another to hide himself; but at last was taken, and (not without the
great wrath and indignation of God) by that wicked King Ahab pardoned and set
at liberty, 2 Reg. 20.

Wherefore he went thence back to Damascus, which was 124 miles.

Within three years after he brought a great Army against Ramoth in Gilead,
which is 104 miles from Damascus South-Eastward. Here he won of Ahab a great
Battle, in which Ahab was slain with an Arrow, 1 Reg. 22.

From thence he returned back to Damascus, which was about 104 miles.

After that, he came again from Damascus into the land of Israel, with a great
Army, 120 miles; where he counseled with his Captains and men of War, saying,
Here and there will we incamp our selves. But the Prophet Elisha disco^ered
their purposes, 2 Reg. 6.

Out of the Land of Isrel he returned to Damascus, which was 120 miles.

From thence he returned again with his Army to Samaria, being 132 miles; which
the second time he besieged so straightly, that an Asses head was worth eighty
pieces of Silver. But yet the Lord, at the fervent Prayers of Elizeus the
Prophet, struck such a fear and anguish among the Enemies, that Benhadad and
his Army were constrained to fly, 2 Reg. 6.

Being sore troubled because he was thus put to flight, he went to Damascus,
which was 132 miles, and there, within a while after, died of grief, 2 Reg. 9.

So all the Travels of King Benhadad were 1224 miles.

The Travels of the Captains which Benhadad King of Syria sent to waste and
destroy the Land of Baesa King of Israel.
THIS Army went from Damascus, and came to the Town of Hion, seventy two miles.

From thence they went to Dan, which is four miles.

From Dan they went to the City of Abel-Bethmaacha, twelve miles.

From thence they went to the land of Chineroth, which was accounted eight
miles: there they took certain Cities of Fruit, and spoiled and destroyed them.

From Chineroth in the Tribe of Nephtaly (when they had cruelly wasted and
destroyed that Country) they returned with a great booty to Damascus, being
eighty eight miles, 1 Reg. 15. So all their Travels were 184 miles.

The Description of the Towns and Places to which they traveled.
Hion and Dan.
HIon and Dan are two Towns near to Mount Libanus, and the Fountains of Jordan,
some 104 miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward. Hion signifies a Town of the
Fountain, because it stands near to the Town or Fountains from whence Jordan
issues.

Of Abel-Bethmaacha you may read before.

Of Chineroth.
THIS Chineroth or Cineroth was the Metropolitan City of the Tribe of Nephtaly,
seventy two miles from Jerusalem Northward. It was situated in a very fruitful
and pleasant place, and for that cause was so called; for Kinroth, being
derived of Kinnor, signifies Music or Mirth.

The Travels of Naaman the Syrian.
NAaman came from Damascus to Samaria, which was 132 miles, to be cured of his
Leprosy by Elizeus; who commanded him to go to the River Jordan, and wash
himself therein seven times, and he should be cleansed.

Wherefore from Samaria he went to Jordan, twenty six miles, and there,
according to the commandment of the Prophet, he washed himself seven times, and
was cleansed, 2 Reg. 5.

From the River Jordan he returned back again to Elizeus the Prophet, to give
him thanks for that benefit, which was about sixteen miles.

From Samaria he returned to Damascus, 132 miles.

So all the Travels of Naaman the Syrian were 296 miles.

The Travels of Hasael King of Syria.
HE went from Damascus (where Elizeus told him that he should succeed his Lord
and Master Benhadad in the Kingdom) to ^am^th Gilead, with his Army, which was
104 miles. There he overcame Iehoram King of Israel in a great battle, 2 Reg.
cap. 8.

From thence he returned to Damascus, 104 miles.

After, he went to Damascus to the City Aroer, which was 132 miles.

From thence he went through the land of Gilead into the Kingdom of Bas^n,
until he came to Mount Libanus, which is accounted eighty miles, and conquered
all that part, 2 Reg. 10.

After, he returned into his own Kingdom, to Damascus, which is 320 miles.

Within a while after, he went again from Damascus with his Army to Gath, which
is reckoned 188 miles. This City he won

From Gath he went to Jerusalem, thirty two miles, which he besieged so
straightly, that Ioas King of Judah was constrained to give him great abundance
of Gold to raise his Siege and be gone, 2 Reg. 12.

From Jerusalem he went to Damascus, which was about 160 miles.

The last Journey that he went against the Israelites, was, when he besieged
Samaria, at which time he won many Cities and Towns round about in the Country,
and made them Tributaries unto him, 2 Reg 13. which was 132 ^iles.

Having finished this Expedition, he returned back to Damascus, 132 miles, and
there dyed and was buried.

So all the Travels of Hasael King of Syria, were 1384 miles.

The Cities of Aroer and Gath are described before; therefore I shall not need
to speak of them again in this place.

The Travels of Benhadad, the second of that name, King of Syria.
THis Benhadad was the Son of Hasael, and succeeded him in the Government. He
went from the City Damascus with a great Army, to Apheck, which was 104 miles.
This King was three times one after another overthrown by Ioab King of Israel,
and lost all those Cities which Hasael his Father had formerly conquered, 2
Reg. 13.

From Apheck he returned to Damascus, 104 miles, and there died. So both
Journeys were 208 miles.

The Travels of Resin King of Syria.
RESIN King of Syria went from Damascus, and joining his Army with that of
Pekah King of Israel, they went to Jerusalem and straightly besieged Ahab king
of Judah, 2 Reg. 16. which was 160 miles. At this time (which was in the year
of the World 3206, and before Christ 762.) the Prophet Esaias, ca. 7. foretold of
the Birth of our Savior Christ, saying, Behold a Virgin being great shall
bring forth a Child, and shall call his name Emanuel.

From thence he brought his Army through Idumaea, to El^th, a City of the Red
Sea, some 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and sixteen miles from
Ezeongaber Northward. This City Resin won, and thrust from thence the Jews out
of it.

From ^lath he went to Damascus, 280 miles, where he was slain by Tiglath
Phulasser, that mighty King of the Assyrians, who carried a great multitude of
the Inhabitants of Damascus into the Country of Syrene, where they endured a
miserable Exile, 2 Reg. 16.

So all the Travels of King Resin were 600 miles.

The Travels of the Kings of Judah, which reigned in the City of Jerusalem: and
first of the Travels of Rehoboam.
REhoboam the Son of Solomon succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and began his
Reign Anno mundi 2971, and before Christ 977* who by reason of his extreme
cruelty and threats (following the counsel of his young Courtiers, rather than
of his grave Senators) the same year lost ten of the Tribes, that fell from him
and rebelled against him; so that he reigned over Judah and Benjamin seventeen
years, 1 Reg. 11. 14.

A little after the death of Solomon, he went to Sichem, thirty two miles,
where he was anointed and crowned King. But the People perceiving that he
carried himself very proudly and arrogantly, desired him that he would ease
them of the burden formerly imposed upon them by his Father: (for Solomon had
set a certain Tax on every man, because he was at extraordinary charges as long
as the Temple was building) but he, little regarding their request, told them,
That his little finger should be heavier than the whole burden of his Father:
wherefore they, disliking his Speech, fell all from him, except Benjamin and
Judah.

Wherefore the King, shunning the fury of the People, with all possible speed
went from Sichem to Jerusalem back again, being thirty two miles. Then he
fortified all the chief Cities of Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chr. 11.

So all the Travels of Rehoboam were sixty four miles.

But he principally fortified fourteen Cities in the Tribe of Judah, that with
the more safety he might oppose his Enemy Jeroboam King of Israel; viz.
Bethlehem, Etam, Thecoa, Bethzura, Adullam, Gath, Ma^esa, Ziph, Adoraiim,
Lachis, Aseca, Zarea, Ajalon and Hebron* most of which Towns, and the memorable
Actions done in them, are described in the former part of this Treatise. I will
therefore speak only of such Towns as have not as yet been mentioned.

Of Maresa.
THIS was a City in the Tribe of Judah, 16 miles from Jerusalem Westward, which
Rehoboam repaired and fortified, 2 Chr. 11. where King Asa overcame the
Eth^opians in a cruel Battle, 2 Chr. 14. Here Michaias and Eleazer the Prophets
were born, 2 Chr. 20 Mich. 1, 2 Ios. 15 Georgias also fled into this City when
he was overcome by Judas Macchabeus, 2 Mac. 12, It was situated on the Borders
of the Tribes of Judah and Dan, as S^. Ierom says, in whose time the Ruins
thereof were to be seen. Maresca signifies an Inheritance, being derived of
Moraschah, that is, a Possession.

Of Bethzura.
THIS is a strong Castle (often mentioned in the History of the Macchabees)
situated on a Mountain some five Furlongs from Jerusalem Southward, and felll
by lot unto the Tribe of Judah. This Tower was as it were a Bulwark for the City
of Jerusalem, and stood in the way ^s you go thence to Bethlem, and so to Gaza.

Of Zareah.
THIS was a City in the Tribe of Judah, eight miles from Jerusalem, toward the
West, which Rehoboam did also repair and fortify, 2 Chapter 11. There was another
City of this name, situated upon the Border of the Tribes of Judah and Dan, 18
miles from Jerusalem Westward: of which you may read in the Travels of Sampson.

Of Adoraiim.
ADoraiim or Adarah was a City in the Tribe of Judah, 44 miles from Jerusalem
South-westward; which Rehoboam the Son of Solomon also fortified, 2 Chr. 11. It
is situated upon the Borders of Judah and Arabia-Petraea, between Cades and
Casmona. It signifies a glorious City, being derived of Adar, he was glorious.

The Travels of King Abia.
ABijah or Abia signifies, The Father of the Sea. He began to reign in the
eighteenth year of Jeroboam his Adversary, An. Mundi 2988, before Christ 980,
and reigned over Israel three years, 1 Reg. 15* 2 Chr. 17.

He went from Jerusalem to the Mount Zemeraim, eight miles. After that he went
to Bethel, and conquered all the Country from thence to Ephron, which was 36
miles.

From Ephron he returned to Jerusalem, 44 miles: there he took unto him
fourteen Wives, and begat 20 Sons and 16 Daughters, 2 Chr. 13.

The Travels of Asa, King of Judah.
AS A signifies a Physician. He began to reign about the end of the 21th year
of Jeroboam King of Israel, An. M^n. 2990. before Christ 978. He governed Judah
with great commendation 41 years.

He went from Jerusalem to Maresa, 16 miles; where, in the Valley of Zephatha
he overcame the Ethiopians in a memorable Battle, 2 Chr. 14.

From thence he pursued the Ethiopians to Gerar, being 22 miles, and recovered
many Cities which the Ethiopians dwelt in, 2 Chr. cap. 14.

From Gerar he went to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles, and offered to the Lord
of the Spoils that he had taken, 700 Oxen, and 7000 Sheep, 2 Chr. 15. These
Travels of King Asa make 70 miles.

The Journey and Expedition of Saerah, King of Ethiopia, whom Asa King of Judah
overcame in the Valley of Zephatha.
SAerah or Saerach signifies, A noble and puissant Lord. This was a mighty and
warlike Prince, who governed Lybia and Aethiopia; the King of which Country at
this day we call Presbyter John, or rather, ^etro Johannes; who holds his
Court in a fair and goodly City called Hamarich, the Metropolitan of all
Ethiopia, and extends his Government beyond Meroes in Africa, Many (though
ignorantly) suppose he is a Priest, because he is called Presbyter, though
indeed he is not so, but rather a puissant and mighty Emperor. But to return
to Saerah, or Saerach, who in hope to extend his Empire into these parts, went
with a great Army out of Ethiopia to the Valley of Zephatha in Judah, to fight
with Asa King of Judah, 1200 miles; but lost the day, and returned with great
shame, 2 Chr. 15.

It seems, that this King was the mightiest of all his Predecessors, and a
Prince of no vulgar Estimation, because of the multitude and great abundance of
Soldiers which he brought in his Army; for it is reported, that there were
1000000 that bore Armor, and 300 Chariots; but this great Army was dispersed,
and most of them died miserably; as did that great Army of Xerxes, which
consisted of 1700000. From whence it may ^e concluded, That it is not the
Strength of Man which delivers him, bu^ the Lord.

The Travels of Jehosaphat King of Judah.
JEhosaphat signifies, The Judge of the Lord. He began his Reign in the fourth
year of Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. The greatest part therefore of the first year of this
King, happened in the Year of the World, 3033, and before Christ, 935. He
reigned over Israel twenty five years, that is, from the 35th of his Age, to
the sixtieth. In the seventh year of his Reign, he went from Jerusalem to
Samaria, which was 32 miles, to visit his Kinsman, Ahab King of Israel: for
Ioram his Son, some ten years before, had married Athaliah, King Ahab's Sister,
2 Reg. 8.

From Samaria he went with Ahab to the War at Ramoth in Gilead, being twenty
four miles, where Ahab was slain, 2 Reg, 22. 2 Chr. 18.

From Ramoth he went safe from the Wars to Jerusalem, which was forty eight
miles.

From Jerusalem he went to the City of Beersaba, the utmost bounds of his
Kingdom, toward the South, to instruct his People in the Law of the Lord:
forty two miles from Jerusalem, Southward.

From Beersaba, passing through all his Kingdom, he came to Mount Ephraim,
being forty eight miles, and the utmost bounds of his Kingdom Northward, being
some eight miles from Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 19.

From Mount E^hraim he went to Jerusalem, which was eight miles. Thus
Iehosaphat went through all his Dominions, to instruct his Subjects in Piety,
and the true Worship of God: in every City ordaining Judges and Governors,
Magistrates, Procurators and Assessors, committing to their Discretion the
deciding of all Controversies; saying to them, Take heed what you do, for the
Office you have taken upon you is not Humane, but Divine: and as you judge, so
shall you be judged; for the Lord is with you in judgment. Wherefore do all
things with diligence, and in the fear of the Lord; for with the Lord there is
no iniquity, nor respect of Persons, neither takes he any bribes. And he
himself remained chief Judge in Jerusalem, to whom any might appeal from the
inferior Judges, that so there might be a just end of Controversies, 2 Chr. 16.

Afterward, Iehosaphat went forth with his Army to Tecoa, six miles from
Jerusalem, where, by fervent Prayers, the sounding of Trumpets, and other
musical Instruments, in obtained a memorable Battle against the Moabites,
Ammonites, and Idumaeans; for the Lord turned the Weapons of them one against
another, and they wounded one another to the death. This fight happened in a
fair Valley between Tecoa and Engedi. So Iehosaphat pursued the Enemy for three
days with great slaughter, and returned with a mighty spoil. This was called
the Valley of Blessing, because of this great Victory at Tecoa, and began eight
miles from Jerusalem South-eastward, and extended it self to the Tower of
Engedi, near to the Bank of the Red Sea, twenty miles.

From Engedi (out of the Valley of Blessing) Iehosaph at and his Army returned
to Jerusalem, twenty miles, and went into the Temple, with Shalms, Harps,
Timbrels, and great Joy, thankful acknowledging Gods merciful Favor toward
him, in giving him so great a Victory, 2 Chr. 20. But as there is nothing in
this Life that can be said permanent, so likewise the felicity of Iehosa^hat
changed on a sudden, the froward and adverse frown of Adversity seizing upon
his Prosperity; for, joining with that wicked and impious King of Israel,
Ahaziah, upon condition to build a certain Navy of Ships at Ezeongaber, to
fetch gold from Tharshish, and other places in India, he displeased the Lord:
for the which cause there arose a great Tempest, which brake down the Works,
and destroyed the Navy.

From Jerusalem he went with Iehoram King of Israel to war against the
Moabites, and with them went the King of Idumaea; so passing through the
Deserts of Edom, they came to Mount Seir, and so went to Petra, the chief City
of the King of the Moabites, distant from Jerusalem seventy two miles, 2 Reg. 3.

From Petra, Iehosaphat returned to Jerusalem, seventy two miles, where he
died, and was buried, 2 Reg. 22. 2 Chr. 21. So all the Travels of Iehosaphat
King of Judah were three hundred seventy two miles.

The typical signification of Jehosaphat.
AS Iehosaphat by Prayer, and the sound of Trumpets, and other Instruments of
Music, overcame and dispersed his Enemies without drawing his Sword; so Christ
also, by the sound of his Word and Doctrine, without drawing Weapon, overcame
the Enemies of the Church.

The Travels of Joram King of Judah.
JORAM signifies, The exalted of the Lord. He was crowned King, (his Father yet
living) at such time as he made his Expedition against Mesa King of the
Moabites, which happened about the fifth year of Iehoram King of Israel, An.
Mundi, 3055, and before Christ, 913. He reigned with his Father Iehosaphat two
years, and after his Decease, six. So Ioram reigned eight years over Judah, and
when he was forty years old, died miserably, 2 Reg. 8, 9.

About the beginning of the second year of this King's Reign, (which was the
sixth of Iehoram King of Israel) Elias the Prophet was taken up into Heaven.
About the beginning of his Reign, he went from Jerusalem to Mount Seir, being
twenty eight miles Southward; where he used such extreme cruelty toward the
Edomites, which at this time were his Subjects, that of a sudden they fell from
him, and chose them a King of their own, 2 Reg. 8.

From the Mountain of Seir he returned to Jerusalem, which is twenty eight
miles, and there cruelly put to death his own Brothers. But God stirred up
against him the Philistines and Arabians, who broke into Judah, and destroyed it
with Fire and Sword. They also went to Jerusalem, and took thence all his
Substance and Riches, put his Children to the Sword, all but Ioachas, which was
also called Ahaziah, or Ochorias; and carried away his Wives captive into
Arabia Foelix, which is near unto Ethiopia 1200 miles. Then the Lord struck him
with an extreme pain in his Bowels, of which, after two years, he died, and was
buried without any Funeral-pomp, or honorable Respect, near to the King's
Tower. A man unworthy to be buried in the Sepulcher of the rest of the Kings,
because he so much degenerated from David his Predecessor, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 28.
So all the Travels of Ioram were fifty six miles.

The Travels of Ahaziah King of Judah.
AHaziah (which also was called Iehoachas) succeeded his Father Ioram in the
Government of Judah, and began his Reign in the twelfth year of Iehoram King of
Israel, Ann. Mund. 3062. and before Christ, 906, and reigned one year, 1 Reg.
8. He went from Jerusalem to Ramoth in Gilead, which is accounted forty eight
miles: There he went to Battle with Iehoram King of Israel against the Syrians,
2 Reg. 8. 2 Chr. 22.

From Ramoth in Gilead he returned to Jerusalem, forty eight miles.

Within a while after, he went back again to visit his Kinsman, Iehoram King of
Israel, to Iezteel, for he was wounded in the Battle against Hasael, and lay
there to be cured: which was forty eight miles.

With Iehoram he went to meet Iehu, the Captain of the Host, who shot an Arrow,
and wounded Iehoram, that he died in the Field of Naboth the Iezreelite.
Wherefore Ahaziah, to save his Life, fled with all possible speed, taking his
way to the King's Garden, that stood close by the Vineyard of Naboth the
Iezreelite, not far from teh City and Tower of Iezreel. But Iehu followed him
so close, that he wounded him as he ascended up to a place called GVR, which
signifies a Lions Whelp; near unto the Town which is called Iiblea. Wherefore
Ahaziah feeling himself hurt, went to Megiddo, four miles from Iezreel, and
near to Apheck upon the West. There (as Josephus says, lib. Antiq. 9.) he
caused his wounds to be searched and bound up. This City of Megiddo is forty
eight miles from Jerusalem Northward.

From Megiddo he went to Samaria, which was fourteen miles; there he lay hid
for a while, flying from one place to another, to save himself. 2 Chr. 22.

But being found out, he was carried back to the City of Megiddo, which was
fourteen miles; and at the commandment of Iehu, was there slain, 1 Reg. 8.

From Megiddo his Carcasa was carried to Jerusalem, which was forty eight
miles, and there buried, 2 Reg. 8. 2 Chronicles. 22. So all the Travels of Ahaziah
King of Judah, were 224 miles.

Of that Idolatrous and wicked Queen Athalia.
AThalia was Sister to Ahab and Daughter to Omri, married to Ioram Son of that
good King Iehosaphat, when he was but seventeen years of age; and after the
death of Azahiah (who was slain about the twenty third year of his age) she
usurped upon the Kingdom of Israel (Anno Mundi, 3063, before Christ, 905,) and
reigned with great Tyranny almost seven years: So soon as she had obtained the
Government, she cruelly and miserably put to death the children of Ahaziah, and
all those that were next Heirs to the kingdom; only Ioas who was saved by the
policy of Iehoshabeath Sister to Ahasiah, that stole him from among the rest of
the King's Sons, and put him to Nurse in her Bedchamber: and he was with them
in the House of God six years; all which time Athalia, reigned over the land.
And in the seventh year, Iehojada waxed bold, and proclaimed Ioas King, as
being next Heir to the Crown, and anointed him in the Temple; who after Athalia
was slain, succeeded in the Government, 2 Reg. 11. 2 Chronicles. 23.

Of Joas King of Judah.
JOas began to reign over Judah when he was almost seven years of age and about
the middle of the seventh year of Iehu King of Israel, Anno Mundi, 3069, and
before Christ, 899, and reigned over Judah forty years. He did that which was
acceptable in the ^ight of the Lord all the days of Iehojada the Priest, who
crowned him King: but after his death he fell into evil courses, and caused
that good Priest Zachariah (the Son of Iehojada, who was the Author of all his
preferment) to be stoned to death in the upper Court of the Temple; which act,
argued that he was very unthankful and tyrannical. But the Lord (displeased
with his cruelty) within a year after the death of Zachariah, stirred up the
Syrians, who invaded Iudaea and spoiled the City of Jerusalem: in which War,
all those that stirred up the King to Idolatry were cruelly slain. To conclude,
within a while after some of his Courtiers conspired against him, and as he lay
sick of a grievous disease in his bed, put him to death; and buried him in
Milo, the City of David. Thus God justly punished this Tyrant for his
Unthankfulness, Apostasy, and Cruelty, when he had lived 47 years, 2 Reg. 12.

The Travels of Amasiah King of Judah.
AMasias, or Amasiah, signifies, the strength of Jehovah. This man was twenty
five years of Age when he was enthronised by his Father, about the second year
of Ioas King of Israel, Anno mundi, 3108, and before Christ 806. He ruled the
Kingdom while his Father was sick, one year, and after his decease twenty
eight: so all the years of his Reign were twenty nine.

He went with an Army from Jerusalem to Saelag, that is to the Tower or Rock of
Mount Seir, forty miles toward the South: here, in the Valley of Salt, he put
to death a multitude of the Idumaeans. And although this Town was very strongly
situated, yet he won it, and called it Ioctiel, that is, the Year of the Lord;
because God in that place heard his Prayers; being derived of Iakah and El,
which is, God has heard. Near to this Town Amasiah commanded 10000 Idumaeans,
which he had taken in War, to be cast down headlong from the top of an high
Rock into a deep Valley, in which fall their bones were shattered all to
pieces, and they died miserably, 2 Reg. 14.

From Selag-Ioctiel he returned to Jerusalem, being forty miles; where he began
to worship the Gods of the Idumaeans that he brought along with him, 2 Chronicles.
24.

From Jerusalem he went to Bethsemes, and there was overcome by Joas King of
Israel, which was four miles, 2 Chronicles. 25.

From Bethsemes, Ioas led Amasiah back again to Jerusalem captive, being four
miles, 2 Reg. 14.

From Jerusalem he fled to the City of Lachis, which was twenty miles, and
there was slain by his own Servants, 2 Chronicles. 25.

From Lachis his carcass was carried back again to Jerusalem, twenty miles*
where it was buried in the City of David, 2 Reg. 14. 2 Chronicles. 25.

So all his Travels were 128 miles.

The Travels of Azariah, or Uzziah, King of Judah.
THIS man succeeded his Father Amasia (in the year of the World 3138, and
before Christ, 830) when he was but sixteen years of age, and reigned fifty two
years; his Mothers name was Iecoliah of Jerusalem. He did those things which
were upright in the sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord blessed him. And
after the death of his Father, built Elah, and restored it to Judah.

He therefore went from Jerusalem to Elah, 160 miles toward the South, and
rebuilt that Town (it being a famous Mart-Town, situated upon the Red Sea) and
fortified it, because Resin, King of the Syrians, in times past, for want of
due fortification, won it, and destroyed it, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From Elah he returned to Jerusalem, 160 miles.

After he went from Jerusalem to Gath, a City of the Philistines, which was
accounted thirty four miles; this Town he won, beat down the Walls, and
destroyed the Bulwarks thereof.

From thence he went to Iabnia, which is twenty four miles, and broke down the
Walls thereof, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From thence he went to Azotus or Asdod, which was eight miles, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From Asdod he went again to Jerusalem, being twenty two miles.

Within a while after, he gathered an Army, and went from Jerusalem to
Gur-Baal, that is, Gerar; where he overcame the Arabians in a great Battle,
which was thirty two miles, 2 Chronicles. 26.

From Gerar he returned to Jerusalem, being thirty two miles.

He went from Jerusalem that third time into the Land of the Ammonites, sixty
miles; which People he conquered, and made Tributary to him* so that he was
made Famous through all the Countries thereabout, even to the utmost part of
Egypt, because of his often Victories and Triumphs, 2 Chronicles 26.

Out of the land of the Ammonites he returned to Jerusalem, being sixty miles.
But now, being lift up with the Prosperity of Fortune, and not content with his
Regal Dignity, he endeavored to have chief Authority over the Priests also*
for which cause he went into that part of the Temple where the Altar of sweet
Incense stood (where it was lawful for none to go but the Priests) and there
took upon him to offer sweet Incense; but as he was offering, the Lord struck
him with Leprosy, so that he was constrained to dwell in a house by himself
separated from the Congregation; and his Son Iotham governed in his stead all
the days of his Life. But within a while after, he died of this disease, and
was buried in the Kings Garden at Jerusalem, and not in the Sepulcher of the
Kings, 2 Reg. 15. 2 Chronicles. 26. So all the Travels of Azariah King of Judah,
were 592 miles.

Of the Places to which he traveled.
Of Elah.
THIS was a City situated upon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward
the South; between Ezion-Gaber and Midian. This City Resin King of the Syrians
conquered; but Azariah King of Judah drove thence the Syrians, and made it so
strong, that it seemed impossible to be conquered. It took the name of
abundance of Oaks, which (as it seems) grew about that place; for Elah or
Ilix, signifies, a kind of Oak Tree, (of which there is great plenty in the
Holy Land) so called because of their strength and hardness.

Of Jobnia.
THIS was a City near to Ioppa and Libba, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-West. This City takes the name of Wisdom and Prudence, being derived of
Bin, to understand.

Of Gur-Baal.
THIS Town is also called Gerar, where Abraham and Isaac sometimes traveled;
it is distant from Jerusalem thirty two miles toward the South-West, and six
miles from Hebron. Here the Jews and neighboring Arabians afterward
worshipped the Idol Baa^* and therefore this City, which in the times of the
Patriarchs, was called Gerar, a Perigrination, was after called Gur-Baal, that
is, the Perigrination of the Idol Baal, being derived of Gor, which signifies,
He has traveled.

The Travels of Jotham King of Judah.
JOtham signifies, Whole and Perfect. He succeeded his Father Azariah, when he
was about twenty five years of age, Anno Mundi 3190, and before Christ, 778. He
reigned over Judah seventeen years, until the one and fortieth year of his age.
His Mothers name was Ichruscha, so called from an Inheritance or Possession. He
began his Reign in the second year of Pekah King of Israel, and continued it
unitl the seventeenth year of his Government, 2 Reg. 15. 17.

When this noble Prince had rebuilded and richly adorned the House of the Lord,
he went from Jerusalem and invaded the Country of the Ammonites, (which was
sixty miles,) conquered their King, and made the whole Land pay him Tribute,
even a hundred Talents of Silver of the common weight, 10000 measures of Wheat,
and 10000 of Barley yearly. This Tribute continued three years.

From the Land of the Ammonites he went back to Jerusalem, which was sixty
miles; where, after he had adorned the Temple with many princely buildings, he
dyed; about the one and fortieth year of his age, 2 Reg. 15. So all his Travels
were 120 miles.

Of Ahaz King of Judah.
AHAZ signifies Apprehending, or a Possessor. He began to reign after the death
of his Father Iotham, about the end of the seventeenth year of Pekah King of
Israel, Anno Mundi, 3205, before Christ, 762. He reigned wickedly 16 years, 2
Reg. 16. 2 Chr. 28. For he was a notorious Hypocrite, who out of a perverse
Zeal, worshipped many Idols, and burnt his Son in the Valley of Gehinnon, as an
Offering unto Moloch; wherefore he was unhappy in his Government; for God
stirred up mighty enemies against, even Re^in* King of Syria, and Pekah King of
Israel, who wasted and destroyed his Kingdom and (straightly besieging
Jerusalem) conquered Ahaz in a great Battle, and put to the Sword 120000 of his
men. After that Resin, returned to Elath, and took it: so that he lost more
then his Father had gotten. Where being struck into a great fear by reason of
these adversities, he sent to crave the Aid of Tiglasse* Phulasser King of the
Assyrians, who at his request sent a great Army from Niniveh to Damascus, 520
miles, and there overcame Resin, and put him to death, and took captive 242000
of the people of Damascus, and sent them into Cyren a Country of Africa, 2 Reg.
16.

The Travels of Ahaz.
KING Ahaz went from Jerusalem to Damascus, which was 160 miles, to meet
Tiglath-Phulasser King of the Assyrians, to rejoice with him for his happy
Victory, and give him thanks for his aid and assistance: where, when he saw the
Altar at Damascus to be very glorious, he sent for Vrijah the chief Priest, who
took a pattern thereof, and carried it with him to Jerusalem, where he made an
Altar like unto it, 2 Reg. 16.

From D^mascus he returned back again 160 miles. So his Travels were 320 miles.

But yet Ahaz continued in his perverse Impiety and Idolatry, without any
regard or fear of God, therefore he stirred up other Enemies against him, viz.
the Idumeans, who took a great multitude of them captive; and the Philistines,
who with their Army broke into the South part of the Tribe of Judah, and took
these Cities following, viz, Bethsemes, Ajalon, Timnath, Socho, Geder^th, and
Gimso, with their Villages. These Cities for the most part are mentioned in the
precedent Treatise, except Gederoth and Gimso. Gederoth, commonly called
Gederothaim, is distant from Jerusalem eight miles toward the South-West, and
stands near to the Castle of Emaus, being compassed about with a Hedge, from
whence it seems to take the name; for Gadar is as much as to say, he has
hedged about. Gi^so was also in the Tribe of Judah, but in what place is not
certainly known. Thus King Ahaz all the days of his Life did evil in the sight
of the Lord; for which, God punished him and all the Land; and in the sixteenth
year of his Reign he died, and was buried with his Fathers in the City of David.

The Travel^ of Ezekias King of Judah.
EZ^kias (which signifies the Champion of Jehovah) was born when his Father was
but thirteen years of age, which made many Questions whether he should succeed
him as his lawful Heir in his Kingdom, because they doubted whether he was
lawfully begotten. For if you do observe the order and course of the years and
Chronology in the Scripture, you shall find, that from the beginning of the
thirteenth year of the age of Ahaz, to the first year of the Reign of this King
Ezekias, make just twenty five years: Ezekias therefore began to reign after
the death of his Father Ahaz, about the end of the third year of Hosea King of
Israel, 2 Reg. 19. Anno mun, 3222, before Christ, 746, being then about twenty
five years of age, a little before Easter, as it appears, 2 Chronicles. 29. He
governed that Kingdom with great Commendations twenty nine years. The first
Journey that he ^ook was from Jerusalem to Gaza, which was forty four miles,
there he overcame the Army of the Philistines, and recovered all those Cities
which his Father Ahaz had lost, according to that in the Prophet Esaias, cap. 15.
2 Reg. 18.

From Gaza he returned to Jerusalem, which was forty four miles; there he broke
down the places for Idolatry, and the brazen Serpent made by Moses in the
Wilderness, and called it Nehustan, a Brazen thing that has nothing in it self
of a Divine nature, and could neither profit nor hurt, therefore ought not to
be worshipped. This Brazen Serpent was kept in memory of that Sign that God
showed unto the Children of Israel in the Desert, when they were bitten and
stung to death by fiery Serpents, for looking upon this Brazen Serpent they
were healed. But now because of the abuse thereof by the Jews, which turned it
into Idolatry, it was broken to pieces, Number. 21. 2 Reg. 18. So all the Travels
of Ezechias were eighty eight miles.

In the fourteenth year of the Reign of Ezekias, and in the thirty eighth year
of his age, Senacharib (that mighty Emperor of the Assyrians) having taken
many Towns and Cities in the Holy Land, would have also besieged Jerusalem, and
for that purpose sent from Lachis (which was twenty miles distant from
Jerusalem) Thartan, Rabsarim, and Rabsacha, three mighty Princes, Ambassadors,
with a great Train to attend them. These men went about the City, to see in
what part it was most subject to battery, and might easiest be got: so when
they came to the Conduit of the upper Pool, which is by the path of the Fullers
Field, between the Fish-Gate and the Old-Gate, in that place where they might
easiliest be heard, they called to the King: but Eliakim the Son of Hilkiah
(which was Hezekia's Steward) Shebna the Chancellor, and Ioah the Son of Asaph,
the Recorder, went upon the Wall: then Rabsacha uttered blasphemous words
against the Lord: but Ezekias when he had heard what the Enemy had said, called
all the Elders of Jerusalem together, and sent for Isaiah the Prophet, the Son
of Amos, and they went into the Temple of the Lord and prayed. Wherefore the
Lord heard their Prayers, and sent his Angel into the Camp of the Assyrians,
and lo, in one night there were slain 185000 men as they lay in their Tents
before Gibeah (which at this time they besieged) being distant from Jerusalem,
some ten miles toward the South-West. This great deliverance happened in the
year of the World 3253, and before Christ, 733. About the end of the thirty
eighth year of the age of Ezekiah, he fell into a dangerous disease, which so
far forth as could be gathered by all likelihoods was the Plague; (for God does
oftentimes try the Patience of his Saints with sundry afflictions) but yet at
his servent Prayers he was restored to Health, and his days were lengthened
fifteen years: at which time the Sun went back ten Degrees, according to the
variation of the shadow in the Dyal of Jerusalem, 2 Reg. 20. Isa 38. 2 Chr. 32.
But at the end of the fifteen years, which was about the fifty fourth year of
his age, he dyed, and was buried with his Fathers.

The Travels of Manasses.
MAnasses, or Manasseh, signifies forgetting, or he has forgotten. This man
was twelve years old when he succeeded his Father Ezekiah in the Kingdom of
Judah: he began to reign Anno mundi, 3251, and before Christ, 717. This King
was a great Idolater, and one that put the Prophets of the Lord to death, so
that it was wonderful to see what Tyranny and mischief he wrought in Israel:
wherefore the Lord stirred up the Assyrians against him, who overcame him in a
great Battle, and took him Captive, carrying him bound in Chains from Jerusalem
to Babylon, even 680 miles.

But after, being humbled by his afflictions, he came to a knowledge of
himself, and repenting for his former evil, humbling himself with prayer and
fasting under the hand of God: wherefore the Lord took compassion of him, and
stirred up the mind of the King of Babylon to mercy, so that he loosed his
bands, and sent him back again to Jerusalem, 680 miles. From that time forward
he left Idolatry, and worshipped the true God: adorned the Temple of the Lord
with many fair and beautiful Buildings, and in the five and fiftieth year of
his age he died, and was buried in the Kings Garden, 2 Reg. 21. 2 Chronicles. 33. So
all the Travels of Manasses were 1360 miles.

Of Amon King of Judah.
AMon signifies, True and Faithful: he succeeded his Father Manasses when he
was twenty two years of age, Anno mundi, 3307, before Christ, 661. He reigned
two years, and then, because of his exceeding Idolatry, the Lord cast him off,
when he was about twenty four years of age; near which time, some of his
Servants conspired against him, and put him to death.

The Travels of King Josiah.
JOSIAH signifies, A Sacrifice of the Lord: he succeeded his Father Manasses in
the Government, when he was but eight years of age, Anno Mundi 3309, before
Christ, 659. He governed Israel with great commendations thirty two years, 2
Reg. 22. his Mothers name was Iedidah, and dwelt in a Town called B^z^ath; but
how far this Town stood from Jerusalem, is not set down by any Author.

This good King went from Jerusalem, to Bethel, which was eight miles; there he
burnt upon the Altar which Jeroboam built, the bones of the Priests of Baal, as
the man of God which came from Judah had told Jeroboam 350 years before, 1 Reg.
13. 2 Chr. 35.

From Bethel he returned back to Jerusalem, which was eight miles; there he
celebrated the Passover with a solemn Feast and great Attendance, 2 Reg. 23. 2
Chr. 35.

In the last year of his Reign he went with his Army from Jerusalem to Megiddo,
being forty four miles, against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt; in which Battle,
he was slain with an Arrow, about the thirty ninth year of his age, 2 Chronicles. 3
5.

From Megiddo his Body was carried in a Chariot back again to Jerusalem which
was forty four miles, and there with great Lamentations honorably buried, 2
Reg. 23. 2 Chr. 35. So all his Travels were 104 miles.

The Travels of Jehoahas King of Judah.
JEhoahas signifies, the knowledge of God: he succeeded his Father Josiah in
the twenty third year of his age, Anno Mundi, 3340, which was 628 years before
Christ; and reigned only three Months, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chronicles. 36. Jeremy (cap.
22.) calls this man Schallum, that is, a Recompense.

He went from Jerusalem to Riblah, a City in the Tibe of Nepthaly, which is
accounted eighty miles; where he was taken Prisoner by Pharaoh Necho, 2 Reg. 23.

From Riblah, Pharaoh Necho led him Captive bound in Chains back again to
Jerusalem, being eighty miles; and there appointed Iehojakim, his elder
Brother, to reign in his place, 2 Reg. 23. 2 Chronicles. 36.

From Jerusalem he carried Iehoahas to Memphis, the Metropolitan City of
Egypt, which was 244 miles, 2 Reg. 23. So all the Travels of Iehoahas were 404
miles.

Of Jehoiakim King of Judah.
JEhoiakim was the eldest Son of Josiah, that Good King, and succeeded his
Brother Iehoahas in the Kingdom, Anno Mundi, 3341, before Christ, 627: he
governed Judah eleven years: Pharaoh Necho made him King when he was twenty
five years of age, to whom he was constrained to pay 100 Talents of What this
is in our Money, you may read after in the quantity of Moneys.
Silver, and a Talent of Gold. This Money being paid, he obtained the Kingdom,
and continued in great Impiety and Idolatry; for which cause he was sharply
reprehended by Jeremiah the Prophet: but he being offended at his words, sought
to put him to death; wherefore the Lord stirred up Nebuchadnezzar, the second
of that name, Emperor of the Assyrians and Babylonians, who in the eleventh
year of this King's Reign came to Jerusalem, and took him captive, tied him in
two chains, and would have carried him to Babylon; but his mind changed,
wherefore he caused him to be put to death, and cast out into the Fields of
Jerusalem for a prey to wild Beasts, Ier. 22. 2 Reg. 23.

Of Jehoiachin King of Judah.
Jehoiachin signifies, the preparation of Jehovah. This man succeeded his
Brother Iehoiakim, and began his Reign about the end of the 3351 year of the
World, and reigned only three Months and ten days, which was about the eighth
year of Nabuchadonozor the Great; at which time he was led captive from
Jerusalem to Babylon, together with Mordochae and many other Nobles; which was
680 miles. This Captivity happened 617 years before Christ, 2 Reg. 24. 2 Chronicles.
36. Ester 2. Ier. 52.

The Travels of Zedekiah, the last King of Judah.
AFter Iehoiachin succeeded Zedekiah, which signifies, the just man of God.
This was the Son of the good King Josiah, (yet an impious Tyrant:) who, by the
permission of Nabuchadonozor the Great, was suffered to be King of Judah after
his Brother, when he was one and twenty years of age. He began to reign about
the beginning of the 3352 year of the World, and before Christ 616: he governed
tyranically eleven years, 2 Reg. 24.

In the eleventh year of this King, Jerusalem was taken by Nabuchadonezar, the
great Emperor of the Babylonians: wherefore Zedekiah, to escape the brunt of
War, fled from Jerusalem with all possible speed to Jericho, which was twelve
miles, Ier. 39. 5.

From the plain near the City Jericho, where he was overcome by the Princes of
the Chaldeans, he was led to Riblah to Nebuchadonezar, which was sixty eight
miles.

From Riblah (after the Emperor Nabuchadonezar, had caused all his Children to
be put to death before his face, and had put out both his eyes) he led him
captive to Babylon, which was 600 miles, where he died miserably, 2 Reg. 25. So
all the Travels of Zedekiah King of Judah were 680 miles.

Of the Destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchadonezar.
IN the ninth year of this Zedekiah (which was the last King of Judah)
Nabuchadonezar began to besiege Jerusalem, it being then Winter, Anno Mundi
3860, upon the tenth day of the tenth Month Tebeth, which answers to the
seven and twentieth day of December, which day the Jews till now observed as a
fasting day. The Siege continued even till the eleventh year of this King,
Ierem. 39. 5. 2 Reg. 25. and upon the ninth day of the fourth Month Thamus,
(which agrees with the tenth day of July) the City was taken, and Zedekiah was
put to flight. Upon the seventh day of the fifth Month Ab, Nabuzaradan chief
Captain of the Army, was sent back by Nabuchadonezar into Iudaea, where he
destroyed and burned the houses and buildings of the City of Jerusalem, Ierem.
52. upon the tenth day of the fifth Month, Ab, which answers to the ninth day
of August, being the Sabbath day, the Temple of Jerusalem was set on fire, Ier.
52. de bello Iudei, lib. 6. cap. 26. 27. This first Captivity and Destruction
of the City Jerusalem by Nabuchadonezar that great Emperor happened Anno
Mundi, 3362, and before Christ, 606* three hundred and ninety years being then
fully complete and ended, from the first year of Jeroboam King of Israel, who
set up the Golden Calves, and caused them to be worshipped. For, after the end
of these years, according to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, ca^. 4. the Sins of
Jeroboam should be grievously punished upon the People of Judah. In the like
manner, from the end of the thirteenth year of Josiah, wherein Jeremy first
began to Prophecy, until this year, in which the Children of Israel were
carried away Captive into Babylon, are numbered forty years: which by Ezekiel. cap.
4. are called the years of the Iniquity of Judah, because so long the Jews did
contemn and despise the admonition of the Prophet Jeremy.

Of Babylon.
HOw far this City stood from Jerusalem, you may read before; which by the
Chaldaeans is called Shinear, or Sinear, and signifies, To strike upon the
Teeth, being derived of Schen, A tooth, and Naer, to strike. It may also be
taken for that, when a man endeavored with all speed to execute a thing; which
seems to resemble the condition of Nimrod: for that in this place he
endeavored to overcome and conquer all his Neighbors: from whence this Land
was called Casdius, that is, The Country of the Destroyer. So changing S into
L, it is called Chaldeus or Chaldaea. The Chief and Metropolitan City of which
Country was this Babylon, built some thirty years after the Flood by Nimrod, or
the Babylonian Saturn, the first great Commander of the World, according to
Berosus, lib. 4. who writes after this manner: Nimrod, which was accounted the
Son of Jupiter Belus, being angry with the Holy Priests of that great God
Jehovah, came with his Colony and People into the Field of Sinear, where he
built a City, and laid the Foundation of a great Tower, 131 years after the
Flood; and raised this Tower to such a height, and withal of such a hugeness,
that it seemed as if it had been some great Mountain; because he would have the
Babylonian People accounted the chiefest and greatest in the World; also their
Governor, the King of Kings. A little after he says, he built this Tower, but
before he could finish it, dyed, in the fifty sixth year after he began it:
wherefore the City and Tower of Babylon, according to the Opinion of Berosus,
was begun in Anno Mundi, 1788, which was 131 years after the Flood, and before
Christ, 2180. There were two causes wherefore the Children of Men built up this
Tower; first, that they might get them a name: secondly, that they might be
safe in case there came another Flood to drown the World. It was made of Brick
and Bittum, lest the Water should loosen it. But the Lord turned their
Enterprises into evil, and divided their Language, so that they could not
understand one another [whereby they were constrained to leave off their
building:] from whence it happened that their Minds, Manners, Understandings,
Studies, and principal Actions were utterly changed, and is the Foundation of
all discord and sedition, where the fear of God, and the true knowledge of
Christ does not prevent it. From this division of Tongues, it is called the
City of Babylon, this is the City of Division; being derived of the word Balal,
he has confounded or mingled together. Of this City you may read in Ios. lib.
I. cap. 9. where he brings in a saying of the Sibyls, which was, That when
all Nations were of one Language, they built an exceeding high Tower, as though
they would have ascended by it into Heaven; but the Lord with great tempest and
dividing their Tongues, subverted their enterprise, from whence it was called
Babylon. This City was the fairest in those times of all others, situated in a
spacious Plain, upon every side whereof there stood pleasant Orchards and
Gardens: it was built four square, conpassed about with Walls of incredible
strength and greatness, being fifty Cubits thick, and 200 high, beautified
within with goodly Buildings, fair Temples richly gilt with Gold, and wonderful
to look upon. It was in compass 380 Furlongs, as Strabo says, which make forty
eight miles. Through it ran the River Euphrates, by which all things necessary
were conveyed to the City; without, it was compassed with fair Ditches, filled
with water like Rivers, and in the Wall there stood a hundred Gates. Herodotus
says, that it was 480 Furlongs about, which make sixty miles English, but that
is not so credible.

The first Founder of this City was Nimrod, who in those times was the chief
Commander of the World. It is thought that he was the Son of Cham, the Son of
Noah; whose name signifies, a cruel Governor, or an unmerciful Tyrant. And
that his Actions might be according to the signification of his name, he is
branded with most perspicious notes of Cruelty, omitting no violent action
whereby he might enlarge his Dominions; incroaching upon other men's
Governments, through a thirsty and ambitious desire of Renown, without respect
of Equity or Humanity. And to add evil to evil, committed many outrages upon
such as were accounted good men, and the Priests of the great God Jehovah, from
whence there grew in him a more than humane resolution, accounting himself in
this World a God, and thorough this opinion grew into contempt of all good
things; compelling such as were his Subjects and Vassals to do him Worship and
Reverence as to a Divine Power; which, being ingraf^ed into the hearts of such
as followed in succeeding Ages, they countenanced it with Authority: from
whence it came to pass, that he was enrolled into the number of their principal
Gods, giving him the name of Saturn, whom the Hebrews called Sudormin, which
elegantly implies Saturn.

Berosus says, that the Babylonian Jupiter succeeded this Nimrod, whose
Authority I am willing to follow, to avoid prolixity. This man so much enlarged
the City, that many in succeeding ages have attributed the foundation thereof
unto him. He ruled over it sixty one years.

After him succeeded Ninus, or, as some would have it, Nimrod the second; who
began his Reign Anno Mundi, 1909, before Christ, 2061: he did many worthy Acts
during his life, and added to the Empire of Babylon many Provinces; and after
he had reigned fifty years, dyed, and was buried in Babylon.

After him succeeded Semiramis, his Wife, who took upon her the Government of
the Assyrian Empire, her Son Ninus being then within age, and she began her
Government, Anno Mundi, 1959 before Christ, 2009. She was one of the manliest
and resolute Women that we read of, and performed as many worthy and memorable
Actions. This Queen built her Sepulcher over the most eminent Gate of Babylon,
in a public and perspicious place, upon which she caused to be written in
Golden letters, If there be any King of Babylon that shall come after me, and
stand in need of Money, let him open this Sepulcher, and what soever he wants
he shall find: but before, it will not be good for him to touch it. This
notwithstanding, it continued till the Reign of Darius, who opened this
Monument in hope to find what the Superscription imported; but no Money was
there to be had, only within might plainly be seen engraven other Letters to
this effect: Unless thou had been un^^tiably Covetous, thou would never
have opened the Graves of the Dead in hope of gain. This Woman beautified
Babylon with many goodly Buildings, built up the Walls thereof, set a Bridge
over Euphrates, made a beautiful Orchard and a Garden in it, beautified it with
many goodly Towers and Fortifications, added unto it many Provinces and
Governments: and after all, because of her own lascivious Appetite (as Sallust
says) was murdered by her Son Ninus, who succeeded her in the Government.

There were many other memorable things within this City, that were built
before and after her time (as Herodotus says) as that great and mighty Tower
before remembered, in which stood the Temple of Baelus, and his Sepulcher. Not
far from that stood a Chapel, wherein was the Statue of Jupiter* all of pure
Gold, worth What this was in our Money, you may see after.
800 Talents of Gold. Without that Chapel there stood an Altar of pure Gold,
upon which they yearly offered 100000 Talents of Frankincense. There was
another also somewhat less, upon which they used to offer their Sacrifices; for
it was not lawful for them to offer any thing that had life upon the greater
Altar: there stood also in that place another Statue twelve cubits high, all of
pure Gold.

This City was after taken by Cyrus, the first Emperor of the Persians, An.
Mundi, 3432. before Christ, 536, in the seventieth year after the Captivity of
Israel and Judah, according to the Prophecy of Jeremy; at which time the City
was so great, that they which dwelt in the middle of it did not know that the
Enemy had entered within the Walls at the farther end: which might happen,
because upon that day when it was taken the Babylonians celebrated a Feast unto
Venus, in which using extraordinary diligence, they were less mindful of such
things as happened unto them.

Thus this City, that with great Tyranny had triumphed over the Nations of the
earth for the space of 1600 years (being so plentifully furnished with all
things necessary for the maintenance of life, that the Inhabitants thereof
contemned all other People) was by God's permission, for their pride and
presumption, wasted and consumed by Cyrus, as you have heard: and shortly after
utterly destroyed by Xerxes, the fourth Emperor of the Persians, and so
continues to this day, as Strabo says. Where then, O World, is thy
Prosperity? or Riches, thy glory? since in the one thou art consumed, in the
other lest desolate.

Of the Ruins of old Babylon that are extant at this day.
BAbylon (which as you have heard reigned over the Nations of the Earth like a
Queen) at this day has nothing to present you withal but an heap of stones;
out of the Ruins whereof there was built a little Town, close by where it
stood, called Elugo, or Felugo, situated upon the Bank of the River Euphrates.
Not far from which, it seems there is a profitable Harbor for Ships, where
Merchants often times go a shore, and travel thence through many Woods and
desert places, unto Seleucia, which at this day is called by the Turks,
Bagdeth, distant thence some thirty six miles, and is the utmost Town of the
Turkish and Persian Empires toward the East, being divided in the midst by the
River Tygris. Some Merchants have reported, That the place where Babylon stood
is become stony, unfruitful, and unpleasant, because of the Ruins of the
destroyed buildings which lie in the Earth. Also, That there is found a Tower
built of a black stone, which to outward appearance seems to have been a very
goodly house, high and eminent; so that upon the top thereof a man might have
seen through the whole City. This Tower the Inhabitants of Felugo call the
Tower of Daniel, in which was the Chamber where he used to pray to the Lord
three times a day, the Windows whereof looked toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6. There
is also to be seen diverse Arches of the Bridge which Semiramis built, standing
upon the River Euphrates, and the foundation of the great Tower whose top
should have reached to Heaven; being in compass two miles, but not very high.
Within the Ruins whereof are found certain Serpents very noisome and venomous,
about the bigness of a Lizard, having three heads, and spect with diverse
colors, which the Inhabitants call Eglones. There are such a multitude of
them, that no man dares approach within half a mile of it any time but in the
Winter season, nor then neither but for the space of a Month; in which time
these Serpents for the extremity of the cold are constrained to keep their
holes. Thus, as this Tower was hateful to God in the beginning, so likewise
has he made it hurtful unto man even to this day.

The Travels of the Babylonian and Assyrian Kings and Em^erours that fought
against Israel and Judah. And first of Phul Belochus, King of Ass^ria.
PHul Belochus (that is he returned wasting) began to reign among the
Babylonians, Anno Mundi 3149. before Christ 819, and governed forty eight years.

This King or Emperor came from Babylon to Samaria, which was 660 miles. There
he so straightly besieged Menahem King of Israel, that he was constrained to
give him What this was in our Money, you may see after.
1000 talents of Silver to raise his Siege and depart, 2 Reg. 15.

From Samaria he returned back again to Babylon, 660 miles.

So all Travels of Phul Belochus were 1320 miles.

The Travels of Tiglat Phulasser King of the Assyrians.
TIglat Phulasser signifies, the Assyrian Conqueror. He was also called
Tiglath Philasser, 2 Reg. 15. which name is attributed to him, either because
he carried away the Children of Israel captives, or else because of the
Conquest that he had of all Galilee, and over the Tribe of Naphtaly, which he
carried into Assyria. He succeeded his father Phul Belochus in the Government
of the Assyrians, An. Mundi 3197. before Christ 771. and reigned twenty five
years.

When Re^n King of the Assyrians (joining his Army with Pekah Son of Remalia
King of Israel,) had straightly besieged Jerusalem, Ahaz was constrained to
crave aid of this Tiglath Phulasser, and sent him great Presents, which he
accepted kindly, and brought his Army from Niniveh to Damascus, 520 miles;
where he put Re^n, and the whole City to the Sword, 2 Reg. 16.

From Damascus he came with his Army into the land of Israel, which was 120
miles, where he overcame Pek^h in a great Battle (conquered all the land of
Gilead and the tribe of Naphtaly, and put a great multitude of the Israelites
into perpetual Exile; 2 Reg. 15.

From thence he went back to Niniveh, 640 miles.

A little after this, King Tiglath Phulasser went from Niniveh to Jerusalem,
680 miles, where he so straightly besieged that wicked King Ahaz, that he was
constrained to give him great abundance of Gold and Silver to raise his Siege
and be gone, 2 Chr. 28.

From Jerusalem he returned back to Niniveh, being 680 miles. So all his
Travels were 6640 miles.

Of the City Niniveh you may read after, in the Travels of Jonas the Prophet.

Of Kyr, which is commonly called Cyrene.
KYR or Cyrene is situated in Africa, 816 miles from Jerusalem Westward. In
which Country Simon that bore the Cross of Christ was born, Mat. 27. Luke 23.
It signifies in Hebrew, a strong Wall: and in Latin a Heart

The Travels of King Salmanasser.
SAlmanasser signifies, the Assyrian Peacemaker. This man Ptolomaeus (that
excellent Mathematician) calls Nabonasarus, that is, the Prophet of the
Assyrians. He began to reign upon the 26 of February, An. Mundi 3221, before
Christ 747, and reigned ten years or thereabout. This man went with his Army
from Niniveh to Samaria, being 652 miles, where he compelled Hosea, the last
King of Israel, to pay him tribute, 2 Reg. 16.

From thence he returned back again with his Army to Nineveh, 652 miles.

After, when Hosea King of Israel (conspiring with So King of Egypt) denied to
pay him Tribute, he returned back again the second time to Samaria, being 652
miles, and after three years siege, he took and destroyed it with Fire and
Sword, and conquered all the Country round about.

From Samaria he returned back again to Nineveh, 652 miles. So all the Travels
of Salmanasser King of the Assyrians were 2608 miles.

The Travels of Senacharib King of the Assyrians.
SEn^charib, as Melan^thon expounds it, signifies a two-edged Sword. He
succeeded his Father Salmanasser, An. Mund. 3231. before Christ, 737. He
reigned seven years. This man, imitating his Father, endeavored to carry away
the rest of Gods People into Captivity: for which purpose he brought an Army
from Nineveh to Lachis, which was 700 miles, which Town he besieged, and sent
his Princes to Jerusalem, being twenty miles, where he blasphemed the Lord: of
which you may read more in the History of King Hezekiah.

From Lachis he went to Libnah, eight miles. This was a strong Hold, but he
besieged it so narrowly, that within a while after he had begun the Siege, he
took it. While he was before this Town, there came News, that Taracha King of
the Ethiopians had invaded his Country. Wherefore he sent the second time
Messengers to Jerusalem. But the Lord was offended with their blasphemy,
wherefore he sent his Angel, who in one Night destroyed 185000 of his Army.

This sudden and unexpected evil falling upon him, in a great fear he returned
to Niniveh, 692 miles, where he was slain by his Sons in the Temple. The fame
of these things was so divulged abroad, that Herodotus, lib. 2. makes mention
of them. So these three Journeys make 1400 miles.

Of Lachis and Libnah you may read before.

Of Assarhaddon King of the Assyrians.
ASsarhaddon (his father Senacharib being slain) succeeded in the Government,
Anno Mundi 3238, which agrees with the 730 year before Christ, and reigned ten
years in Niniveh, the chief City of the Assyrians. Here again the mutation and
change of Kingdoms may be observed; for Merodach, a Chaldaean, rebelling
against Senacharib, continued his Government in Babylon eleven years, that is,
during a part of the Reign of Senacharib, and all the Reign of Assarhaddon his
Son; in which time he conquered the Assyrians, and made them subject to the
Empire of the Babylonians.

Of Merodach, the first Emperor of the Babylonians.
MErodach signifies, a bitter repentance. He was the Son of Baladan, Prince of
Babylon, who ruled at such time as Senacharib had that grievous overthrow in
Judah. Wherefore taking advantage of the time, and the necessity of that
Prince, he rebelled against him and his Son Assarhaddon taking upon him the
absolute command of the City and whole Empire. The beginning of whose Reign
happened in the year of the World 3236, and before Christ 732. This Merodach
sent to Jerusalem wise and learned men with Gifts and Presents to King Ezekiah,
just in that year when the Sun went back ten Degrees, to know the truth of this
Miracle. For it was a custom amongst the Nations round about Jerusalem, (if any
thing happened beyond the expectation of man) to send thither to inquire the
truth thereof. Such and so Wise a People were the Jews esteemed in those times,
as may appear by diverse places of the Holy Scripture. In the beginning of the
twelfth year of this King, Assa^haddon Emperor of the Assyrians died; after
whose death he became Emperor of all Assyria and Chaldea. He began to reign
over that spacious Kingdom, Anno Mundi, 3247, before Christ 721, and reigned
after that forty years.

Of Ben-Merodach, Emperor of Babylon.
BEn-Merodach, that is, the Son of Merodach, succeeded his Father, Anno Mundi,
3287, before Christ 681. He reigned twenty one years.

Of Nebuchadnezzar, first of that name, Emperor of Babylon.
NEbuchadonezar or Nebuchadnezzar, signifies a Divine Judge. He was the most
potent King of all the Babylonian. This man obtained the chief command over the
Babylonians. Empire, Anno Mundi, 3309, before Christ 659. He reigned thirty
five years, and held his Court sometime in Babylon, sometimes in Niniveh, Iud.
1. He made War with Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, of which Battle you may read,
2 Reg. 25. 2 Chr. 35. in the Valley of Megiddo, where Josias was slain. Herod.
lib. 2. does also make mention of this Battle, and calls the place by the name
of Magdalum. Of which Jeremy also speaks. But they were Towns in the Tribe of
Manasses, situated near to the Plain where this Battle was fought: in which
Country Mary Magdalen was born.

The Travels of Nebuchadnezzar, the second of that name, Emperor of Babylon
NEbuchadnezzar, or Nebuchadonozor the Great, which Ptolomaeus calls
Nebupollasser, about the end of the third year of Ioachim King of Judah (being
a little before created Emperor, his Father yet living) came unto Jerusalem,
which he besieged so straightly, that he constrained Ioachim to pay him Tribute
for thirty seven years. Berosus says, Lib. 3. A little after, that is, Anno
Mundi 3344. before Christ, 624, he was sent against the Syrians, Phoenicians,
and Egyptians that rebelled. So he went with his Army from Babylon to
Carchemis, a City of Syria, situated near the River Euphrates, which was 280
miles. Here he overcame Pharaoh-Necho King of Egypt in a great Battle, Ier.
46. Herod. lib. 2.

From Carchemis, he went to Jerusalem, which was 400 miles; here he took Daniel
and his companions captive, and brought them to Babylon.

After, he went with his Army to Pelusio, being 132 miles, which he took,
conquered all the Land of Egypt, put to death Pharaoh-Necho, and made
Psammeticus his Son King in his place. Jeremy the Prophet told of this War,
cap. 25. 26.

From Pelusio he returned to Babylon, 800 miles. Within a while after, his
Father died, and he succeeded in the Government, and reigned forty three years.

In the eleventh year of Ioachim King of Judah, he went again from Babylon to
Jerusalem, which was 680 miles, and by policy took that City, and put Ioachim
the King thereof to death, according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, cap. 22. 2 Kin.
24.

From thence (after he had made Iechonias his Son King) he returned back again
to Babylon, 680 miles.

About three Months after, he went the third time back to Jerusalem, 680 miles;
for he feared Iechonias would rebel and revenge the death of his Father
Ioachim. 2 Kin. 24.

In the eighth year of his Reign he took Iechonias, Mardoche, and 3000 other
Jews of the Nobility, and carried them captive to Babylon, which was 680 miles,
2 Kin. 2. Chr. 36. Est. 2.

Nine years after, he came the fourth time to Jerusalem, being 680 miles, and
besieged the City, because of the Impiety and Rebellion of Zedekiah King
thereof. During this Siege he took diverse Towns, but chiefly Lachis and Aseka,
Ier. 34.

But when he understood that Pharaoh was coming with an Army out of Egypt, to
rescue Zedekiah, he raised his Camp, and went about eighty miles into the
Country of Egypt; which Pharaoh hearing, was abashed, and turned back again.
In the absence of this Emperor, Jeremy the Prophet being then within the City,
having foretold the Destruction thereof, would have fled thence for his better
safety, into the Tribe of Benjamin: but by the way he was taken in the Gate of
Benjamin, and cast into Prison, Ier. 7.

Within a while after, according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, Nebuchadnezzar
returned out of the Desert of Sur, whither he went to meet the Egyptians,
being eighty miles, and utterly destroyed the City of Jerusalem, carrying
thence the Vessels and Ornaments of the Temple to Babylon, 2 Kin. 25. 2 Chr. 36.

From Jerusalem he went to Riblah, in the Tribe of Naphtaly, eighty miles,
where he put out Zedekia's eyes, and killed his Children, 2 Kin. 25.

From Riblah he carried Zedekiah to Babylon, which was 600 miles; where he died
miserably in Prison, 2 Kin. 25.

Afterward Nebuchadnezzar went with his Army from Babylon to Tyrus, which he
won, and pitifully wasted with Fire and Sword, according to the Prophecy of
Ezekiel, cap. 26. being 600 miles.

From Tyrus he went to Egypt, and passed 480 miles through that Kingdom,
conquering all the Countries and Provinces as he went along, even the
Ammonites, the Moabites, Philistines, Idumaeans, and Egypt it self, all which
Countries he made Tributary to him, Isa. 15, 16, 19. Ier. 46, 47, 48, 49. Ez.
25. 29.

From Egypt he returned to Babel, 960 miles.

From that time, till his death, he was Emperor of all those Kingdoms. In the
second year of his Empire, Daniel expounded unto him his wonderful Dream, under
the similitude of an Image, setting forth the condition of the four Monarchies
of the World, Dan. 2. Not long after, he caused Sidrack, Misack, and Abednego
to be cast in a Fiery Furnace, because they refused to worship the golden Image
which he had set up; Dan. 3. Also this Nebuchadnezzar, for his great Pride and
Arrogance, was by God stricken mad, and into a deep melancholy, in which
disease he continued for the space of seven years, tied in Bonds and Chains,
running up and down like a Beast, and seeding upon Grass and Roots; until he
came to understand, that God the Governor of Heaven and Earth, had the
disposing of Kingdoms and Governments, giving them to whom he list, and again
taking them away. At the end of which time he was restored again to his
understanding and Empire: and after beautified the City of Babylon with many
goodly Buildings, fair Orchards, and pleasant places, as Iosep. lib. Ant. 10.
^aith. And when he had reigned forty three years died, and was buried by his
Father in Babylon, An. Mundi 3387. and before Christ 581. So all the Travels of
Nebuchadonozor, or Nebuchadnezzar, were 7892 miles.

The Description of the Cities and Places that have not as yet been mentioned.
Of Carchemis.
THIS was a City in the Country of Syria near Euphrates, 400 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, and signifies, A sacrificed Lamb; being derived of Car,
which signifies a Ram or Lamb, and Mosch, He has cut in pieces. It may also be
taken in the third Conjugation, for a Lamb sacrificed to the Idol Chemosch or
Chamos, the God of Meetings, or nightly Salutations.

Of Pelusio.
THIS City Peluso was built by Peleus the Father of Achilles, from whence it
took the name. It stands in Egypt, some 172 miles from Jerusalem
South-westward, near to the Gate of Nilus called Pelusiachus, where it falls
into the Mediterranean Sea. Not far from this City, in the Mountain Casius,
upon the Borders of Arabia-Petraea (where the Temple of Jupiter Casius stood)
is to be seen the Tomb of Pompey the Great, beautified and adorned by Adrianus
Caesar, as Capitolinus says. At this day this City is called by the name of
Damiata. You may read of it, Ezekiel. cap. 30.

Of Tyrus, or Zor.
TYrus signifies Cheese, or to congeal together, as Cheese does of milk;
something alluding to the Hebrew word Zor, signifying to make strait, or a Rock
having a strait and sharp Edge. It was the Metropolitan City of Phoenicia, now
the Haven or Passage of Sur: but in ancient time it was called Sarra, Aul. Gel.
lib, 14. cap. 6. It was situated upon a very high Rock, compassed about with
the Mediterranean Sea, 100 miles from Jerusalem Northward, and a famous Mart
Town for all the Holy Land. By the description of Ezekiel it seems to have been
like unto Venice, both in Situation and Dignity, Ez. 27. Ierem. 28. Esaias 27.
28. and many other Prophets prophesied against this Town, saying, Out of the
Land of Kithim (that is, from Macedonia) the Destroyer of Tyrus should come. As
after happened: for, Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, besieged that Town,
and in the seventh Month after took it; for the obtaining whereof, he was
constrained to fill up the Sea which compassed it about, containing 700 Paces,
and made it firm Land for his Army to pass upon to the Walls of the City. In
this Country that famous Civilian Vlpian was born, as he writes, lib. 1. ff.
de Censibus. And upon the Borders of Tyrus and Sidon Christ cured the Daughter
of a Canaanitish Woman, of a Devil, Mat. 15. Wherefore you shall read more of
it in the second Tomb.

Of Evil Merodach, Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians.
AMilinus Evil-Merodach, Son of Nebuchadonosor the Great, succeeded his Father,
An. Mun. 3388. before Christ, 580. In the first year of his Reign he set at
liberty Iechonias King of Judah, and attributed to him the Title, Dignity, and
Maintenance of a King, Iechonias being then fifty five years of age, and thirty
seven after he had been in Captivity, 2 King. ult. Ier. ult. Whence it is
concluded by most, That this Emperor did also embrace the Doctrine of Daniel,
concerning the true God, as did Nebuchadonosor his Father; who had before by
public Edict professed it to the whole State, and caused it to be published
through his Dominions, and therefore showed favor and mercy toward King
Iechonias. And from thence it is thought, that those which were impious Princes
about him, called him Amelinus, that is, the Circumcised; being derived of Mol,
which signifies to circumcise, and Evil, simple and foolish Merodach. His
Wife's name was Nitocris, according to Herod. lib. 1. She was a very
magnificent and wise Woman, set up many fair and goodly Buildings in Babylon,
and was the Mother of Balthazar, the last Emperor of the Assyrians, Dan. 5.

Of Niriglissoroor Emperor of Babylon.
NIriglissoroor (whose Syrname was Regassa^) Son-in-law to Nebuchadnezzar the
Great, having slain Evil-Merodach, his Wifes Brother, reigned over the
Babylonians and Assyrians four years, as Berosus says.

Of Labassardach, the last Emperor of the Babyl^nians.
LAbassardach, the Son of Niriglissoroor, succeeded his Father* He reig^ed only
nine months, and died without Heir male.

Of Balthazar Nabonidus, the last Emperor of the Babylonians and Assyrians.
ANno Mundi, 3415, and before Christ, 553, Balthazar Nabonidus, whose Surname
was Labynitus, the Son of Evil-Merodach and Nitocris, obtained the Empire, and
reigned seventeen years, according to Berosus; with Joseph. cont. App. Alexand.
Polyb. apud Eusebium, Praep. lib, 9. l. 4. Alphae. Hist. with Eusebius. calls
this King Nabinidochus. This is that Balthazar (says Josephus, lib. Ant. 10.
cap. 13.) which Daniel, cap. 5. calls the Son of Nebuchadonosor, though
indeed he was but his Son's Son, as may be gathered from that of Ier. cap. 25.
All Nations shall serve Nebuchadonosor, and his Son, and his Son's Son.

B^lthasar signifies, The Host of the Lord destroying his Enemies. Labynitus
signifies, a shaken Sword. This man, as he was celebrating a great Feast unto
Venus, (whom they call in the Assyrian Tongue Myleta) amongst a great multitude
of his Nobility, and in that using extraordinary Excess and Blasphemy against
the Lord; in the midst of his Feast and all his Merriments, he saw a hand
writing upon the Wall, which left these Words, Mean, Mean, Tekel Vpharsin, of
which you may read more, Dan. 5. Some say, That at this very time the City was
taken by Cyrus, Emperor of the Persians, and he put to the Sword in those
Sports and Pastimes.

But certain it is, that he was slain at a Banquet, lost his Empire, and was
the last of the Assyrian Emperors: but whether at that time, I refer it to the
opinion of the Reader.

The Travels of the Kings of Egypt that fought against the Kings of Judah. And
first of Sisack, who made War upon Rehoboam the Son of Solomon.
THAT proud and presumptuous Prince Sisack (which signifies a Garment of Silk)
in the last year of his Reign (which was the first of Rehoboam the Son of
Solomon) came with 1200 Chariots and 60000 Horse, from Memphis to Jerusalem,
which was 244 miles; bringing in his Army a great Multitude of People of diverse
Nations, as Lybians, Ethiopians, etc. With this Company he besieged Jerusalem,
and took it, wasted the City, spoiled the Temple, and took thence the golden
Shields which Solomon had made, and destroyed that fair and beautiful house
which Solomon had built. From whence that Saying of his own was verified,
Eccles. That it is a great Evil upon the Earth, for a man to take care to lay
up Riches and Treasures in this World, yet knows not who shall inherit it.
For those things which a little before he had with great Labor and Pains
builded and beautified, within less than twenty Years after, were destroyed and
made desolate by this King.

From Jerusalem, Sisack returned with the Spoils of the Temple and City, to
Memphis in Egypt, which was 244 miles, and in the Year following he was
stricken by the Lord with a grievous Disease, of which he died miserably.

So these two Journeys were 488 miles.

The Travels of Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, who made War upon Josiah King of
Judah.
NECHO signifies an Enemy or Invader. This man was one of the greatest of all
the Egyptian Kings, who, in the thirteenth year of his Reign made War upon
Nebuchadnezzar the first, and in the Valley of Megiddo, near to Magdala, 244
miles from Memphis, fought a great Battle, wherein Josiah King of Judah was
wounded to death.

From the Valley of Megiddo, Pharaoh Necho went to the River Euphrates, 360
miles, where he fought a second Battle with Nebuchadnezzar, upon a Plain near
to Carchemis, where he lost the day, and was put to flight.

From Carchemis he fled to Riblah, in the Land of Israel, being 320 miles;
where, in the Land of Chaemath, near to the Lake Samachonites, he overcame
(...) King of Judah, and took him Prisoner.

From Riblah, Pharaoh Necho led Ioachas bound to Jerusalem, 80 miles, and made
Ioachim his Brother King in his place.

From Jerusalem he returned to Memphis, 240 miles.

Within four years after, he went the second time with a great Army from
Memphis to the River Euphrates, 640 miles.

But there he was the second time overcome by Nebuchadnezzar, and constrained
to fly thence back again to Memphis in Egypt, being 640 miles. But
Nebuchadnezzar followed him with an Army of chosen men, and conquered all
Egypt, took Pharaoh Necho, and made his Son Psammeticus King in his place, who
was the second of that name. Of this Battle there is mention, Ier. ca. 25. 26.
So all the Travels of Pharaoh Necho were 1524 miles.

The Travels of the Holy Prophets: and first, of the Prophet Eliah.
ELIAH the Prophet went from Thisbe (which was in the Land of Gilead) to
Samaria, twenty four miles, where he told the wicked King Ahab, that there
should be neither Rain nor Dew for the space of seven years, 1 Reg. 17.

From Samaria he went to the River ^erith, twenty four miles, where he was fed
by a Raven.

From Kerith he went to Sarepta, being an hundred miles, where he sojourned
with a poor Widow that found him Necessaries, whose Son he restored to Life, 1
Reg. 17.

From Sarepta he went to Mount Carmel in the Land of Israel, being sixty miles;
and by the way as he went he met Obadiah (which signifies, the Servant of the
Lord) and King Ahab, whom he rebuked sharply because of his Idolatry. Also upon
this Mountain he put all B^al's Priests to death, and prayed unto the Lord, who
sent Rain upon the Earth in great abundance, 1 Reg. 18.

From Mount Carmel he ran by King Ahab's Chariot to Iezreel, which was
accounted 16 miles.

After, when Queen Iesabel threatened his Death, he departed thence, and went to
Beersaba, eighty four miles, 1 Reg. 19.

From Beersaba he went one days Jouney into the Wilderness of Paran, because
he thought to remain there safe from the mischief of Iesabel, which was
twenty miles from Beersaba, Southvvard. Here the Angel of the Lord brought him
meat as he was sitting under a Juniper-tree, 1 Reg. 19.

By virtue of this meat, Eliah traveled from thence to Mount Horeb, or Sinai,
eighty miles; and continued there forty days and forty nights, without meat
or drink. There the Lord spoke to Eliah, as he stood in the ^ntrance of a Cave,
his Face being covered with his Mantle, 1 Reg. 19.

From the Mount Sinai or Horeb, he returned to Abel-Mehola, being 156 miles,
where he called Elizeus the Son of Saphas to the Ministerial Function, and
Office of a Prophet, 1 Reg. 18.

From thence he went to Damascus, 124 miles, where he anointed Hazael King of
Syria, 1 Reg. 19.

From Damscus, Elias went to Mount Carmel, where he dwelled, which was
accounted 120 miles.

From Mount Carmel he went to Iezreel, sixteen miles; there, in the Vineyard
of Naboth, (whom Iezabel caused to be stoned to death) he sharply reprehended
Ahab for his Impiety and Idolatry, 1 Reg. 21.

From Iezreel he returned back again to his own House to Carmel, sixteen miles.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was thirty two miles, where he answered
the Servants of King Ahaziah, whom he had sent to enquire of B^alzebub, the
Idol of Ekron, concerning his health, saying, Go and tell your Master that sent
you, That the God of Israel says, Because thou have sent to ask counsel of
Baalzebub, the Idol of Ekron, and think there is no God in Israel, therefore
thou shall not rise off the Bed whereon thou lie, but shall surely dye, 2
Reg. 1.

Soon after, Elias returned to Mount Carmel, being 32 miles; where the two
Captains with their Companies of fifty that were sent to take him, were
consumed with fire from Heaven, 1 Reg. 1.

From Mount Carmel he went to Samaria with the third Captain, thirty two miles,
where he prophesied of the death of King Ahaziah, 2 Reg. 1.

From Samaria he returned back again to Mount Carmel, thirty two miles.

From thence he went to Gilgal, fifty two miles.

From Gilgal he went with Elizeus to the Town of Bethel, being six miles, 2
Reg. 2.

From thence to Jericho, four miles, 2 Reg. 2.

From Jericho he and Elizeus went to Jordan, which was six miles, through which
River they went upon dry ground. Now as they were speaking one to another, upon
the East Side of the River, behold a fiery Chariot came with fiery Horses, and
took Elias up alive into Heaven, after he had governed the Church thirty years,
An. Mundi, 3056, and before Christ, 912. 2 Reg. 2. So all the Travels of Eliah
the Prophet were 1033 miles.

Of the Cities and Places to which he traveled.
Of Thisbe.
IN this Town the Prophet Eliah was born, it being situated in the Land of
Gilead beyond Jordan, 48 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. It takes
the Name from Captivity; being derived of Chabah, he has led into Captivity.

Of Kerith.
THE River Kerith (where the Ravens fed Elias runs from Mount E^hraim
between Bethel and Jericho, eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
so passing along toward the East, falls into the River Jordan, 1 Reg. 17.
The Kerethites were such as guarded the Person of the King, which in the
Prophet David's time were called mighty men; taking their name from striking
and cutting, being derived of Charath, he has smitten, or cut in sunder.

Of Zarpath, or Sarepta.
THIS was a City of the Sidonians, where they found much Metal of diverse kinds;
lying between Tyrus and Sidon, 112 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
takes the name from Zoraph, which signifies, To try, or burn with Fire. There
is at this time but eight Houses in all the Town, although by the Ruins it
seems to have been in times past a very fair City. The Inhabitants thereof
take upon them to show the Chamber wherein Elias the Prophet sometimes lived,
when he raised the Widows Child to Life. Before the Gate of the City also there
is showed a certain Chapel, where (they say) Elias first spoke with the Widow,
1 Reg. 17.

Of Abelmehola.
THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Manasses, on this side Jordan in the midway
between Sichem and Salem, some 38 miles from Jerusalem Northward. At this day
it is called Abisena; where there are found certain ruins of Marble Pillars,
by which may be gathered, that in times past it has been a very beautiful
City. It seems to have taken the name from a great lamentation or mourning:
for Abel signifies to lament and bewail; and Machol, a company.

The Typical Signification of Elias.
Elias, according to the Interpretation of St. Jerome, signifies, the Minister
of Jehovah: but as others would have it, Eliah, is as much as, my God Jehovah.
He was a Type of St. John Baptist, who was sent before to prepare the way of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Of this you may read more Malach. 4. Matt.
11, 17. Isa. 40. etc.

The Travels of the Prophet Elisaeus, or Elisha.
ELisha followed Elias through diverse Countries, and became as it were his
Servant, pouring Water upon his hands, and ministering to him, 1 Reg. 19. 2 Reg.
3.

Elisha went with Eliah from Gilgal to Bethel, which was six miles, 1 Reg. 19.

From Bethel they both went to Jericho, which was four miles.

From Jericho he went beyond Jordan, six miles; where his Master was taken from
him up into Heaven, and his Spirit was doubled upon him, 2 Reg. 2.

From thence he returned back again to Jericho, which was six miles, passing
through the River Jordan upon dry ground; by which Miracle the Children of the
Prophets ( viz. such as studied Divinity at Jericho) did certainly know that
the Spirit of his Master Elias rested upon him. Near to this Town, he ^lung
Salt into a River, by which the Water was made sweet, 2 Reg. 2.

From Jericho, Elisha returned to Bethel, which was four miles: here the
Children that mocked him, saying, Come up thou Bald-pate, etc. in contempt of
his Age and Office, were devoured by two Bears, 2 Reg. 2.

From Bethel he walked to Mount Carmel, which was fifty six miles.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was about thirty two miles.

From thence he went to the three Kings, viz. Ioram King of Israel, Iehosaphat
King of Jerusalem, and the King of the Idumaeans, into the Desert of
Arabia-Petraea, which was 104 miles: here he prayed unto the Lord, and he sent
them Water, lest they should have perished with thirst, 2 Reg. 3.

From the Desert of Arabia-Petraea he returned back to Samaria, which was 104
miles, where he relieved a certain Widow-woman that was afflicted with Poverty
and Want, miraculously, by a Cruse of Oil, 2 Reg. 4. Josephus lib. Antiq. 9.
supposes this Woman to be the Widow of Obediah the King's Steward; of whom you
may read before, who did hide and maintain a certain number of the Prophets of
the Lord in a Cave, 2 Reg. 18.

From Samaria, Elisha went o^tentimes to a Town called Sunem, as he returned to
Samaria to Carmel, which was 16 miles distant. Here a certain rich Woman
observing his often Passage to and fro by that Town, built him a little Chamber
wherein he might rest himself after his Journey; to which place he often
resorted, and in recompense of this benefit (although she had been long barren)
he prophesied, that within a Year she should have a Son, which accordingly she
had, to her great Joy and Comfort, 2 Reg. 4.

From Sunem he went to Carmel, being 16 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Sunem, to the Woman where he used to
lie, which was 16 miles: here he restored her Son to Life, 2 Reg. 4.

From thence he went to Gilgal, which is distant from Sunem thirty six miles
toward the South: here he fed 100 men with twenty Barley loaves, 2 Reg. 4.

From Gilgal he went to Samaria, which is accounted twenty miles: to this place
Naaman the Syrian came to him to be healed of his Leprosy, 2 Reg. 5.

From Samaria he went to Jordan, which was eight miles; Here he made a Hatchet
of Iron that fell into the Water, to swim, 2 Reg. 6.

From Jordan he went to Dothan, where the Children of Jacob sold their Brother
Joseph to the Midianites, which was eight miles; here the Angels of the Lord
compassed him and his Servant about, lest they should have been taken by the
Army of the Syrians, and God struck the Syrians with Blindness, 2 Reg. 6.

From thence he led the Army of the Syrians (being thus made blind) to Samaria,
being twelve miles, and delivered them to the King of Israel, upon condition
that he should give them Meat and Drink to refresh themselves and suffer them
to depart in Peace, which he did, 2 Reg. 6.

From Samaria he went to Sunem, which was sixteen miles; here he advised the
Woman where he used to lie, to travel thence to some other Place, because of
the Famine that should follow, and continue for seven years, 2 Reg. 8.

From Sunem he went Damascus, being 132 miles: there he told Hazael, that he
should succeed his Master Benhadad in the Government of the Syrians, 2 Reg. 8.

From Damascus he returned to Samaria, which was 132 miles, where soon after he
fell sick and died; his body was buried near to Samaria, where the Lord a long
time after his Death showed a wonderful Miracle; for a dead man being thrown
into his Sepulcher, was restored again to life by touching of his Bones, 2 Reg.
13. This man governed the Church of God amongst the Children of Israel sixty
years after the death of Elias. So all the Travels of Elisha were 730 miles.

Concerning the Towns and places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before.

The Typical Signification of Elisha.
ELisha or Elischa signifies, the Salvation of God; being derived of El, that
is, God; and Iaschag, he has saved: from hence Jesus, a Savior; because this
Prophet was a notable Type of our Savior Jesus Christ: for as Elisha was
anointed Priest by the Prophet Eliah; so Christ was the anointed Priest of the
Father: and as Elisha did many works of Mercy and Miracles, to make evident
Gods Power and Providence; so our Savior Christ went from place to place,
showing mercy to the blind, lame, and impotent, upon them working wonderful
Miracles, that thereby his doctrine might be made evident to the World, and all
such as trust in him, be made capable of eternal happiness.

The Travels of the Shunamite, whose Son, Elisha had raised from Death to Life.
FRom Sunem she went to Mount Carmel, and besought Elisha to come and raise her
Son from Death to Life; which was sixteen miles, 2 Reg. 4.

From thence she and Elisha returned back again to Sunem, which was sixteen
miles; and there he delivered her Son unto her alive, 2 Reg. 4.

From Sunem (having buried her Husband) she traveled into the Land of the
Philistines, because of the Famine that was to come suddenly after, being fifty
six miles, 2 Reg. 8.

From the Land of the Philistines, she returned to Samaria, which was forty
miles, 2 Reg. 8.

From Samaria she returned to Sunem, which was sixteen miles. So all her
Travels were 144 miles.

Of the Prophet Isaiah or Jesaia.
JEsaia, or Ieschaia, is all one in signification with Elisha, that is, a
Savior. He was the Son of Amos (which signifies, strength) and by
consequence, Ozia King of Judah was his Cousin-German, as may appear by this
Genealogy following. Iosas King ofIuda.
Amasiah King of Judah. Ozias King of Judah.
Iotham King of Judah.
Ahas King of Judah.
Ezekias King of Judah.
Manasses King of Judah, who caused Isaiah to be slain.
Amos, Isaias Father. Isaias had two Daughters,
Sear Iasub, that is, the rest remaining: and was a sign of the rest of the
Posterity of Judah that should remain and dwell there, Isa. 7.
Mahez Schatal, that is, a sudden Destruction: for this second Daughter of Isay
did denote the immediate Desolation of the Kingdoms of Syria and Samaria.



From whence it plainly appears, that the Prophet Esaias was of the stock of
David, and lineage of Christ; for which cause, in the fifth Chapter of his
Prophecy, he calls him his beloved. He began to teach publicly in the year
of the World, 3167* and before Christ 800. and governed the Church eighty years
and more, until the time of Manasses, who caused him to be cut in pieces with a
Saw.

In Anno Mundi 3190. before Christ 778. Isay saw the Lord sitting upon a high
Throne in great Majesty, the lower part whereof filled the Temple, and the
Seraphins compassed him round about, Esa. 6. Cherubins are glorious and bright
shining Angels, of a fiery nature: for Saraph signifies, He has turned to
Fire.

His Doctrine was twofold, that is, partly concerning the Law, partly the
Gospel, as may appear by his Prophecy; in the first forty Chapters whereof,
the Doctrine of the Law is set ^orth, with sharp Reprehensions for Sin: in the
first four of which, are grievous Accusations of Sinners for breach of the
first Commandment; the other, for the most part, prophecy of horrible
Punishments, Mutations, and Change of Government; but principally, of the Jews,
Babylonians, Assyrians, Syrians, and Egyptians. From the ^ortieth to the end
of the Book, is contained the Doctrine of the Gospel, and of the Kingdom of our
Savior Jesus Christ; which he has set forth with such excellent Eloquence,
Figures, and Amplifications, that he may be compared with the best Orator that
ever wrote.

The Travels of the Prophet Jeremias.
(...) or ^eremiah, signifies, The exalted of the Lord: he was born in the
Tribe of Benjamin, in a City of the Priests called Anathoth, and from thence
came to Jerusalem, being two miles, and continued there for forty years,
teaching and prophesying.

From Jerusalem he was sent to Euphrates, where, in the cliff of a Rock, he hid
his Girdle, Ier. 13. being 400 miles.

From the River Euphrates he returned back again to Jerusalem, 400 miles.

A little after, the Lord sent him back again to Euphrates,(400 miles) to fetch
his Girdle, and l^e it was putrefied.

From thence he returned back again the second time to Jerusalem, 400 miles.

From Jerusalem he was led captive bound in Chains, with other Prisoners, to
Ramath, a City in Mount Ephraim, being eight miles; there Nabuzaradan, the
chief Captain, caused him to be set at Liberty.

From Ramath he went to Mispah, which is eight miles; where he continued a
while with Gediliah Prince of the Jews, which man had the chief command of
certain Cities of Iudaea under Nabuchadnezzar.

But in the seventh Year of the Captivity of the people of Israel, Ishmael that
was of the Stock and Progeny of David, (hoping to obtain the Government of
Judah) made War upon Gediliah, and put him to Death; wherefore Jeremy went from
thence with John the Son of Kareach, Prince of the Jews, to Bethlem Euphrata,
eight miles, Ier. 41. Now when he had stayed a while in a Village near Bethlem,
called Geruth Chimeham, where sometime Chimeham the Son of Barzilla^ lived, 2 Samuel 19. he prophesied, saying, If you stay in this Land you shall do well,
neither shall any Evil happen unto you; but if you depart hence into Egypt,
they shall devour you with Famine and with the Sword, Jer. 42.

But John and the rest of the Princes would give no credit to the words of
Jeremy, but went into Egypt, and compelled the Prophet to go along with them:
so they went from Bethlehem to Tachpanes, which was 172 miles. Here the second
time Jeremy prophesied unto them, saying, Behold, Nebuchadnezzar shall come
hither and wast and destroy all the Country of Egypt, beat down the Images of
Bethsemes, ( or Heliopolis) and carry away the Egyptians into perpetual
Captivity, Jer. 43. But the People of Israel being moved to Anger because of
his Words, stoned him to death. So the Travels of the Prophet Jeremiah were
1786 miles.

Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in the Travels of this Prophet, you
may read of them before, except Geruth-Chimeham, which stood close by
Bethlehem. It takes the name from a Stranger or Traveller being derived of
Gor, which signifies, He has traveled; and Tachpanes which was a City of
Egypt, some 180 miles from Jerusalem; where the Prophet Jeremy was stoned to
death; it is oftentimes called the name of Taphniis.

The Travels of Urijah the Prophet.
URIAS, or Vriah, signifies, Illuminated, or enlightened of the Lord. He was
born at Kirjath-jearim, a mile from Jerusalem toward the West: from thence he
came to Jerusalem, and there prophesied of the Destruction of the City.

After, when King Ioachim went about to take away his Life, he fled thence into
Egypt, 160 miles.

But the King sent Messengers into Egypt, and fetched Vrijah back again to
Jerusalem, and hundred and sixty miles, and there cut off his head, and caused
his Body to be thrown into the Sepulcher of a poor despised man, that it might
not be known that he had been a Prophet of the Lord. So all his Travels were
321 miles.

Of Hananias the false Prophet.
HAnanias, or Chanania signifies, the Grace of God. This false Prophet was a
Gibeonite, and came from Gibeon to Jerusalem, which was four miles; where he
took the wooden yoaks from the neck of Jeremiah the Prophet: but Jeremiah
caused Iron Yoaks to be made in their places, and told Hananias, that for his
falsehood, that year he should surely dye, as after he did.

Of the Prophet Ezekiel.
EZekiel or Iechezkel, signifies the Strength or Fortitude of God. He was
carried captive, with 3000 others of the Nobility of the Jews, from Jerusalem
to Babylon, which was 680 miles, the same year that Nebuchadnezzar put King
Ioachim to death: Within five years after, (a little before Easter) the Book of
the Law was found, 2 Chronicles. 3. He began to prophecy in Babylon, Anno Mundi
3356, before Christ, 612; at which time he saw his first Visions, near to the
River Chebar.

Of the River Chebar.
THE River Chebar was near Babylon in Chaldaea (upon the borders of
Mesopotamia, falling into Euphrates; and was often times called Aborras,
according to the opinion of many learned men. Strabo in the sevententh Book of
his Geography says, that there is another River between Tygris and Euphrates,
called Basilius: Aborras passes along by the City of Athemusia, and is a very
fair stream, from whence it is called Chebar, which signifies, a swift and
spacious River. Near to this River the Prophet Ezekiel saw the Glory and
Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ, in a bright shining Cloud. In this place also
dwelt many Jews, to whom he prophesied and foretold the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and the captivity of Zedekiah.

The Travels of the Prophet Daniel.
DAniel signifies, the Judge of God. In the reign of Ioachim King of Iud^h, he
was carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon, by Nabuchadonozor, which
was 680 miles, and there with his fellows learned the Arts and Language of the
Chaldeans, for three years. He was then but young, about some nineteen or
twenty years of age, and lived in Exile ninety one years, until the third year
of Cyrus Emperor of the Persians, about which time he saw his last Vision, and
a little after died, when he was about 110 years of age, as may be gathered by
the Circumstances of Histories and Times.

From Babylon he went to Susan in Persia, Anno Mundi, 3418, and before Christ,
540, being then ninety four years of age, which was 252 miles, where, near to
the Flood Eulaeus, he had a Vision of a Ram and a Goat; which set forth the
state of the second Monarchy (which was that of the Graecians.) In this Vision
Gabriel the Archangel, appeared to Daniel, Dan. 8. This was in the third year
of King Balthazar.

From Susan, Daniel returned to Babylon, which was 252 miles; here he
interpreted to Balthazar the meaning of these words, Mean, Mean, Tekel Euphar
sin, Dan. 5.

From Babylon he went to the River Tygris or Hidekel, which was thirty six
miles: here, in the third year of Cyrus King of Persia, he saw his last Vision,
which is described in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Chapters of his Prophecy.

From Tygris, he returned to his own house at Babylon, which was thirty six
miles. Sometimes also in his three last years of his life, he used to go to
Egbatan, the Metropolitan City of the Medes, which was accounted 464 miles from
Babylon, toward the North-East: Here Daniel built a fair and and artificial
Temple, so strongly, that it remained unperished, and retained the ancient
beauty many Ages, to the great admiration of all the Spectators: In it the
Kings of the Medes, Persians, and Parthians, were for the most part honorably
buried: the Government whereof was committed to a Priest of the Jews, as
Josephus says, lib. Antiq. 10. cap. 4.

From Egbatan, he returned back again to Babylon, which was. 464 miles, and
there died, Anno Mundi, 3445, and before Christ, 533. So all the Travels of the
Prophet Daniel were 2184 miles.

Of the Places to which he traveled.
Of Susan.
SVsa, or Susan, is so called from a sweet smelling Flower; but chiefly a Rose,
or a Lilly, because it is situated in a fair and pleasant place. It was a
goodly City, lying on both sides the River Eulaeus, some 200 furlongs (that is
twenty five miles English) about, as Polycletus says. And of this City all the
Country round about is called Susana: bordering toward the North upon Assyria,
toward the West upon Babylon, toward the South upon the Gulf of Persia, and
joyneth upon the East part of Persia toward the East. There are but two Cities
that are eminent in it, that is this, and another called Tariana. The Air in
the Winter season is very temperate, at which time the Earth brings forth
many pleasant Flowers and Fruits; but in the Summer it is extreme hot; by which
heat all things are scorched and burned away, and by reason of the Putrefaction
of the Air (as some think) in that Season, there do breed Toads, Lyzards, and
other Noisome Serpents in great abundance: so that the Inhabitants are
constrained (partly because of the heat, partly because of the loathsome and
dangerous Creatures) to build their Houses all of Earth, long and narrow, the
Walls and Roofs being at least a yard thick, that so the heat might not pierce
through them, or Serpents breed in them, Strabo, lib. Geograph. 5. says, that
one Tython (the Brother of Laomedon King of Troy.) did first build this City,
about such time as Thol^ judged Israel. After him his Son Memnon beautified it
with a fair and goodly Castle, calling it after his own name, Memnon.(Of this
man Homer speaks.) This Castle was such a goodly thing, that a long time
after his death, the Town was called Memnon, as Strabo observes: but in Hester
and Daniels's times, it was called Susa, and the Inhabitants Susans. The
Persian Emperors in those times keeping their Courts there for the most part,
and did greatly beautify the City with many fair Buildings. The first of these
Emperors that dwelt there was Cyrus, who, after he had conquered Babylon,
Assyria, and many other Kingdoms and Countries lying near to the City Susa;
that he might with more ease and better safety retain them in his Government,
removed his Court from Persepolis, which lay up in the East part of Persia) to
this Town, where all the Winter season, for the most part, he lived, and in the
Summer went to ^gbatan, the chief City of Media, because there, at that season,
the Air was very temperate: His Successors after him observing the same course
for their better convenience, and to make evident their greater magnificence,
repaired the Castle of Memnon, joined to it many fair and goodly Buildings, and
close by it planted a pleasant Orchard of diverse and sundry sorts of Trees and
Herbs. It is reported, that the Gate whereby they entered into this Orchard, was
very curiously built, supported with Pillars of polished Marble, imbossed with
Silver and Gold, very rare to look upon: over it was a banqueting house,
beautified with lively pictures, costly furniture, and Beds of Gold and Silver,
covered with rich Tapestry, wrought with Silk, Silver, and Gold; upon these
they used to eat their Banquets: it was paved with Porphire, Marble and
Hyacinths, in such ^ort, as it greatly delighted such as beheld it. The Queen
had a private Garden to her self; in which were great abundance of Trees of
diverse kinds, and many sweet Flowers and Herbs: In which Garden Ahashuerus
walked to qualify the heat of his wrath that he had conceived against that
wicked and perfidious Haman, who through envy and ambition sought the
destruction of the whole Nation of the Jews; le^t by giving place unto anger,
he should transgress the bounds of Clemency and Justice: wherefore it becomes
every King, Prince, and Judge, to imitate the example of this Emperor, who, in
the heat of his anger, would determine nothing of so wicked a man: for long and
often deliberation becomes every wise man before he does any thing, Est. 7.

Not far from the Emperor's Palace, in a fair and pleasant Garden, there stood
a College of the Magi, that is, such as the Persians accounted wise and
learned men: these were of such account for their knowledge and understanding
amongst that People, that some of them in succeeding ages were chosen for Kings
and Governors in that Country. They studied for the most part the
Mathematics, History, Philosophy, and Divinity, and, as many have thought, the
Prophecies of Daniel, Ezekiel, and others: wherefore, as is said before, many
are of opinion, that the Wise men which came into Iudaea to see Christ, were of
this College and Town, because it stood East from Jerusalem. It is at this day
called Cusistane, as Ortelius and Sebastian Munster witness, and in their times
was under the Government of one Caliphus, Emperor of the Saracens. This
Caliphus was strongly besieged by one Allan the great, King of Tartaria, in
this Town, Anno. Dom. 1250. But because of his exceeding Covetousness and
Parcimony, he lost the City and was famished to death.

Of the River Eulaeo.
ULai, which Stra. li. 15. calls Eulaea, passed through the City, of Susa,
and, as Pliny says, lib. 6. cap. 27. took the beginning at Media, and so fell
into a hole or Cavern of the Earth, and passed under the ground, till it came
near to the City Susa, where it brake forth again, and compassed about the
Tower of Susa, and a Temple in the City dedicated to Diana. The Inhabitants
hold this River in great estimation, insomuch as the Kings drink of no other
Water, and for that purpose carry it a great way. Strabo, according to the
Testimony of Polycletus, says, That there are two other Rivers of good
account, which pass through Persia, viz. Choas^es and Tygris, but neither of
them are in like estimation as this is.

Of Elam.
PErsia in ancient times was called after this name, from Elam the Son of Sem.
But after Perseus had obtained a large and spacious Government in that Country,
it was after his name called Persia. Elam signifies, a Youth, or a young man.

Of Egbatana, or Egbatan.
THIS is the Metropolitan City of the Medes, and is distant from Jerusalem 1136
miles toward the North-West, built by Deioce King of the Medes, as Herod. l.
2. says. Here Daniel built a fair Temple, of which you may read more in his
Travels. Of this Town you may read more in the Travels of Judith.

The Typical Signification of Daniel.
DAniel signifies, the Judge of God: typically representing Christ who is
appointed by that eternal Jehovah to be Judge of all things both quick and
dead, and rescueth his Church, which is (as a Rose compassed about with Thorns)
oppressed with the Tyranny and cruelty of Evil and wicked men, casting those
false Judges and merciless Governors into eternal Exile and the Pit
Destruction. And, as the Prophet was innocently condemned, cast into the Lions
den, and had the door sealed upon him, and, to the judgment of man, no hope of
life, or means to escape was left him, yet, by the Providence of God was
delivered out of this danger, and came thence safe and untouched, Dan. 6. so
our Savior was innocently condemned, cast into the Grave, sealed up among the
dead, and to common judgment, left as a man out of mind; yet early in the
morning, at the appointed time, by the Power of his Deity, he raised himself up
from this Pit of Hell (the Grave) and gloriously triumphed over it and death.

Of the Prophet Hosea.
THIS Prophet Hosea was born in a Town called Bemeloth, or Bethmeloth, (as
Dorothe^s sometime Bishop of Tire says) which was a Town in the Tribe of
Issachar, not far from Bethulia, some fifty two miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, near to which place Holofernes afterward pitched his Tents, extending
thence to the Field of Esdrelon, and the Town Chelmon, from whence it seems
this Town takes the Name. He prophesied in Israel eight hundred years before
Christ; his name ^ignifieth, a Savior, being derived of Hoschiag, the third
Conjugation of Iaschag, that is, He has saved, Mat. 2.

Of the Prophet Joel.
JOEL signifies God's own, as St. Ierom expounds it. He prophesied eight
hundred Years before Christ, both in Israel and in Judah. He was born in a
Village which was called Ba^homeron, not far from Sichem, in the Tribe of
Manasses, as Dorotheus the Bishop of Tire, says.

Of the Prophet Amos.
THIS Man's Father dwelt at Tekoa, a poor man, one that kept Kine, and used to
gather wild Figs, as appears in the first and seventh Chapters of Amos. In
this Town Amos was born, and followed the Profession of his Father, but the
Lord called him to be a Prophet; and then he went to Bethel, which was twelve
miles distant. Here he reprehended Jeroboam King of Israel, for Idolatry and
worshipping the Golden Calf; after, he was accused by Amasia the Chief Priest
of the Idols in Bethel, and bound in Chains; and at length, Vria, the Son of
this Amasia, struck him upon his Head with a Spear, whereby he was mortally
wounded.

From Bethel, being sick, he was carried back to Tecoa, which was twelve miles;
where, a little after, he died, as St. Ierom witnesses, in whose time his
Monument was to be seen. Amos signifies, A Burden, as indeed he was to the
wicked Israelites, he so sharply reprehended them in his Sermons of the Law. He
lived eight hundred years before Christ. So his Travels were 24 miles.

Of the Prophet Obediah.
OBediah signifies, God's obedient Servant, of Abad, he has served, or been
obedient. He lived six hundred years before Christ, about the time of the
Captivity of Babylon. St. Ierom says, that in his time there were to be seen
in the City of Samaria, the Monuments of three Prophets, that is, of Elisha,
Obediah, and John Baptist. But some think that Obediah the Prophet lay not
buried in Samaria, but rather it was the Sepulcher of that Obediah which lived
in the time of Ahab, that hid a hundred of the Lord's Prophets, fifty in one
Cave, and fifty in another, between which there were three hundred years
difference.

The Travels of the Prophet Jonah.
THIS Prophet Jonas was born in Gath Hepher, which was a Town in the Tribe of
Zabulon, from whence to Samaria is accounted thirty two miles: here he
prophesied to Jeroboam (second of that name) King of Israel, that he should
recover Hemath and Damascus, and so to the Plain of the Red Sea, 2 Reg. 14.

From ^amaria to Ioppa, or Iapho, a Port Town upon the Sea Shore, (to which
Jonas went when he fled from the Lord) was thirty eight miles: but the Lord
stirred up a great Wind when Jonas was upon the Sea, that the Mariners cast him
out, and he was devoured of a Whale, Jonas 1.

That Whale which had devoured Jonas, with a continual course and great
violence, in three days and three nights swam to the Euxine Sea, and there cast
him up upon the Shore, which was 600 miles, Ios. Antiq. lib. 9.

From the shore of the Euxine Sea, Jonas went to Nineveh, which are eight
hundred miles: Here Jonas preached Repentance to the Ninevites, Ion. 3. 4. So
all the Travels of Jonas were 1470 miles.

Of Gath Hepher.
IN this Town the Prophet Jonas was born: it was situated in the Tribe of
Zabulon, sixty miles from Jerusalem Northward, and four miles from Nazareth
toward the South. It seems to take the name from abundance of Grapes; for Gath
Ghepher signifies a Wine Press.

Of Japho.
JAPHO, or Ioppa, was a City or Haven-Town situated upon the Sea, where all
such Ships landed as went into Iudaea. At this day the Turks and Saracens call
it Iafa, lying upon the Mediterranean Sea, in the Tribe of Dan, Ios. 19. in a
certain Mountain twenty miles from Jerusalem North-Westward. Pliny, li. 5.
says, this City was built before the Flood; and in St. Ierom's time there was
to be seen the Stone to which Andromeda was bound when she should have been
devoured by a Monster of the Sea. The Poets Seign this Woman to be the Daughter
of Cepheus, and delivered by Perseus King of the Persians, whom after she
married. It is called Iapho, because of the beautiful Situation. Some say it
was so called of Iapheth the Son of Noah, who first caused it to be built.

Of Tharsis.
FRom Ioppa, as is said, the Prophet Jonas descended into a Ship, that he might
fly upon the Sea. The Latin and Greek Texts read it Tharsin; whence it happened
that many have thought that Jonas fled from Thar^is a City in Cili^^a, in which
Country St. Paul was born. But Luther, in his Exposition of the Prophecy of
Jonas, does utterly disallow of this as false; for the Hebrew Text reads it
not, to Tharsin, but in Tharsin, that is, into the Sea. For the Hebrew Tongue
has two words or Syllables which signify the Sea, which are Iam and Tharsis.
Iam signifies, not only a great Sea, but the meeting together of Waters, or a
Lake. So in Luke. 5. the Sea of Galilee, in which Christ and his Disciples
sailed, is called a Lake; yet Ioh. cap. 5. and the rest of the Evangelists call
it a Sea. So also Moses, Genesis 1. calls the meeting together of the Waters,
Iam; which may signify, a Sea, and a Lake; But Tharsis, or Tharschich,
denotes a great Sea, and no Lake; or an high and troublesome Sea, as the
Mediteranean Sea is. In this Paul traveled, and there stands many Islands,
as Rhodes, Cyprus, Cicilia, and others; all which are at this day subject to
the Turks, Venetians, or Spaniards. It extends it self from Ioppa and
Cilicia, to the Streights between Spain and Mauritania. Into this Sea, Jonas
was cast when the Whale devoured him. In like manner, the Red Sea, and all
others that are Ocean Seas, are called Tharsis, as appears in the 72 Psalm,
where it said, The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall bring Presents.
Here, the Kings whose Empires extend themselves along the Sea Coast are
understood. But the City Tharsis (the Country of the Apostle Paul) is not a
Kingdom, neither ever had a King, much less many Kings. So Solomon sent his
Ships by Tharsin(that is, by Sea toward the South-East, into the Red Sea and
Eastern Ocean) that they might bring Gold, precious Stones, and sweet Gums from
Arabia. But the Ships could not sail by the Red Sea unto the Town of Tharsis,
unless they would have sailed over the Land, which is impossible, because
Tharsis lies into the Land from the Red Sea, as all Cosmographers agree. So
also the Psalmist says, Thou breakest with thy strong Winds the Ships of
Tharsis, that is, of the Sea; beside many such like speeches. From whence St.
Ierom concludes, that Tharsis may better signify the Sea, than the City
Tharsis.

Of the Euxine Sea.
THE Euxine Ocean is that great and troublesome Sea, which, beginning not far
from Constantinople, runs from Bosphorus and Thrace, toward the East and
North, containing to the Longitude eight hundred miles, but to the Latitude two
hundred and eighty. Toward the South it touches upon Asia the less; toward
the East, upon Calcos; toward the West, upon Thracia and Valachia: but toward
the North it is ^oyned to the Pool of Maeotides. This Sea in times past was
called Pontus Axenus, that is, the inhospitable Country; because, as Strabo
lib. 1. of his Cosmography says, The Inhabitants near about the Seashore did
usually sacrifice those Strangers they got, or else cast their Bodies unto Dogs
to be devoured, making drinking-cups of their Skulls. But after, when the
Ionians had built certain Towns upon the Seacoast, and had restrained the
Incursions of certain Scythian Thieves, which usually preyed upon Merchants
that resorted thither; at the command of Pontus their King, who had obtained a
large and spacious Kingdom in that Country, they called it Pontus Euxinus,
which is as much as to say, the hospitable Country. Ovid testifies almost the
same, concerning the original of the name of this Sea, after this manner;
Frigida me cohibent Euxini littora Ponti,
Dictus ab antiquis Axinus ille fuit.
The chilly shoars of the Euxine Sea constrains me to abide,
In ancient time called Axinus, as it along did glide.


Of Ninus, or Nineveh.
NINVS, or Nineveh, was a City of Assyria, where the Emperors of that Country
used to keep their Courts. It was first built by Ninus, that great Emperor of
the first Monarchy, 300 years after the flood, and 2000 before Christ, about
the time when the Patriarch Abraham was born. It continued in great glory for
the space of almost 1500 years, and was distant from Jerusalem toward the
North-east 684 miles: upon the East side joining to the River Tygris, on the
North to the Caspian Sea. It takes the name from the Beauty of it, being
derived of Navah, which signifies, A comely place, spacious and pleasant.
There are many that are of opinion, that in many things it exceeded Babylon;
as, for the sumptuousness of the Buildings, the strength of the Walls, and the
extent. The Walls were so thick that three Chariots might have met upon them
without any danger; and beautified with an hundred and fifty Towers. Jonas
being sent of God to this City, was three days going through it, that is (as
Luther expounds it) through every Street of it; in which time he converted a
hundred and twenty thousand to repentance. Arbaces (who was called Arphaxad)
was then Emperor. This Arbaces, Iustine lib. 2. calls Arbactus: he was a
Captain of the Medes, who perceiving the effeminate disposition of
Sardanapalus, the then Emperor, taking advantage of the times, and this man's
weakness, conspired with some of his Companions to usurp upon his Government:
and that he might make them hate and loath his looseness, brought them into a
Room where they might see him sitting amongst his Harlots, tired in Woman's
apparel, and carding Wool. This sight greatly displeasing them, and before
being encouraged by Arbactus, they seized upon the City, and besieged
Sardanapalus in his Palace. But to prevent the misery of a shameful death,
after he had gathered all his Riches together, he set fire on his Palace, where
he, his companions, and Treasure perished, this fire continued fifteen days,
and happened 823 years before Christ: about which time Arbactus succeeded
Sardanapalus, began to reign, and continued his Government twenty eight years.
But the Medes held not the Assyrian Empire long; for Phul Belochus, who at this
time reigned in Babylon, and his Successor Tiglath Philasser, are called Kings
of Assyria, between whom there happened many great Wars, 2 Kings, 15. 26. From
whence may be gathered, that after the death of Arbactus, these Emperors dwelt
in Nineveh, and succeeded in the Empire.

Thus was this City greatly defaced with continual evils, the Lord beforehand
giving them many admonitions and gentle Corrections (if it had been in them to
have conceived it) to win them to repentance; but they continued still in their
Sins, therefore, according to their former Prophecies, Cyaxares King of the
Medes besieging this Town, took it, and destroyed it even unto the Ground, as
Eusebius says. This desolation happened thirteen years before the destruction
of Jerusalem, in the eleventh year of Sadyattis King of the Lydians, who was
Grandfather to Croesus, Anno Mundi, 3349, before Christ, 619.

After this Destruction it lay a long time desolate, but at length some part of
it was restored, though with much trouble; and then, when it was at the best
estate, constrained to suffer many changes; and at length utterly destroyed by
Tamerlane the Great the second time, Anno Mundi, 3390. After this, the
Inhabitants of that Country, upon the East side of the River Tygris, began the
third time to build it. But whether this third restoring of this City was at
the command of some Prince that had the Government of the Country thereabouts,
or because of the situation, or for private profit, it is not set down:
nevertheless it is again repaired, standing upon the Borders of Armenia,
beautified with goodly Buildings, with fair and spacious Streets, compassed
about (as other Cities of the East are) with Walls and Ditches sufficiently
strengthened to oppose the Enemy. But in respect of the former Nineveh, it
seems a small Village. It has a Bridge built of Ships, lying upon the East
side of it over the River Tygris; and upon that side of the River there stand
many fair Gardens or Orchards; and the Land there also is very fertile and
pleasant. But upon the West of Tygris the Soil is nothing so fruittile. At this
day it is called by the name of Mossel; so that although it stands in the same
place, yet does it not retain the same name. To this Town there is a great
resort of Merchants, who bring up their Commodities from the Rier Tygris
hither, and from hence convey them to Bagdeth, and many other parts of the
World. The Inhabitants thereof are for the most part Nestorians; of whom you
may read before, in the Description of the Sects remaining in Jerusalem at this
day. They are had in great account and estimation among the Turks, because it
is imagined that one of this Sect helped Mahomet to compose the Alcoran. This
Nestorius lived Anno Dom. 429. and taught at Constantinople; but after he was
condemned at Ephesus for an Heretic, he was constrained to steal from
Constantinople, and to fly to Thebes in Egypt; where God laid a grievous
punishment upon him; for his Tongue began to rot his head, and to consume with
Vermin, of which he died miserably.

The spiritual signification of the Prophet Jonas.
JOnas signifies a Dove, and typically represents Christ in his name. For
Christ was that gracious and innocent Dove, who has made evident to Man his
singular Mercy and Clemency, without any show of bitterness or wrath. Then in
his Affliction; for as Jonas thrust himself into the Sea of Calamity, and there
was swallowed up of a Whale, which might be well resembled to the Grave, so
Christ our Savior was cast into the Sea of Affliction; the misery and calamity
of this World; and after that, thrust into the jaws of death, the Grave; where
(as Jonas did. in the Whales belly) he lay three days, and then arose again,
the Earth being unable any longer to contain his Body.

Of the Prophet Micah.
THIS Prophet was born at Maresa a Town of Iudaea, sixteen miles from Jerusalem
Westward; it signifies a bitter Field. In St Ierom's time the Ruins of the
Wall of this City was to be seen. Micah, or Micheas, signifies humble or
lowly. This man was held in great estimation, because he was the first that
named the Country where our Savior Christ should be born, viz. in Bethlehem,
800 years before his Nativity. He lived Anno Mundi 3200.

Of the Prophet Nahum.
NAhum signifies a Comforter. He was born in a Town of Galilee called Elcosch,
as he says in the beginning of his Prophecy. This Village was shown unto St.
Jerome, by those that traveled with him through the Holy Land: in his time it
was but a small Village, called by the name of Elcos, and situated (as
Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says) on the further side of Bethabara, sixteen miles
and something more from Jerusalem toward the North-East. This Prophet lived
750 years before Christ, and Prophesied of the Destruction of Niniveh, which
after came to pass.

Of the Prophet Habacuck.
HAbacuck, or Chabacuck, signifies, one that embraces, or a Lover; from
Chaback, he has embraced. For as a Nurse embraces and kisseth her in^ant, so
also this Prophet embraced and comforted his People with comfortable Doctrine,
lest by the destruction of Jerusalem (which he prophesied should after happen
by the Chaldaeans,) they should be driven to desperation. Paul took the
foundation of his Epistle to the Romans out of this Prophet, reciting a saying
of his. viz. The ju^t shall live by faith. He began to preach a little before
the Prophet Jeremy, 650 years before Christ, above 100 years before Daniel was
cast into the Lions den. From whence most of the Learned conclude, that this
could not be that Habacuck which brought meat to Daniel as he was among the
Lions; but they rather think it a fragment of a spiritual Comedy, and therefore
worthy to be called Apocrypha.

Of the Prophet Zephania.
ZEphania signifies the Secretary of the Lord; being derived of Zaphan, he has
kept secret. He lived in Jerusalem and Iudaea in the time of Josiah King of
Judah. He was born (as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says) in a Town called
Sabarthaca in the Tribe of Si^eon.

Of the Prophets Haggai and Zacharia.
HAggai or Chaggi signifies, A Priest celebrating the Feast of the Lord; being
derived of Chagag, he has celebrated a Feast. And Zacharias or Zacharia does
denote, such a man as remembered the Lord; being derived of Zachar, that is, he
has remembered or recorded. These two Prophets prophesied in Jerusalem in the
second year of Darius the Son of Histaspis, 519 years before Christ, An. mun.
3449. Haggai began his Prophecy upon the first day of the sixth month Elul,
answering to the 28 of August. He sharply reprehended the People because they
neglected the house of the Lord, and built up their own houses.

In the eighth month Marhusuan (which for the most part answers to our
November) Zacharias the same year began to prophecy, and in his Sermon exhorted
the People to repentance, adding the promise of our Savior, and that he would
turn unto them that would turn unto him, Zach. 1.

These two Prophets lie buried 20 miles one from the other. For, as Dorothaeus
Bishop of Tire says, Haggai lies buried in Jerusalem amongst the Priests, but
Zacharias, near to a Town in the field of Bethania, 20 miles from Jerusalem
Westward; but in the time of Theodosius the Emperor was removed and preserved
as an holy Relic. Concerning that fable and figment inserted into the History
Nicephorus, I utterly disallow.

Of the Prophet Malachi
THIS Prophet prophesied after the Captivity of Babylon, and dwelt in the Town
of Ziph, as Dorotheus Bishop of Tire says. Malachi signifies an Angel sent;
and in Greek, a Messenger: for this Prophet preached so comfortably as if he
had been an Angel of God; but principally of Christ, and Saint John Baptist,
who should go before him, to prepare his Way and make his Paths strait. S.
Ierom in his Epistle to Paul and Eustochius writes, that some of the Hebrews
suppose this Malachi to have been Esdras the Scribe, who was sent by Artaxerxes
Longimanus Emperor of the Persians, to restore the Commonwealth of Israel, in
the year before Christ 457.

An Instruction how the Prophets may rightly be understood.
FIRST look into the Cosmographical Table at the beginning of this Book, and
diligently observe the Countries and Cities that are there set down, and how
they lie situated from Jerusalem.

Toward the South of Jerusalem, the Idumeans, Ismaelites, Arabians and
Egyptians dwell.

Toward the East, the Moabites, Ammonites, Chaldaeans, Babylonians, and
Persians.

Toward the North, the Phoenicians, Syrians, Assyrians, and Armenians.

Toward the West lies the Mediterranean Sea, Gr^cia, Italy, Spain, and the
Isles of the Sea.

Secondly, this rule is to be observed, that as often as the Prophets speak of
the Tribes of Israel, they use these names viz. Israel, Samaria, Ephrain,
Ioseth, Iesreel, Bethel, and Bethaven; these are the names of the Kingdom of
Israel: but to the Kingdom of Judah these names are attributed, viz. Iuda^,
Jerusalem, Benjamin, the house of David. But when the Prophets join these two
Kingdoms together, they call them by the names of Jacob and Israel.

Thirdly, when thou read in the Prophets, the name of any Country or City
which is not sufficiently known unto thee, search this Alphabetical Table here
following, and thou shall find the whole matter declared unto thee.

An Alphabetical Table of all the Countries and Cities mentioned in the
Prophets.
A.
ABarim, that is, a Bridge, or Passage over. It was a Mountain of the Moabites,
where the Israelites pitched their Tents, Number. 33. Achor, the Valley of
Trouble. Here Achan was stoned to death for his Thievery. It stood not far from
Gilgal toward the North, twelve miles from Jerusalem, Ios. 7. Isa. 6. Adama,
Red Earth. This was one of the Cities that were destroyed with Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven. Ai, Hilly. This City Joshua burnt with Fire. It lay
eight miles from Jerusalem Northward, Josh. 8. Aiath, idem. Isa. 10. Ar, or
Ari, a Lion. It was a City of the Moabites, lying beyond Jordan in the Tribe of
Benjamin, called A^iopolis, situated upon the Bank of the River Arnon, 24
miles from Jerusalem North-Eastward, Deuteronomy. 2. In Esa. 15. It is called Arar, a
Destroyer. Aram, Noble or Mighty. Armenia and Syria are so called, of Aram the
Son of Sem; the chief City of which Country is Damas^us. Pliny, lib. 6. I7.
says, the Scythians were also in ancient times called Aramites. Arnon, a
famous River of the Moabites, in the Tribe of Reuben, which falls into the dead
Sea, 20 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. In Esa. 16. it is called Ranan, he has
shouted for joy. Aroer, by usurpation, an Ewe Tree. This is a City of the
Moabites near to the River Arnon, in the Tribe of Gad, beyond Jordan, 24 miles
from Jerusalem Eastward, Ier. 40. there is another City so called, near to
Damascus in Syria, Esa. 7. Arpad, the light of Redemption. This was a City in
the Land of Damascus, Ier. 49. There is another flourishing* City of that name,
which may compare with Antiochia for greatness, Esa. 10. But where it is
situated it is uncertain. Arvad, was a part of the Land of Canaan, so called
of Arvad the Son of Canaan, Genesis I0. Ascanes, or Tuiscones, are a People
descended of Ascenitz, the Son of Gomer, the Son of Iaphet, which sometimes
dwelt in Armenia, but now have their abiding in Germany, 2 Genesis 10. Esa 51. so
that of Gomer they are called Germans, and of Ascanes, Ascanians or Tuiscons.
Asseca, fortified round about. Near to this Town David killed Goliath. It stood
eight miles from Jerusalem Westward. Assure or Assyria, a blessed Country; being
so called of Assure the Son ^f ^em* Aven Iniquity. Bethel was so called after
Jeroboam had there set up a Golden Calf, Hos. 10.
B.
BAbel, Confusion. Babylon is the Metropolitan City of Chaldaea, 280 miles from
Jerusalem Eastward. Bath, Domestical. It was a Town of the Moabites in the
Tribe of Reuben, beyond Iordon, Esa. 16. Bazra, a Grape-gathering. It was a
City of the Edomites, situated upon the Bank of Jordan on the farther side,
near to Bethabara, twenty miles from Jerusalem North-eastward, Esa. 24. 36.
Ier. 48. Note here, that the Country of the Moabites in times past was subject
to the Edomites, and then this City was in their jurisdiction; but after the
Moabites got it into their hands again, and held it. It was one of the six
Towns of Refuge mentioned, Ios. 29. Berothai, a Cypress Tree. This Town stood
near Hemath, or Antiochia, 280 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ezekiel. 49. In
this City David King of Israel took Hadadesar King of Zoba or Sophena, and
constrained him to give him a great deal of Brass (as it is thought) yearly for
Tribute: for near that City were many Brass Mines. Bethavin, the house of
Iniquity. Bethel was so called, Hos* 6. It stood eight miles from Jerusalem
Northward. Beth-Cherem, the house of the Vines. It was a Town not far from
Jerusalem Northward. Ier. 6. Beth-Diblathaim, the house of dried Figs. It was a
City of the Moabites, Ier. 48. Bethie^imoth, the house of Desolations. It was
also a City of the Moabites, beyond Jordan in the Tribe of Reuben, Ios. 13.
Ezech. 25. twenty miles from Jerusalem. Beth-Gamul, the house of Restitution.
This was a City of the Moabites, Ier. 48. Beth-Bealmeon, the house of
habitation for the Idol Baal. It was a City of the Moabites, twenty four miles
from Jerusalem Eastward, not far from Aroer, Ezekiel. 25. 1 Chr. 5. Butz, a Castle
of Prey. It was a City of the Ismaelites, in Arabia-Petrae^, eighty miles from
Jerusalem South-Westward, Ier. 25. Bell and Neob, two Idols of the Babylonians,
Esa. 45. Bell signifies, the God of Mixture or Confusion; Neob, the God of
Prophecy.
C.
CAlno, his Perfection. This is Selucia, situated upon Tygris, beyond Babylon,
316 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. It is now called Bagdeth, Genesis 10. Es^y 2.
Can, a firm foundation. It was a City of the Syrians, Ezekiel. 27. Caphihor, a
little Sphere, or, a round Globe, like unto a Globe or Pomegranate. Also
Cap^adocia, a Country of Asia the less, 600 miles from Jerusalem Northward.
Carchemis, a sacrificed Lamb. This was situated too near Euphrates in Syria,
400 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ierem. 25.
D.
DE^dan, a City of the Idumaeans, so called of Dedan the Son of Es^u, Ier. 25.
Isa. 21. D^bon, a Mist. This was a City of the Moabites, near Hesbon, in the
Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Jerusalem North-eastward. Diblath, a
bunch of Figs. It was a City in the Tribe of Naphtali, near to the Lake of
Samachonites, eighty miles from Jerusalem Northward, Ezekiel. 6. Here Zedekiah had
his eyes put out, 2 Kin. 25. Ier. 39. 52. Dimon, Bloody. This is a City in the
Tribe of Reuben, which, as St. Ieron says, is twenty eight miles from
Jerusalem North-eastward. Duma, Silence. A City of the Israelites, so called of
Duma the Son of Ismael. It stood in Arabia Petaea, eighty miles from Jerusalem
toward the Southwest, Esa. 25. 21.
E.
EGbathana, the Metropolitian City of the Medes, distant from Jerusalem 1136
miles North-east-ward. Eden, Pleasure. A City of Syria situated near
Euphrates, 400 miles from Jerusalem North-eastward, Esaias 7. This is thought to
have been a part of Paradise. Eglaim, a round Drop. It was a Town of the
Moabites, Esa. 15. 16. Elam, a Young man, so called of Elem the Son of Sem,
Esa. 10. 21. After Perseus had got in this Country a great Government, he
called it after his own name, Pers^a. Eleale, the Ascension of God. It was a
City beyond Jordan, in the Tribe of Reuben, between Iacza and Heshbon, 26 miles
from Jerusalem North-eastward, Number. 32. Elim, a Heart. This was a Lake so
called, in the Land of the Moabites, Esa. 10. Elisa, the Lamb of God. So were
the Aeolians called in Grecia, of Elisa the Son of Iavan, the Son of Iaphet,
Ezekiel. 7. Gen 10. Enaglaim, the Fountain of Calves. It was a Town or Castle near
to the Red Sea, Ezekiel. 10. Epha, the Land of Obscurity. It was a part of Arabia
Petraea, so called of Epha, the Son of Midian, the Son of Abraham, Genesis 25.
Esa. 60.
G.
GEbim, a Ditch. This was a Town in the Tribe of Judah, Esa. 10. Gebah, a Hill.
It was a Hill in the City of Kirjath-jearim: there was a Town also of the same
name, standing within a little of it. This was little more than a mile from
Jerusalem Westward, Esa. 10. Gebal, a bound or limit. It was the bounds and
limits of Syria, bordering upon the Mediterranean Sea. This City Gibal or Gebal
was 160 miles from Jerusalem Northward, 1 Reg. 5. Psalm. 82. Gibeah, a Hill. It
was also called Gibeon, where Saul dwelt, four miles from Jerusalem Northward,
Esa. 10. Gilgal, a roundle, or the compass of a hill. Here Ioshuah pitched his
Tents: it stood between Jericho and Jordan, twelve miles from Jerusalem
North-eastward. Gog. The Turks were thus called, because they lived in Tents,
Ezekiel. 48. Gosan, a Land and River in Mesopotamia, called after that name, 2
Reg. 17. Esa. 37.
H.
HAdad Rimmon, a Pomegranat. This was a Town near to Megiddo, where Josiah King
of Judah was wounded to death, 46 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Zach. 12.
Hadrach, the Land of Gladness. So the Prophet Zachary calls Syria, c. 19.
Hanes, an Ensign of Grace. This was a City of Egypt, bordering upon Assyria,
Esa. 30. Haram, the Syrian liberty. It was the Metropolitan City of
Mesopotamia, where Abraham dwelt, Genesis 11. distant from Jerusalem 440 miles
North-eastward. Haveran, a Casement. It was a City in Syria not far from
Damascus, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. Hazor Enon, the gate
of the Fountain. It was a City in Syria. Hazor-Tichon, the middle Porch. It was
a Town in Syria not far from Haveran, Ezekiel. 47. Hazor, the Land of Hay. So the
Ismaelites called their Country. Hemath, Anger. So the Prophets called
Antiochia, the Metropolitan of Assyria, distant from Jerusalem 280 miles
Northward. Hermon, Accursed. It was a Mountain beyond Jordan, near to Libanus,
122 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. There is another Mountain of
this name near to Naim, and not far from Mount Tabor, forty four miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, of which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 89. Tabor
and Hermon praise thy name. The Mountain beyond Jordan is oftentimes called by
the name of Mount Gilead. Hesbon, an Ingenious Cogitation. It was a City of the
Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-East. Henah and Ievah were two Idols, Esa. 37. Hevilah, Sandy. So India
is called, and a certain part of Arabia-Petraea. of Hevilah the Son of Chus,
Genesis 10. These Countries are very dry and sandy. Hethlon, he has rolled
together It was a City of Syria near to Antiochia, Ezekiel. 47. Holon, a Window.
It was a Town of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, and is also called Helon,
Number. 2. Ier. 47. Horonaim, the Syrian Liberties, two Towns of the Moabites,
Esa. 16.
I.
JAchza, the privity of God. A City of the Moabites, in the Tribe of Reuben,
twenty four miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Iaezer, the help of God. A City of
Refuge belonging to the Levites, in the Tribe of G^d beyond Jordan, forty miles
from Jerusalem North-Eastward. Iavan Grecia, so called of Iavan the Son of
Iapheth, which was distant from Jerusalem 800 miles Westward. Iezreel, the Seed
of God. This is the City where Queen Iesabel was devoured of Dogs. It stands
forty eight miles from Jerusalem Northward. Irheres, or Heliopolis, a City of
the Sun. This was a City of Egypt, 224 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-West.
K.
KEdar, Blackness. This was a Desert of the Ismaelites, called Sur, eighty
miles from Jerusalem South-Westward. Kir Paries, a Wall. This was Cyrene a
great City in Africa, which was 816 miles from Jerusalem Westward. There was a
Town of this name in the Land of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, Esa. 16.
Kir-Hazereth, or Kir-Hares, a Mud-Wall. It was a City of the Moabites in
Arabia-Petraea, otherwise called Petra, seventy two miles from Jerusalem
toward the South, Esa. 16. Kiriathaim, a-City. This Town was in the Tribe of
Reuben, 22 miles from Jerusalem Eastward, Esa. 16. Kiriah, or Kirieth, ibidem.
Kithim, a shining Jewel. Macedonia is so called of Kithim the Son of Iavan, the
Son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. Ier. 2. Mac. 1. For if you do diligently observe the
derivation of Names, you shall find that of Kithin comes Maketis, and so by
continuance of time, and change of words, Macedonia. It lies 920 miles from
Jerusalem North-Westward.
L.
LAchis, a continual walking: or as some will have it, A pleasant Walk. This
was a City in the Tribe of Judah, twenty miles from Jerusalem Westward, Ier. 34.
Laisa, a Lioness. So was Caesarea Philippi sometimes called. It was also called
Dan, situated near to the Fountains of the River Jordan, not far from Mount
Libanus, 104 miles from Jerusalem North-eastward. Libna, Frankincense. It was a
Town in the Tribe of Judah, ten miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west.
Lud, that is Lydia, a Country in Asia Minor, so called of Lud the Son of Sem.
Luit, green Grass. It is also a Mountain in the Tribe of Reuben, Esa. 6.
M.
MAg^g, dwelling under a shed or Tent. The Turks are so called, Ezekiel. 8.
Maresa, an inheritance. In this Town the Prophet Micah was born, Mich. 1. It
was situated in the Tribe of Judah, distant from Jerusalem sixteen miles
toward the West. Medai, a Measure. The Kingdom of Medea was so called, of
Medai the Son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. Medba, warm Water. It was a City of the
Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
East, Esa. 16. Medemena, a Dunghill. It was a Town in the Tribe of Judah, near
Beerseba and Gaza, 44 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west, Josh. 15.
There was also another Town of the same name in the Tribe of Benjamin, not far
from Jerusalem, Josh. 10. Ier. 48. Megiddo, a wholesome Apple. Here Josiah King
of Judah was slain in War. It stood 46 miles from Jerusalem Northward, Zach.
12. Mephaath, the splendour of Waters. It was a City belonging to the Priests in
the Tribe of Reuben, subject to the Moabites, twenty four miles from Jerusalem
toward the East, Ier. 48. Mesech, the tract of sowing. So the Muscovites and
Russians are called, of Mesech the Son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. Midian, a Measure. A
Town lying upon the Red Sea, 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the South; so
called of Midian the Son of Abraham by ^eturah, Genesis 25. Mispe, a Watch. This
City stood in the Land of Gilead, beyond Jordan, forty eight miles from
Jerusalem toward the North-east. There is another Town of this name also, not
far distant from Jerusalem, in the Tribe of Benjamin, Hos. 5. Ier. 40. Moab, A
Father. The Country of the Moabites, situated between the Red Sea and the
Mountains Abarim, Ezech. 9. Meusal, Running swiftly. It was the name of a
People that took their beginning from Vsal the Son of Ioktan, Genesis 19.
N.
NAbaioth, The Country of the Prophets. This Country begins in the Tribe of
Gad, beyond Jordan, and extends to the East part of the Dead Sea, and so by
the Land of the Moabites to the Red Sea. It takes the Name of Nabaioth the Son
of Ishmael: for all the Tract of Arabia Petraea, from the Red Sea to the Gulf
of Persia, of him is called the Land of Nabathaea. Diodorus Siculus says as
much, and further, That it extends toward the East unto the Indian Sea, Genesis
25. Nebo, Prophesying. It was a City of the Moabites in the Tribe of Reuben,
near to Mount Pisga, twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the East, Ier. 48.
Nimrim, A Leopard. This was also a City in the Tribe of Gad beyond Jordan,
thirty two miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east, Isa. 16. No, A
Hinderance. So was Alexandria, a City in Egypt, in ancient times called,
distant from Jerusalem 288 miles toward the West, Ezekiel. 30. Noph, A Honey
Comb. So the Prophets call Memphis, the Metropolis of Egypt, being distant
from Jerusalem 244 miles toward the South-east, Isa. 18. Ier. 2. Ezekiel. 30.
O.
ON, Opulency. So Ezekiel. c. 30. calls Heliopolis, a City of Egypt, which is
224 miles distant from Jerusalem toward the South-west. Oreb, A Crow or Raven.
Near to this place, in Mount Ephraim, Prince Oreb was slain; not far from
Jericho, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Judge. 7. Psalm. 83.
Ophir, A Palace. It was the proper Name of the Son of Ioktan, the Posterity of
Sem, of whom in times past India was called Ophir. You may read of this, Genesis
10. 1 Reg. 9.
P.
PAthros, or Petra, the Metropolitan City of Arabia Petraea, 72 miles from
Jerusalem toward the South. It is a Country also of Egypt near Tathnis, 180
miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west, Isa. 11. Ezekiel. 29. Parath,
Fruitful. A name of the River Euphrates, Ier. 2. 13. Prazin, A Breach. It is a
Valley near Jerusalem, where David overcame the Philistines, 2 Samuel 5. Phut; is
Africa, so called of Phuth the Son of Cham, Genesis 10.
R.
RAbba, A Multitude. Philadelphia, the Metropolitan of the Ammonites is so
called, 96 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. Raema, Thunder. So they
called Aethiopia, of Raema the Son of Ch^s, Genesis 10. Rama, High. This City
stood eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North, Isa. 10. There were other
Cities also of the same Name and Signification. Rezeph, A Cole. It was a City
in Syria, Isa. 37. Riblath, An inveterate Anger. This was a City in the Tribe
of Naphtali, near to the Lake of Samoconites, eighty miles from Jerusalem
toward the North. Antiochia also was sometimes called Riblah, 2 Reg. 25. Ier.
39. 52. Rimmon, A Pomegranate. This was a City in the Tribe of Judah, not far
from Gerar, 32 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-east.
S.
SAba, The Stone Achates. This was the Metropolitan City of Ethiopia, called
also Meroe, 960 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. The two famous Queens
(one that came to see Solomon, the other mentioned Act. 8.) dwelt in this Town.
Sanir, A clear Light. So Mount Hermon beyond Jordan was called of the
Ammonites: it stood 112 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. Sarion,
The Doves Song. So the Edomites called Mount Hermon that stood beyond Jordan.
Saron, A fair Plain, or a green Place. So is that Plain between the Sea of
Galilee and Mount Ephraim called, Is. 35. There are some that think there is a
Mountain so called. Sela, a Rock. This is Petra, a City of Arabia, ante.
Sepharuaim, A City of the Scribes. It stood in Assyria, Isa. 37. Sibarim, A
City of Syria near to Damascus, Ezekiel. 47. Sibma, A Possession. A City built by
the Sons of Reuben, 24 miles from Jerusalem toward the East, Number. 32. Sichor,
Black. It is a Brook or River called Rhinocorurus, which falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, near to the Town Rinocorura, situated upon the utmost
Borders of the Holy Land toward the South, 72 miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west. The River Nilus in Egypt is also called Sichor, Jer. 2. Simri,
Gardians. They were Arabians dwelling upon an Angle of Isthumus of the Red Sea.
Sinear, a blow upon the teeth. Chaldea is so called, Is. 11. Sion, or Scaion,
by Schin, not by Zade, Tranquillity and Security. The Mount whereon Jerusalem
stood is not so called, but Mount Hermon beyond Jordan, Deuteronomy. 4. S^ene, or
Sevene, illustrious. It was a City in Africa, upon the Borders of Egypt and
Ethiopia, 516 miles from Jerusalem toward the South. Iovias says, that the
Inhabitants at this day call it Guagheram.
T.
TAchpanes, or Taphnis, a covered or hidden Ensign. It is a City in Egypt, 180
miles from Jerusalem South-westward, Ier. 2. 43. Thamar, a Plain. This Town was
built by Solomon, and stood 360 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east,
Thelasser, a Princes Tomb. It was a Country upon the Borders of Assyria, Isa.
37. Themath, Wonderful. A City of Arabia Petraea, Ier. 25. so called of Thama
the Son of Ismael, Genesis 25. it stood 40 miles from Jerusalem Southward: it is
called Theman, a City of the South. Thogarma, Perfection. Tartaria was so
called of Thogarma the Son of Gomer, the Son of Iaphet, Genesis 10. Ezekiel. 27.
Thubal, a People bordering upon the Muscovites: so called of Thubal the Son of
Iaphet, Genesis 10. Ezekiel cap. 27. and 38. makes Mesech, Thubal, Gog and Magog
all one People: from whence may be gathered, that these People dwelt toward
the North, and were governed by one Prince. In the 38 Chapter he calls them
Gog, that is, the Turk, who is Prince and Governor in Mesech and Thubal.
Therefore, without doubt, the People of Russia in times past were called
Thubal, which People dwelt near to Muscovia: and this opinion seems to be more
probable than theirs that imagine the Italians and Spaniards, which have their
dwellings near unto the River Iberia, to be the Offspring of Thubal.
V.
UPhar, the Country of Gold. It is called also Ophir and India, 1 Reg. 9. Ier.
10. Dan. 10. Psalm. 119.
Z.
ZEb, a Wolf. The Wine Press of Zeb was in Mount Ephraim, not far from Iori^ho,
twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North, where Zeb the Prince of the
Midianites was slain. There is another Town of this name, near to the Iaboch
beyond Jordan, forty eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North-east. Zeboim,
Pleasantness. One of the fiv^ Cities that were burnt with fire from Heaven,
Genesis 14. 19. Hos. 11. Zenan, a Sheepfold. It was a City in the Tribe of Judah,
Mich. 1. Zoa^, moving ^anis, a City in Egypt, where Moses wrought all his
Miracles before Pharaoh, was so called: it stood 232 miles from Jerusalem
toward the South-west. Zoba, presumptuous. This was also called Sophena. It is
the Country of Armenia, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, which
David conquered, 2 Samuel 8. 1 Chronicles. 19. Zor, a Rock. Tyrus is so called; It
stood 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. Thus (gentle Reader) for your
better ease and understanding, have I collected a short Alphabetical Table, and
therein briefly described all those Countries and Cities mentioned in the
Prophets: that so by your diligent care and observation you may the better
understand the meaning of such Texts of Scripture wherein they are mentioned.
Of Esdras the Lawyer.
ESDRAS signifies, a Helper, of Asar, he helped. He is a type of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is our Helper and Savior, which has brought us into that holy
Land, eternal Life; and is the Restorer of Religion, and the Christian
Commonwealth.

This Esdras was sent to Jerusalem, to restore the Commonwealth of the Jews,
Anno Mundi 3511, before Christ, 457, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, that good Emperor of the Persians. So he went from Babylon to
Ahaeva, a certain River near Babylon; to which place he assembled a great
Multitude of the Jews, and from thence sent to Caspia to fetch a certain number
of Levites, (this Land was in Chaldaea not far from Babylon.) These being here
met together, celebrated a Fast unto the Lord, and with ^olemn Prayers besought
his aid and furtherance in their Enterprise: then they went thence to
Jerus^lem, which was 680 miles, and there restored the Judaical Government,
instituting Ecclesiastical Officers, chief Priests, Pr^nces, and other
Governors.

Of the Land of Caspia.
THE Land of Caspia signifies, the Land of Silver, being derived of Kesaeph,
that is, Silver. It was so called, because they used to dig Silver in that
place; (see Lyra) it was a Country near Babylon, where the Priests and Levites
were in Captivity; and stood 680 miles from Jerusalem toward the East.

Of Nehemia.
IN the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was Anno Mun. 3524, and
before Christ, 444. Nehemias went from Susan to Jerusalem, which was 920 miles,
there he repaired the Walls and Gates in 52 days, Neh. 1. 2. 6.

When he had governed Judaea 12 years, he returned back again to Susan to
Artaxerxes Longimanus, which was 920 miles, Neh. 3.

Afterward Artaxerxes about the end of his Reign suffered Nehemia to return
back again to Jerusalem, which was 920 miles, Neh. 17. So these Journeys of
Nehemia make 2760 miles. Of this City Susan you may read before.

Of the Name and typical Signification of Nehemiah.
NEhemiah signifies, The Consolation of God, being derived of Nicham, He has
comforted. This Man was a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ; for, as Nehemias was a
Comfort unto the dispersed Jews, in that he was sent to restore them into their
own Country, and to rebuild Jerusalem, so Christ our Comforter was sent by his
Father from that everlasting Throne of Heaven, to refresh and comfort us by his
Doctrine, and gather the dispersed Members of his Church into one Communion,
that he might bring them into that heavenly Jerusalem which he has built, and
where he has prepared a place for us.

The Travels of Serubbabel.
SErubbabel carried the People of Israel from Babylon to Jerusalem, which was
680 miles, in the first Year of Cyrus Emperor of Persia, Anno Mundi, 3433.
before Christ, 535.

In the seventeenth year of his Government he went from Jerusalem to Susan, 920
miles, 3 Esd. 3. 4.

From Susan he went to Babylon, which was 242 miles, 3 Esd. 4.

From Babylon in the same Year he returned to Jerusalem, 680 miles, where the
next Year after, in the beginning of the second Month, which answers to the 21
of May, in the third year of Darius Ahasuerus, Zerubbabel and Josua, the chief
Priests of the Jews, began to build the Temple, and finished it in the sixth
year of the same King, 1 Esd. 6. So all the Travels of Zerubbabel were 2280
miles.

The Book of ESTHER.
MORDOCHIVS was led Prisoner with Jechoniah to Babylon, which was 680 miles.

From Babylon he went to Susan, which was 252 miles; there he brought up
Esther, his Brothers Daughter, and taught her honest Discipline and the fear of
God. This Maid was very beautiful and comely, wherefore at such time as Darius
Ahasuerus (the Son of Hystaspis) had caused all the beautiful Virgins of his
Empire to be brought before him, that from amongst them he might choose him a
Wife; Mordochius adorned this Virgin with goodly Apparel, and she also went
with them: in whose Presence (by his Instruction) she behaved her self so well,
that the Emperor chose her from among the rest, and made her his Queen, she
being at that time but a poor Maid, and of small Ability. They were married in
Susan in the second year of his Empire, An. Mun. 3454, and before Christ, 514.
From whence it is evident, That Preferment comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, but from the Lord. So these two Journeys make nine hundred
thirty two miles.

The Types and Allegories collected out of the Book of Esther.
MORDOCHIVS, or Mordochai, signifies bitter and contrite, being derived of
Marah, He was bitter, and Dachah, sorrowful and contrite. A fit resemblance of
that true Mordochius, Christ Jesus, who for our Sins and Offenses was
constrained to drink of that bitter Cup of Afflictions, the Necessities of this
World, suffering in his Body more than tolerable Torments, as you may read in
his Passion; therefore justly called Mordochius, that is, bitter and contrite.

Ester and Al^a have both one signification, that is, a Virgin, or one kept
from the Bed of Man. Therefore she was a notable Image of the Church, who
keeps her self chaste and undefiled, avoiding the Society of evil Men; and
although she seem to be desolate and forsaken in this World, in respect of the
wicked (who flourish like a Flower, and glory in Voluptuousness and Pleasure)
yet has she her Mordochius, her Spouse, her dearly beloved, which provides for
her, even Jesus Christ, that immaculate Lamb which died for her Salvation, and
will cloth her in white, put into her hand a regal Scepter, crown her with
Glory, and set her with him in the Throne of eternal Happiness.

Ahasuerus signifies, A noble Captain, and typically represents God the Father:
for as the Emperor had the Command of 127 Provinces, and in them did
principally Rule; so God our Heavenly Father is the Emperor and Governor of
all Kingdoms, and all Creatures both in Heaven and in Earth be obedient to his
will; he sits in that everlasting Palace of Heaven, that place of Joy, and
that eternal Paradise, from whence he looks down to behold us miserable and
distressed Creatures upon Earth; of his merciful Goodness electing and choosing
us to be Heirs of that eternal Kingdom, and purifieth us with the Graces of his
holy Spirit, so that we might be made capable to sit with him in eternal
Felicity.

The disdainful Queen Vasthy may be a fit Type and Effigies of this World, not
only in respect of her Pride, but her excess in drinking; taking her name from
Schatha, which signifies, To Drink: so this World lives in all manner of
Prodigality and Luxury; and contemns the Lord and King thereof, that Almighty
God which sits in the Heavens; and therefore is justly thrown down from that
eternal Kingdom; whereas on the contrary, humble Esther (that is, the Church)
is taken up into Dignity, and crowned in that everlasting Kingdom of Heaven.

Haman signifies, a Rebellious and Proud Man: being derived of Haman, He has
stirred up a Tumult: typically representing the Devil, whom God in the
beginning made a good Angel, exalted him in the Heavens, and made him much more
Glorious than others; yet notwithstanding, glorying in himself, he contemned
his Maker, and nothing would content him but to become like unto him, yea he
desired to be worshipped of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 4. And as Haman
endeavored to overthrow not only all the People of the Jews, but Queen Esther
als^; so the Devil does not only endeavor to overthrow the whole Church, but
if it were possible the Head of the Church Christ Jesus.

Of that holy Man Job.
JOB was a holy and good man: he dwelt in the Land of Vz, so called of Vz the
Son of Aram the Son of Sem, as St. Jerome upon Genesis observes. This Vz was
that great Man which built (as was thought) Damascus in Syria, and all the Land
which extends from Damascus to Jordan, after his name was called Vz, that is,
the Land of Counsel, for so Vz signifies. There were two Towns in this
Country, where Job is said to have dwelt; that is Astaroth Carnaim and Batzra:
Astaroth Carnaim was distant from Jerusalem, fifty two miles toward the
North-East, the Inhabitants of which Town worshipped the Goddess Venus, and
called her by the name of Astaroth, of which you may read before. St. Jerome
says, That the Sepulcher of Job was to be seen in his time in that Town; and
later Writers testify as much ^ore their times. This Town at this day is
called Carnea.

Batzra is mentioned in the thirty sixth of Genesis; it signifies a Grape
gathering. In this Town it was thought that Job was born, it lay beyond Jordan
in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the North-East. All
this Country in those times was subject to the King of the Edomites or
Idumaeans; but after, it was joined to the Land of the Moabites, they having
conquered the Kings of Edom: you may read more of it in the sixth of Isay; also
Ios. 20. where is showed, that it was one of the six Cities of Refuge,
appointed by Ioshuah. Here Job for the most part continued, and held this Town
in great honor and reputation.

He lived about the time of Baela, the first King of the Edomites: and
according to the opinion of St. Ierom, Augustine, Ambrose, Philo, and Luther,
was for his excellent Virtue and singular Piety, chosen King of that Country,
which he greatly enlarged, making all the Countries and neighboring Princes
near adjoining tributary unto him: wherefore (as Ierom says, in locus
Hebraicis) having obtained so large an Empire, he removed his Seat from Batzra
to Astaroth-Carnaim, which was a strong and well-defenced City, where in those
times (as Moses witnesses, Genesis 14.) there inhabited mighty men, and noble
Heroes; that so by their Virtue he might with the greater facility suppress and
conquer other Provinces.

There are many think him to be of the Stock of Abraham, and of the Family of
Esau, because he is mentioned in the 36 of Genesis, where it is said, That when
Baela died, Iobab the Son of Zerah of Bozra, or Betzrah, reigned in his stead.
And St. Ierom, in his Preface upon the Book of Job, shows, that he was but
five degrees removed from Abraham: for, Abraham had
Ishmael Basmath, who was the Wife of Esau, Mother of Reguel, Grandmother to
Serah, and great Grandmother to Job. So that by the Mothers side Job descended
from Ishmael, and by the Fathers side from Esau.
Isaac Esau
Reguel
Serah
Job or Iobab, King of Idumaea, Genesis 36.



Notwithstanding, there are some that are of opinion, that he descended from
Nahor, Abraham's Brother; and was of the Family of Vz, Nahor's Son: which
opinion also St. Ierom mentions in his Hebra^cal Q^estions: But most of the
Ancient Fathers hold this nothing so probable.

Luther, upon the thirty sixth Chapter of Genesis, says, That he was King long
time before Moses ca^ried the Children of Israel out of Egypt. For, Judah and
Aser, the Sons of Jacob, had Children before they went into the Land of Egypt,
Genesis 46. therefore it is not impossible for Reguel the Son of ^sau to have
Children also, since he was married long before his Brother Jacob. From hence
then it may be gathered, that Job was King of Idumaea before Jacob and his Sons
went into the Land of Egypt: for, although the fourteen Sons of ^sau governed
the Land of Edom, like so many Princes, (of which number, Reguel the
Grandfather of Job was one) because they held it as their Inheritance; yet, to
avoid Sedition and Distractions, which oftentimes happen where there is not a
certain Head and principal Commander, therefore they elected Bela the Son of
Beor to be their King; after whose death they chose Job, because he was a holy
man of God, and in his Actions just and upright; who, without doubt, reigned
amongst the Edomites a long time: for he lived after his Afflictions (which God
imposed upon him to try him) 140 Years. Plato says, he married Dina the
Daughter of Jacob: but St. Ierom, That he married the Daughter of an Arabian,
by whom he had Enon. Both these may be true; for his first Wife being dead, he
might marry an Arabian.

After the death of Job, the Giants and Heroes in Asteroth-Carnaim fell again
from the Idumaeans; for when Moses brought the Children of Israel out of the
Desert of Arabia-Petraea, and that they had conquered the Land beyond Jordan,
the City Astaroth-Carnaim had a King called Og, who governed all the Kingdom of
Basan. This Giant was of a mighty Stature; he had a Bed of Iron Four Yards and
a half long, and two broad.
nine Cubits long, and four broad, Deuteronomy. 3.

Of Eliphaz.
ELiphaz the Themanite was the Brother of Reguel, Job's Grandfather. This
Eliphaz had a Son called Theman, who built a City, and after his own Name
called it Theman, where Eliphaz his Father dwelt with him. From whence it
happened that he was called Eliphaz the Themanite, Job. 2. It was distant from
Jerusalem forty miles toward the South, and therefore it was called a City of
the South: you may read of Eliphaz in Ier. cap. 25. He had a Concubine called
Thimnah, because of her Beauty and comely Proportion: by her he had Amaleck, of
whom came the Amalekites, between whom, and the Children of Israel, were cruel
Wars, Exad. 17.

The Travels of Eliphaz the Themanite.
FROM Themen he went to Astaroth-Carnaim, where Job dwelt, which is accounted
ninety two miles, to comfort his Friend Job, Job 2.

From Astaroth-Carnaim he returned back to his own house, which was ninety two
miles. So the Travels of Eliphaz were 184 miles.

Of Bildad, Job's Friend.
BEyond Jordan and the Sea of Galilee, not far from Astaroth-Carnaim, there is
at this day found a Town called Suah, where (as it is thought) Bildad the
Friend of Job dwelt. Near to this Town (as Sebastian Francus observes in his
Cosmography) there was yearly, in the Summer Season, a great Mart kept, in
certain Tents and Tabernacles erected for that purpose, of diverse colors.
Bildad signifies an ancient Friend, and Suah takes the name from Desolation,
being derived of Scho, He has made desolate.

Of Zophar, the Friend of Job.
ZOPHAR dwelt in the City of Naema, Josh. 15. but how far it stood from
Jerusalem is uncertain. Zophar, of Zaphar, signifies swift. Naema signifies,
Pleasant and delectable; of Naem, courteous and comfortable.

Of Job's Daughters.
THE Lord gave unto Job, after his Affliction, and that he had tried his
faithfulness, three Daughters, so fair, that there were none fairer to be found
in all the Land. The name of the first was Iemmima, that is, as fair as the
day: of Iom, which signifies, a Day. The second, Kazia, that is such a one as
gives a pleasant savor like unto Gum Cassia. The third, because of the
excellency of her Countenance, was called Kaeren Hapuch, that is, casting forth
rays or beams, Job 42.

APOCRYPHA. The Book of JUDITH.
Of Egbatana.
AFTER the death of Arbactus, or Arphaxad, which signifies a mighty Lion, to
whom Jonas prophesied, as is said before; there succeeded in the Empire of the
Medes, Mandanes, Sarsomenes, Artecarnis, Cardiceas, and Deioces; who being
enthronized in that Empire, called himself Arphaxad, or Arbactus, the second.
This man built Egbatana, the Metropolitan City of the Medes, and beautified it
with very fair Buildings and goodly Walls, made all of apiece Stone, cut
and polished, 70 Cubits high, and 30 broad; Towers standing upon it 100 Cubits
in height, as well those that were for the Defense of the Town, as those where
the Gates were. The Air in that Country was temperate, inclining rather to
Cold than Heat, because it lay toward the North: it stood 1136 miles from
Jerusalem North-eastward. Here (for the most part) this Emperor kept his
Court, till (as Herodotus says) he was utterly conquered by Nebuchadnezzar,
Emperor of the Babylonians. This was that Nebuchadnezzar which sent Holofernes
with a mighty Army against Iudaea, Bethulia, and many other Cities and
Countries, and would be worshipped as a God, Judith 3.

Of Hydaspes.
HYdaspes is a River that arises in Media, which runs through a part of
Parthia, extends it self into India; and not far from the City Nisa, falls
into Indus, according to the Opinion of Pliny, and Strabo l. 15. Near this
River Nebuchadnezzar overcame Deioces, otherwise called Arbactus, Judge. 1.

The Description of the Countries conquered by Holofernes.
Of Kedar.
KEdar (the Wilderness of Zur was thus called;) stood in the Land of the
Ishmaelites, eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the South-west; and took the
name of Kedar the Son of Ishmael, Genesis 25.

Of the Mountains of Ange.
THE Mountains of Ange lay between Pamphylia and Cicilia, to the Latitude of
that famous Country of Cilicia in Asia minor, 320 miles from Jerusalem,
toward the North; not far from Anchiale, a City of Cilicia, from whence it
seems to take the name.

Of Cilicia.
CIlicia is a Province of Asia minor; so called of Cilice, the King's Son of
Syria and Phoenicia: the Metropolitan City of which Country was Tharsus, where
the Apostle Paul was born; it was distant from Jerusalem 304 miles toward the
North.

Of Mallos.
MAllos, a City of Cilicia, was so called of Malo, that is, Plenty of all
things. Stephanus says, that it took that Name of Mollo who first built it. It
is a City to this day, and of most of the Inhabitants of that Coun^ry called
Mallo, as Gesner observes.

Of Gesem.
GEsem signifies fruitful. The Land of Gosen in Egypt was so called, being
derived of Gusch, that is, a Turf: it stood 174 miles from Jerusalem toward
the South-west.

Of Aethiopia.
THIS Country stands beyond Egypt, 800 miles from Jerusalem toward the South,
where the Sun is extreme hot, that it turns the Complexion of the Inhabitants
to Blackness: here breed great abundance of Dragons and cruel Beasts.

Of Esdrelon.
ESdrelon was a Plain lying between the Mountains, Thabor, Hermon, and Gilboa,
extending it self from the Cities of Megiddo and Apheck, to the Sea of
Gennezareth or Galilee. In this great Field, which was called the Plain of
Galilee, and the Field of Megiddo and Esdrelon, there were many cruel Battles
fought; for here Gideon overcame the Midianites: here Saul was put to flight by
the Philistines, from whence, ascending into Mount Gilboa, he killed himself.
Josias also, King of the Jews, was in this place put to flight by Pharaoh
Necho, and wounded unto the death. The Camp of Holofernes was so great, that it
took up all the Plain, which contained sixteen miles in length. In some parts
it was wonderful fruitful, and brought forth Wine, Oil, and many other
Commodities in great Abundance. It stood 52 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North, and was so called of Caeder, that is, A hid order and disposition: for
Alam is as much as to say, he has hid.

Of Sobal.
SObal was a Country upon the Borders of Syria, where Sophena was situated,
near to the River Euphrates; which Country, Saul and David, Kings of Israel
sometime conquered: it stood 600 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, and
signifies, an ear of Corn.

Of Apamea.
THIS was a famous City in Tetrapolis of Syria, two hundred and eighty miles
from Jerusalem toward the North, built by Seleucus Nicanor King of Syria, and
was so called of Apamea his Wife.

Of the City Bethulia.
BEthulia was situated within four miles of Dothan, and two of the Gali^lean
Sea, forty four miles from Jerusalem Northward. About four miles from this
Town, in a Mountain a little beside Dothan, lay the Tents of Holofernes in the
sight of Bethulia, Iudeth, c. 7. between which and Bethulia lay the Plain of
Esdrelon, in the midst whereof there ran a pleasant River, which in times past
watered it. Here Iudeth (according to the custom of the Jews) washed her self.
The place where Bethulia stood is to be seen at this day, the ruins of the Town
and many houses still remaining. It was situated upon a goodly high Mountain,
strongly fortified by Nature, and, as it seems, by Art also. A man might have
seen it thorough the greatest part of Galilee, but above the rest, a certain
Castle in the end of the Mountain, made for the defense of the Ci^y. They show
at this day, in the Mountain and Field near Dothan, the place where Holoferne's
Camp stood, and the Relics of their Tents; also the Brook where Iudeth washed
her self. Bethulia signifies, The Handmaid of God; being derived of Bethulah,
a Virgin; and Iah, God. Holofernes, a profane Captain, of which sort are those
Tyrants that persecute the Church of God.

The BOOK of TOBIAS.
The Travels of Tobias the Elder.
TOBIAS the elder was carried captive out of the Tribe of Naphtaly, where he
was born, to Nineveh, the Metropolitan City of Assyria, being 600 miles: at
such time as Salmanasser King of the Assyrians carried away the ten Tribes of
Israel into Assyria captive; in the year before Christ 742. 2 Kings, ca. 17.
Tob. 1. From that time he continued in Nineveh, being then about twenty seven
years old, and numbered amongst the young men that went into Exile; for he was
born about such time as Romulus and Remus were born, which was An. Mundi, 3200,
and before Christ, 798, Tob. 1.

About the thirtieth year of his Age, he went from Nineveh into Media, which
was 752 miles, and there came to a City called Rages, in that Country, to visit
the banished Israelites: at which time he lent Gabel by Bond, ten Talents of
Silver, which amounts in our Money, at 5. s 6. d. the Ounce, to 2062 pound and
10 s. or thereabouts.

From Rages he returned back again to Nineveh, 752 miles. So all his Travels
were 2104 miles.

The Travels of the Angel Raphel and young Tobias.
IN the year before Christ 708, the Archangel Raphel went from Nineveh to
Rages in Media, with Tobias the younger, being 752 miles.

From Rages in Media they returned back again to Nineveh, 752 miles. So these
Journeys were 1504 miles.

The Description of the places mentioned in their Travels
Of Naphtaly.
THIS was the chief City of the Tribe of Naphtaly, eighty four miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. It stood in Galilee, and in times past was a strong
Town: here Tobias the Elder was born. It is to be seen at this day (as some
say) but much decayed; and is now called by the name of Sirin, situated in a
Mountain, so steep and strongly fortified by Nature upon the West side, that it
is impossible to ascend upon it. In a Valley some two miles from this Town
toward the South, Naason, spoken of in the first Chapter of Toby, is
situated. Upon the left side whereof there stood a Town called Sophet: but now
there is nothing to be seen but a Castle, where in ancient times the Knights
Templers kept their abiding, and at this day is in the custody of the Turks.
This Castle is situated upon a high Mountain, fortified very strongly both by
Art and Nature, and stands within a mile of Naphtaly South-Westward. At such
time as Josephus, that great Historiographer (who was the Son of Matthia or
Marathia, a Priest of the Jews) was chosen chief Commander of the Tribe of
Naphtaly, he gathered an Army of 100000, and fortified this Castle and
Naphtaly, and many other Towns thereabouts, continuing a long and sharp War
against the Romans, until Naphtaly was taken, and he constrained to yield
himself Captive. In the taking in of which Town, Titus the Son of Vespasian did
first ascend the Walls, and there made manifest his noble resolution and
valor. Vid. Ios. de bell. Iud. lib. 3. and 4.

Of Rages, a City of the Medes.
RAges is so called of a great Congregation, being derived of Ragasch, that is,
He has assembled a great company; for it was a very Populous City. It was also
called (as Strab. lib. 11. Cosmograph. says) Rahga: but after, being rebuilt
and fortified by Nicanor, it was by him called Europus, being distant from
Jerusalem 1396. Miles toward the Northeast. The Persians call it Arsacia. S.
Ierom. de Trad. Hebr. would have Edissa, a City of Mesopotamia (or rather as
Pliny says, of Coelosyria) to be Rages, which stands but 448. Miles from
Jerusalem Northward, and from Nineveh 188 miles Westward. There are diverse
others that have wrote of this Town of Edissa: but that this and Rages should
be both one, I cannot see how to agree with Toby; for that he himself has set
it down to stand in Media, and the Cities of the Medes lie distant from
Jerusalem 1396 miles. Therefore gentle Reader I refer it to thy better
consideration.

Of Jesus the Son of Syrach.
SYrach signifies an illustrious Prince, being derived of Sarach, he has
shined forth: he was of that noble Family of David, that is, the Son of Syrach
the son of Jesus, and Cousen-german to Amos Syrach, who (as Philo says) was the
chief Prince and captain of the Children of Israel in the time of Ptolomeus
Philadelphus King of Egypt, and is inserted into the Genealogy of Christ, Luke
3. He was born 230. years before Christ, in the City of Jerusalem, from whence
about the 38. year of his age he went to Alexandria, a City of Egypt, 288 miles
( Evergates Ptolomais the Son of Philadelphus being then King of that Country)
where he gathered out of that flourishing Library (set up at the charge of
Ptolomais Philadelphus) his book of Ecclesiasticus, as Bees from diverse flowers
gather sweet honey.

Of the great City Alexandria.
ALexandria was a City of Egypt, distant from Jerusalem 288 miles Westward; in
ancient time called No, that is, a Hindrance. But Alexander the Great taking
affection to this city, in the year 330. before Christ, began to build it, (for
by continuance of time it was much decayed) and within the space of 17. days
made it a goodly city, much greater than that it was before: to which, that he
might add the greater grace, he called it after his own name, Alexandria; and
there he lies buried, after he had governed the Empire of the Grecians 7
years. For although he dyed in Babylon, the chief City of the Chaldaeans, yet
Ptolomais (one of his chief Princes) removed his Body thence in a golden
chariot to Memphis in Egypt, and 20 years after, to Alexandria. The Situation
thereof is very delectable, bordering to the North upon the Mediterranean Sea,
and to the South upon the Pool of Mareridis, as Strabo says, lib. 17. It was
ten miles about, strongly fortified with walls, beautified with goodly
buildings, situated in a very fruitful Country. And to give a greater delight
unto the inhabitants, without the Walls there stood many goodly Orchards and
Gardens, plentifully furnished with fruits and flowers of diverse kinds, as
Pomecitrons, Figgs, etc. During the time of Ptolomais Philadelphus, it was a
famous and flourishing City; for this Prince being a great lover of Learning,
instituted an Academy, as it is thought, in it, and added thereto a stately
Library, wherein were 400000 Books. The same whereof being published through
the World, many People of diverse Nations resorted thither to see it. Then
Eleazar also the High Priest of the Jews, at the request of Ptolemais sent 72
Interpreters to translate the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek; which was (as
Eusebius observes) in the third year of his reign, before Christ 268. In
recompense whereof, he sent to be dedicated in the Temple of Jerusalem a Table
of gold, richly adorned with Carbuncles, Smaragdes, and other precious stones;
two stately Cups, and 30 Bowls of pure gold, as appears in Joseph. lib.
Antiq. 12. The Academy continued there till after Christ's time, as you may
read, Acts 6. But the Library was consumed 47 years before Christ, and the City
greatly defaced. For Julius Caesar at that time making war with Pompey the
younger, who continued with his Sister Cleopatra in this City, caused the Kings
Navy to be set on fire, and the Library standing near it, the flame took hold
of it, and burnt it down to the ground, with all that was in it, and defaced
also a great part of the City.

Upon the Book of Maccabees.
The Travels of Antiochus Epiphanes.
ANtiochus Epiphanes, that is, An illustrious Adversary, in the year of Christ
380. was sent out of Syria by Antiochus the Great, to Rome, which was 1600.
miles, where he remained as an hostage for his Father and his Brother Seleucus
Phil^pater seventeen, years, 1 Mac. 1. After the death of his Father, he stole
secretly from Rome, and went back again to Antiochia in Syria, which was 1600
miles; and there succeeded his Brother Zeleucus Philopater in the government.
He began to reign 173 years before Christ.

In the third year of his Reign he went from Antiochia to Tyrus, 60 miles; in
that journey he conquered all the lower part of Syria and Phoenicia.

From thence he went about six score miles through Galilee and Iudaea,
conquering all the Cities and Countries that lay in his way; and would also
have gone down into Egypt; but when he heard that his Nephew Ptolomais
Philometor had proclaimed an Assembly and Parliament, and would not acknowledge
him for his Protector, he sent Apollonius, one of his Princes, upon the day of
the meeting into Egypt, and he himself returned back again to Ioppa, 2 Mac. 4.

From Ioppa he went to Jerusalem, which was 20. miles, where Jason the
High Priest, and all the people, received him with great honor. At that time
Antiochus placed a Guard in the Castle or Tower of Jerusalem, which was the
beginning of their intolerable Servitude.

But for that year, which was the fourth of his reign, he returned through
Phoenicia to Antiochia in Syria, 280 miles.

In the fifth year of his reign, he went from Antiochia with a great Army into
Cilicia, being 80. miles. There he appeased the Uproars of the Inhabitants of
Tharsus* and Mallotus, and conquered all Cilicia, 2 Mac. 4.

From Cilicia he returned back again to Antiochia, eighty miles.

In the sixth year of his reign Antiochus, went with a great Army both by sea
and land (wherein were many Elephants) to Pelusio, 400 miles. This City he
conquered, and overcame the Alexandrians in a Naval battle, 2 Mac. 4.

From Pelusio (having built a bridge over Nilus) he went with his Army to
Memphis, conquered all the Countries and strong Cities as he went, about 140.
miles, and brought thither a mighty and great prey: where, according to the
saying of the Prophet Daniel, cap. 11. he dealt subtly with Ptolomais
Philometor.

From Memphis he returned to Alexandria, where the Citizens would not suffer
him to enter the gates, wherefore he besieged it, but to small purpose; which
was 120 miles.

From Alexandria he returned to Pelusio, which was 160. miles, there he left a
Garrison to retain what he had gotten in Egypt, 1 Mac. 4.

From Pelusio he returned to Antiochia with a great prey, being 400 miles. In
the mean time Ptolomais King of Egypt, and his Sister Cleopatra, brought in the
aid of the Romans, Livy, Decad. lib. 4, 5.

In the next year (that is, in the seventh year of Antiochus Epiphanes) there
was seen in the air as if there had been men fighting; a Comet also appeared.
This happened in the year before Christ 167.

This year, in the Spring* Antiochus went the second time from Antiochia with
his Army into Alexandria in Egypt, which was 560. miles. So passing through
Coelosyria and Iudaea, he came into Egypt, which he invaded with open war,
endeavoring to get that by force, which he could not get by entreaty. But the
Romans sent P. Popillius with other Ambassadors, into Egypt, who hearing that
Antiochus was come to Leusia, which was within a mile of Alexandria, the Romans
went thither to him. Where, when he had welcomed them, and showed all the
courtesy he could to P. Popillius, P. Popillius delivered him certain Tables
that he had about him written. And first of all commanded him to read them,
which he did. Then he counseled with some of his friends, what was best to be
done in the business. While he was thus in a great Study, P. Popillius, with a
wand that he had in his hand, made a Circle about him in the Dust, saying E're
thoustir a foot out of this Circle return thy Answer, that I may tell the
Senate whether thou had rather have War or Peace. This he uttered with such a
firm Countenance, that it amazed the King: wherefore, after he had paused a
while, quoth he, I will do what the Senate has written, or shall think fit. So
doing little or nothing in Egypt he returned back again. Iustine, lib. 34.
Decad. Lib. 4. cap. 5. Ios. lib. 12. cap. 6. These things happened ann. urb. Romans
585. L. Aemilius Paulus aup Cai^s Licinius Crassus being then Consuls; in which
year the Moon was totally ecclipsed, Aemilius overcame Perseus King of Macedon,
and reduced Macedonia into a Province, lib. Dec. 4. lib. 5.

From Leusia, Antiochus (fearing lest the Jews would forsake his Empire and
rebel) went to Jerusalem, which was 288 miles; but the Inhabitants of the Town
shut him out of the City, wherefore he besieged it, and by the Treason of
Menelaus, Chief Priest, (who for that purpose conspired with the Guard that was
in the Castle) quickly got it, and entered the Gates. In every place where he
came he put the Citizens to the Sword, and for three days space did little else
but cruelly massacre the People. He went also with Menelaus into the Temple,
where he polluted the sacred things of the Temple, and took thence the Vessels
of Silver and Gold, or whatsoever he found precious or worthy: so that the Prey
he took amounted to 1800 Talents, which make almost eleven Tun of pure Gold;
all which, were partly Gifts dedicated to the Temple, and partly Treasure that
was left there as in in a safe and sure place, to the use of poor distressed
Widows and Orphans.

After that Antiochus had robbed the Temple of all the Silver and Gold that he
could find, had banished Jason, had placed a strong Garrison in the Tower of
Acropolis, (the Captain of which was one Philip a very cruel man) and made
Menelaus High Priest; with all this booty and some number of Captives, he
returned to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. In the Year following, that is,
before Christ 166, Lu. Aemilius Paulus, triumphed for the Wars of Macedonia.
Not long after, Antiochus misdoubted the Fidelity of the Jews, sent Apollonius
with an Army of 22000 to Jerusalem, who entered the City upon the Sabbath day,
and committed many Outrages.

Then, Antiochus having spent a great part of the Gold and Silver which he had
got from Jerusalem, about the eleventh Year of his Reign made his Expedition
from Antiochia to Persepolis, (it was also called Elymaides) in Persia, which
was 196 miles. Here he took the Temple of Diana, spoiled all that Country round
about, and with strong hand gathered together a great Mass of Gold and Silver
to maintain War against Judas Macchabeu^. But a multitude of Citizens disliking
his Sacrilege, banded themselves together, and put Antiochus and his Soldiers
to flight before he could take the City of Persepolis. 1 Match. 6. 2 Match. 9.

Wherefore being driven from thence, he fled with his Army to Egbatana, a City
in Media, which was 209 miles. Here, having certain Intelligence by Letters, of
the noble Exploits of Judas Macchabeus, and that he purged the Temple of such
things as were profane, he fell into an extreme Grief, and like one
distracted, railed against the Jews, and swore to be revenged of them, 1 Mac. 9.

In this extreme Anger he went from Egbatana to Babylon with his Army, which
was 464 miles. But as he went, his Chariot was overthrown, in the fall whereof
he was so extremely wounded, that they were constrained to ^arry him in a Bed
to Babylon, where he shortly after died miserably. So all his Travels were 8153
miles.

Thus may we see with what Difficulties and Dangers this wicked Prince obtained
his Victories, and past away his Life, sometimes in Travel, his Journies long
and troublesome, sometimes in Prosperity, sometimes in Adversity, again
sometimes afflicted with troublesome Cogitations, sometimes with extreme Anger,
seldom in Peace, and then also his Actions savouring of Violence and
Filthiness. From whence it appears, That the Wicked, with more Sorrows,
Troubles and Vexations, gain eternal Damnation, that the Just, tho they suffer
many grievous Afflictions, obtain everlasting Salvation. For amongst all the
Patriarchs, good Kings, and Prophets, there is not found any that had so many
long and tedious Journies as this Antiochus, who continually oppressed his Mind
and Conscience with unprofitable Vanities and wicked Thoughts, and at length
had a miserable and terrible end.

Of the Cities and Places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Antiochia.
ANtiochia, where Antiochus Epiphanes kept his Court, was anciently called
Chaemath, or Riblah. It was situated in Syria, 180 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, near to the Cities, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea, which
four Cities (as Strabo says in the sixteenth Book of his Geography) were built
by Seleucus Nicanor first King of Syria. This man was a mighty Prince, and
obtained the Name of Nicanor (which signifies Victory) because he prospered in
his Wars, and conquered his Adversaries. For, when (within 13 years after the
Death of Alexander the Great) he had got the Kingdom of Syria, he became so
great in the 31 year of his Reign, that he obtained the Empire of all the East;
and beside (as Strabo says) re-edified and built up these four Cities, calling
one of them Antiochia, after the name of his Father, another Laodicea, after
the name of his Mother, a third after his own name Seleucia, and the last
Apamea, after the name of his Wife. These four Cities, because they were all
built by one man, and at one time, were called Sisters. But Antiochia was much
fairer than the other, and in those times was a greater City than any other
called after that name; yea, it was equal to Alexandria in Egypt, for glory and
excellency of Building. It was divided into four parts, and those parts
separated with four Walls: The first, which was anciently called Hemath (a
violent Anger) of Chamathai the Son of Canaan; was after Riblath, from the
multitude of the Inhabitants; and the third time by Seleucus, after his
Father's name, called Antiochia. In this part Seleucus to dignifie the City,
kept his Court, it being compassed about with Goodly Walls. In the second part
the Citizens of Syria inhabited. In the third, Seleuchus Callimichus (afterward
King of the Syrians) kept his Court, and greatly beautified it. But in the
fourth (where afterward many Christians inhabited) Antigonus Epiphanes
continued, and did greatly adorn it, and set it forth with goodly buildings and
sumptuous Houses. Close by the City there stood a pleasant Wood, watered with
many clear Fountains and delightful Springs, to which there resorted a great
multitude of Fowls of diverse sorts, which sung very pleasantly among the Trees,
to the great content and delectation of the Citizens. In the midst of this Wood
stood the Temple of Apollo and Diana, goodly things, and very curiously built.
It was called the Wood of Daphne, because it was full of Laurel Trees. From
this Wood all the Country thereabout is called Epidaphne. Not far off stands
the River Orontes, which begins in Coelosyria, and passes under the earth
till it comes near to Apamea, where it rises and waters all Antiochia. So
passing thence, it runs some sixteen miles, and so falls into the
Mediterranean Sea. Here Paul preached and kept a Synod, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 24,
25. There was another Synod kept here by the Arrians, Trip. lib. 4. 9.

Stephanus reckons up many other Cities of this name: as Antiochia, (...) in
Galatia, where Paul preached, Act. 3. and is distant from this 384 miles:
Antiochia in Mesopotamia, which is also called Mygdonia, and (...); in which
Apollophanes the Stoic, and Pharnuchus that wrote the Persian History, are
said to be born. Antiochia between Syria and Arabia, built by Semiramis.
Antiochia in Cilicia, situated near to the River Pyramus. Antiochia in Pieria,
also called by the Syrians, Arados. There is also a City called Antiochia near
Mount Taurus in the Country of Comagena. Antiochia situated upon the Lake of
Callichan. Antiochia in Scythia. There was another in Caria, called also
Pithapolis. Antiochia Marigiana, built by Antiochius Soter. And many Authors
call Tharsus in Cilicia by the name of Antiochia. Antiochia signifies an
Adversary.

Of Rome.
ROME stands 1528 miles from Jerusalem Westward. Of this City you may read more
in the Travels of the Apostle Paul.

Tyrus, Ioppa, Memphis, Peluso, Mallo, and Alexandria, are before described.

Of Tharsus.
TArsus or Tharsus signifies a Hyacinth stone, so called (as some think) of
Tharsis the Son of Iavan, the Son of Iap^et, the Son of Noah, Genesis 10. It was
distant from Jerusalem 304 miles Northward.

Of Persepolis.
PErsepolis was the Metropolitan City of Persia, distant from Jerusalem 1240
miles Eastward. So called of Perseus that mighty King of the Persians, who
re-edified it and gave it that name; which is as much as to say, the City of
the Persians, which also of him were so called. The Astronomers, because he was
greatly affected to such as were skilful in that Art, attributed his name and
his Wives name to two Constellations in the Heavens, of which Ovid's Fable is
contributed of Pegasus and Andromache.

This City of Persepolis was so fair, that it exceeded all the Cities of the
East both for Stateliness, and Beauty, and so continued from Perseus time,
until Alexander the Great had conquered Darius: at which time, this great
Emperor having got into his hand the whole Empire of the Persians, came to
Persepolis in the year before Christ, 329, and there celebrated a great feast
in triumph of his Victories; to which there resorted a great many Women, not
such as were of the better sort, but them that followed the Camp, and lived
dissolutely: amongst whom was that notable Curtesan Thais; who perceiving the
King inclined to Mirth, and full with Wine, began to flatter him in his Cups,
and among other things to commend and dignifie his Noble Exploits, withal
giving him to understand, how acceptable it would be to the Grecians to see the
Royal Palace of the Persians fired, which had so often afflicted Grecia. No
sooner had she uttered these words, but another seconded her, and then a third.
After, the whole assembly cried out, Shall we revenge the Injury of the
Grecians, and burn the City? With that they all rose in great fury, the King
himself (being crowned) beginning first to fire the Palace, wherein was great
abundance of Cedar, from whence it happened, that suddenly the fire spread it
self a great way; which when the Army that lay without the Walls perceived,
with all speed came to the City to stay the burning of it, for which purpose
many brought Water with them. But when they beheld the King himself busy in
this Tragedy, laying aside their Water, they also, in hope of Booty, and to
imitate the steps of their Prince, fell to firing the City, and according to
the custom of Soldiers in such Massacres, made a Prey of what they could get;
increasing the fire with dry stuff and other Combustible matter, whereby it
came to pass that the whole City was therew^th fired and burnt to the ground.
This was the end of that mighty City which ruled over so many Nations, where so
many mighty Princes governed, that was the scourge of Grecia and the greatest
part of the World, that sent forth a Navy of 10000 Ships and an Army of an
infinite number: there being an infinite number; there being at this day
nothing to be seen, unless the River Araxes that ran close by it remains.
Thus was that consumed in a fury, which the King and all his Army before
endeavored to spare. But after it turned to the great shame of the
Macedonians, that their King should fire so famous a City in the midst of his
Cups: and Alexander himself, after he had slept, repented what he had done.

You shall find in 2 Mac. cap. 6. That Antiochus Epiphanes besieged a certain
City in Persia called Persepolis, from whence, for his exceeding Covetousness
and Sacrilege, he was forced by the Inhabitants dwelling about the Town, to
raise his Siege and be gone. Therefore some may gather, that this Persepolis
before mentioned was rebuilded, because it also stood in Persia: but if you
read 1 Mac. cap. 6. you shall find, that this City, so besieged by Antiochus,
was also called Elymais, wherein stood the Temple of Diana, beautified with
many goodly Ornaments, shining with the splendour of fine Gold wherewith it was
gilt. In which Temple, as says Josephus, lib. Ant. 12. Alexander the Great
left his Armor and other things. From whence may be gathered, that this Town
was not the Persepolis which he caused to be burned, but rather some other Town
built out of the Ruins of that City (according to the opinion of Quintus
Curtius) or else some Village standing near to it, which being built up and
enlarged, might of some be called new Persepolis, though indeed it was
anciently called Elymais, and all the East part of Persia beyond Susa, of that
Town called Elematica, having some affinity with Elam the ancient name of
Persia, so called of Elam the Son of Sem Genesis 10. Wherefore it may well be
concluded, that that Persepolis, burnt down by Alexander, was never restored,
but lies waste to this day.

Thus the Empire of the Persians (after they had ruled over the Nations of the
Earth 260 years) was conquered by the Grecians, who held it 129 years. At the
end of which time, Demetrius Nicanor, the last Emperor of the Grecians in
Syria and Asia, going with a great Army out of Syria toward the East, Arsaces
King of the Medes and Parthians, being aided by the Citizens of Elymais, the
Persians, and Bactrians meeting him in those parts, gave him many sharp and
cruel Battles, and in the end (under the pretense of Peace) took him Prisoner,
in the year before Christ 137. and from that time the Parthians governed Persia
and Grecia, and opposed the Romans in many cruel Battles.

Afterward, in the year of our Lord, 226, Artaxerxes that mighty Lord of Persia
overcame Artabanus King of the Parthians in a mighty Battle, and took his Crown
from his head: the same year entering upon the Government of Persia, 548 years
after the death of Alexander the Great: from which time, Artaxerxes and his
Posterity reigned in Persia for the Space of 314 years; in the which space
there succeeded twenty eight Kings, viz. Artaxerxes 1. Sapores, Ormisdates,
Vararanes, Vararanes 2. Vararanes 3. Narses, Misdates, Sapores 2. Artaxerxes 2.
Sapores 3. Vararanes 4. Cermazat, sir-named Isdigertes, Vararanes 5. Vararanes
6. Perozes, Valens, Cavades, Zambades, Cavades 2. Cosroes, Hormisda, Cosroes 2.
Siroes, Adhasir, Sarbaras, Bornarim, Hormisda 2. who was the last King of the
Persians; for being overcome by Humarus, Amiras of the Saracens, and third
Emperor of the Mahumetans, he was thrown out of his Kingdom, Anno Dom. 640.
After which time, it continued long in the Government of the Saracens and Turks.

Where that holy* Priest Mattathias the Father of Judas Machabe^s dwelt.
MAttathias and Dorotheus, have both one signification, that is, The Gift of
God; being derived of Matath, a Gift, and Iah, God. This Matt^thias was a Holy
Priest, of the Tribe of Levi, the Son of John, the Son of Simon, of whom all
that Family was called the Posterity of Simon, of the Stock of Ioarib, of whom
you may read, 1 Chr. 15. He dwelt in a Town called Modin, fourteen miles from
Jerusalem, toward the North-West, situated in a Mountain, close by the way as
you go to Ioppa, in the Tribe of Dan. Modin signifies a Measure, being derived
of Madad, he has measured. In this place, seeing the cruelty of Antiochus
Epiphanes, and the Insolence of his Soldiers, he killed one of his Captains,
and afterward in the Synagogue put to death an Idolatrous Jew, overthrew the
Altar set up by Antiochus; after called forth all the Inhabitants of Modin, and
other Towns near adjoining, to withstand the fury of this King. So they brought
their Goods out of the City, into the Wilderness, where they encamped
themselves, and after, so manfully opposed Antiochus, that he delivered all the
Cities and Towns thereabouts out of his Bondage, and from Idolatry. But being
now grown old, (after he had admonished his Sons to Constancy in the Service of
God, and Courage in Defense of the Country) he died in the year before Christ,
164, and was buried at Modin, where afterward his Sons were buried. Simon, his
third Son, high Priest of Jerusalem, did marvellously beautify this Sepulcher;
for he made a Vault of white Marble, compassed about with fair Pillars, which
supported an admirable curious Arch, to see to as if it had been one stone.
Over this Vault, in convenient places, he built seven Pyramids, in memory of
his Father, Mother, his four Brethren, and himself. In the Circumference of
this Monument he set up fair Marble Pillars, upon which he caused to be
engraven Ships, so artificially, that they which sailed upon the Sea might see
them; and upon these he placed the Arms of his Father, and of his Brethren. You
may read more of this, 1 Match. 13. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 9.

The Travels of Judas Macchabeus.
JVdas Macchabeus succeeded his Father Mattathias in the year before Christ
164, Anno Mundi 3804. and ruled six years. Immediately after his Father's
death, who, as is said, was buried in Modin, he led his Army against
Apollonius, chief ^aptain of Antiochus, who at that time was in Samaria; which
was thirty miles; here he overcame Apollonius, and killed him with his own
Sword, 2 Mac. 2, 3.

When Seron (who was also one of Antiochus's chief Captains in Syria the lower)
heard that Judas Macchabeus had overcome Apollonius, and put him to death, he
was very angry, and said, I will go and conquer Judas Machabeus and those that
are with him, that so I may get my self a name, and be famous through the whole
Kingdom: so he came out of Syria, and pitched his Tents near Bethoron the
lower, in the Tribe of Judah, thirty two miles from Samaria. But Judas went
down to him to Bethoron, where he broke into his Camp, overcame his whole Army,
and put him to the Sword, with 8000 of his men, but the rest fled into the Land
of the Philistines, 1 Mac. 3. These two Victories he obtained in the first year
of his Government, by which he made the name of Macchabees famous through that
Kingdom. This Battle was fought eight miles from Jerusalem.

Antiochus Epiphanes having certain Intelligence of that which had happened, in
the next year made an Expedition into Persia, that he might gather Money in
those East parts to make an offensive War against the Jews; and gave Authority
to Lysias (whom he made Governor in his absence) to suppress this faction
sprung up amongst them. Wherefore Lysias sent 40000 Foot and 7000 Horse into
Jury; and appointed Ptolomais, Nicanor, and Gorgias to be Generals of the whole
Army. Who, so soon as they had entered Iudaea after Hostile manner, they
pitched their Tents near to a Town called Emaus, Iosep. lib. Ant. 13. c. 10.
This Town stands six miles and somewhat more from Jerusalem; but Judas
Macchabeus assembled his Army in Mizpah, situated in the Tribe of Benjamin,
not far from Jerusalem, six miles from Bethoron, 1. Mac. 3.

After Judas Macchabeus had implored Gods assistance in his Wars, and performed
many Religious ceremonies, he went with his Army to Emaus, which was four
miles: where, coming upon the Enemy in the night and unexpected, he overcame
Nicanor, put him to flight, and killed 3000 of his men. This Victory happened
in the third year of Judas Macchabeus his Government, 1. Mac. 4.

From Emaus he pursued the Enemy to Gexeron Azotus, Asserimoth and Iamniah,
upon the Borders of Idumaea, which was eight miles.

After, he returned back from pursuing the Enemy with his Army to Emaus, which
was eight miles, that he might oppose the Army of Gorgias; but Gorgias
understanding of the overthrow of Nicanor, and burning of his Tents, fled.

Judas Macchabeus obtained his fourth victory in the third year of his
Government, which was 62 years before Christ, and in the 148 year of the
Government of the Graecians in Syria, six miles from Emaus, near to the Castle
or Fortress of Bethsura, which signifies, the house of the Rock, being a very
strong place, situated in the top of a high Rock, some half a mile from
Jerusalem, in the way which leads to Bethlehem. Near to this Castle Judas
Macchabeus overcame Lysias, Antiochus his chief General of Syria, who had 20000
foot, and 5000 horse in his Army, carrying away a great victory, and put to the
sword 5000 of his men. Lysias being thus overcome, mediated a Peace with the
Jews, which was concluded upon the fourth day of the Month Diosceris, which
answers unto the seventh day of our Month of June, 2 Macch. 10.

From Bethsura Judas Macchabeus brought back his Army to Jerusalem* which was
almost a mile; where he caused the Temple of the Lord to be cleansed of the
abomination of the Gentiles, and broke down the Statue of Jupiter Olympus,
which had continued there for the space of three years: and on the fifth day of
the month Caslew, which is our December, celebrated a solemn Passover, and
built up a new Altar, and dedicated it unto the Lord.

In the year after, being the fourth year of his Government, he repaired ^he
Town of Sion, and fortified Bethsura against the Idumeans, which Nation all
this year made War upon the Jews: But after, Judas gathered an army and went 40
miles into Idumaea, and invaded those that were in Arabathnes, and in the Land
of the sons of Bean (which people troubled the Israelites with continual
Robberies) and put them to flight, so that they were constrained to take their
Castle; where he fired them and it together, 1 Macch. 5. 2. Macch. 10.

From Idumaea he returned back again with his army to Jerusalem, which was
forty miles.

Afterward he led his Army against the Ammonites, which lay 60 miles from
Jerusalem toward the Northeast, 1. Macch. 5.

From thence, he went to Iaeser in the Tribe of Gad, which was 24 miles; which
he took, and all the Castles thereabouts. This Town Moses in times past
conquered, as you may read before 1 Macch. 15.

From Iaeser he returned to Jerusalem which was 40 miles;

From thence he went to Ioppa which was 20 miles; and there he burned their
Haven (for Ioppa was a Haven-Town) and those which escaped the fire he killed
with the sword, 2 Mac. 12.

From Ioppa he went to Iamnia, which was accounted four miles; where, in the
Night, he fired their Haven, burned their Ships, and spoiled their Town;
insomuch as the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, which were sixteen miles off, might
easily see the Fire, 2 Macch. 12.

From Iamnia, Judas went with his army against Timotheus, chief Captain of
Antiochus Eupater, who continued at the City Caspin, which was something more
than a mile, where he overcame him and 5000 Arabians, which were strengthened
with 500 Horse, and took the City, 1 Mac. 12.

Afterward Judas Macchab. with his Brother Jonathan, led an Army to Characa
unto the Jews that were called Tubieni, which was 96 miles, against Timotheus
Governor of the Ammonites; but he was gone thence and had done nothing, but
left a Garrison in a strong hold. Wherefore Dositheus and Sosipater (which were
Captains with Macchab.) went forth and slew those that Timotheus had left in
the Fortress more than 10000 men: Timotheus himself also fell into their hands;
but by reason of his fair Speeches, they suffered him to depart with Life, 2
Mac. 12. 1 Mac. 5.

From thence he went to Bozor, a fair City, which was situated beyond Jordan
near to Bethabara, in the Tribe of Reuben, it was also called Bazra, which was
24 miles: this Town he took and burned with Fire, Isa. 64. 1 Mac. 5.

From Bozor he went to Mizpa, where Iephtha some i am sacrificed his Daughter,
which was 32 miles. In that Journey Judas Macchabeus rescued the Castle of
Datheman, drove thence Timotheus, and put to the Sword 8000 of his Army. After,
he went thence to Mizpa, won the Town, burned it with Fire, and put to the
Sword all the male Children because the Inhabitants had vexed the Children of
Israel with continual Robbery. After that, he won many other Towns and Cities
thereabouts, 1 Mac. 5.

From Mizpa, Judas passed the River, and went to Astaroth-Carnaim, which in the
second of Macchabees is called Carnion, which was eight miles: here he
destroyed the Temple of Venus, which the Inhabitants call Astaroth, and put
25000 of the Inhabitants to the Sword. He went also to Atargation, a Town not
far off, and took it, and delivered all the Israelites, from the greatest to
the least, which were in Captivity amongst the Giliadites, 1. Mac. 5. 2 Mac. 22.

From Astaroth-Carnaim he went to Ephron, being 16 miles; this City Judas
Macchabeus destroyed because the Inhabitants thereof denied him Passage, and
went through it over the dead Bodies, 2 Mac. 5. Here Gideon, Judge of Israel,
sometime dwelt; it took the Name from the rising up of the Dust, being derived
of Aphar, that is, he has made a dust.

From Ephron, Judas passed over Jordan into the great Field of Galilee, and so
went to Scythopolis, which in ancient time was called Bethsan, which was four
miles.

From Bethsan or Scythopolis he returned to Jerusalem, which was 44 miles, a
little before Pentecost, in the fourth year of his Government, in the Year 161
before Christ, 1 Mac. 5. 2 Mac. 12.

After the Feast of Pentecost he went from Jerusalem to Maresa, which was 16
miles; here he overcame Gorgias, Governor of Idumaea, in a great Battle, 2
Mac. 12.

From Maresa he went with his Army to Odullam, which was six miles Here
sometime David hid himself.

From Odullam he returned to Jerusalem, being eight miles; 2 Mac. 12.

From Jerusalem he brought his Army to Hebron, the Metropolitan City of the
Idumaeans, which was 22 miles: this Town he won, and all the Towns and Castles
near adjoining, 1 Mac. 5.

From thence he went to Samaria, which was fifty six miles, 1 Mac. 5.

From Samaria he led his Army against Azotus, being 44 miles. This was a City
of the Philistines, which he destroyed, broke their Altars, and burned their
Idols in the Fire, 1 Mac. 5. After that, he conquered two Castles in Idumaea, 1
Mac. 10.

After that, he returned to Jerusalem, which was accounted 22 miles, 1 Mac. 5.

From Jerusalem he went to meet Timotheus, chief Captain of the Syrians, who
came with a great Army to invade Iudaea. But when the Battle waxed hot, there
appeared to the Enemies from Heaven, five comely men upon Horses, with Bridles
of Gold, two of which led the Jews, and took Macchabeus between them, and
covered him on every side with their Weapons, that none could hurt him; but
against their Enemies they shot Darts and Lightnings, so that they were
confounded with Blindness, and beaten down; whereby the Jews obtained a great
Victory, and put to the Sword 20500 Foot, and 600 Horse; the rest seeing this
great Slaughter, fled. So Judas praised the Lord, and pursued the Enemies to
Gazara, being sixteen miles. Here Timotheus hid himself in a Cave; but the Jews
took the City, found him out, and put him to death, together with his Brother
Chaerea and Pollophanes, 2 Mac. 10.

From Gazara, Judas Macchabeus returned to Jerusalem, being 16 miles.

In the Year following, which was the fifth of his Reign, and 160 before
Christ, Judas Macchab* besieged the Tower of Sion in Jerusalem, because those
that were in the Garrison had put to the Sword some of the Jews that were
sacrificing in the Temple. But Antiochus Eupator, the Son of Antiochus
Epiphanes, hearing of it; at the Instigation of Menelaus, Chief Priest of the
Jews, brought a great Army to their Rescue; wherefore Judas Macchabeus hearing
of his coming, left the Siege, and went from Jerusalem to Modin to meet him,
which was 14 miles: Here he overcame Antiochus, destroyed his Elephants, and
put 4000 of his Soldiers to the Sword, 2 Mac. 13.

When King Antiochus had felt a taste of the boldness of the Jews, he went with
his Army through by-ways, and secret Passages to the Castle of Bethsu^a, which
he besieged, whither Judas followed him, which was twelve miles; encamped
himself a mile from Bethsura, in a straight place called Bethzachara. Here
Antiochus, betimes in the Morning (thinking to take the Army of the Jews at an
Advantage) set upon them: But the Jews and their Leaders behaved themselves so
manfully, that they put Antiochus the second time to flight, and killed 600 of
his men. In this Battle Eliazer, the Brother of Judas Macchabeus, was slain by
an Elephant, Ios. lib. Antiq. 12. lib. 16. 1 Macc. 6.

From Bethzachara he returned back to Jerusalem, being two miles; and when the
King had taken the Town of Bethsura (for they were constrained to yield by
reason of Famine) he followed Judas, with whom he joined the third time in
Battle; but Judas overcame him, and put to the Sword many of his Army.
Wherefore, having certain Intelligence that Philip (whom he had made Over-seer
of the Affairs at Antiochia) rebelled, he made a Peace with Judas Macchabeus,
was appeased toward the Jews, did sacrifice, adorned the Temple, and showed
great Gentleness toward the People. So Antiochus departed out of Iudaea, and
took Menelaus, that seditious High Priest, along with him captive, 1 Mac. 6. 2.
Mac. 13.

After, in the sixth Year of his Government, Judas went with his Army through
all the Borders of Iudaea, and executed Justice upon all such as were Offenders
and Contemners of the true Religion.

After, when Judas had certain intelligence that Nicanor (whom Demetrius King
of Syria had sent against Jerusalem) went about by fraudulent Courses, and
under pretense of Friendship, to take away his Life, 2 Mac. 14. he went privily
from Jerusalem and came to Caphar-Salama, situated twelve miles from Jerusalem
toward the North. Here Nicanor and he joined Battle; but Judas discomfited his
Army, and put to the Sword about five thousand of his Men, himself not escaping
without great danger, 1 M^c. 7.

From Caphar-Salama, Judas came to Samaria, which was 28 miles: here he rested
himself, and refreshed his Army a while, 2 Mac. 15.

In the Year before Christ 128, he went from Samaria to Ad^rs^, which was 28
miles; and there (upon the 13th. day of Adar, which answers to the 13th. day
of February) near to Bethoron the lower, he gave Nicanor a great Overthrow, and
put him, with 35000 of his Host, to the Sword, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15.

From Adara and Bethoron the lower, he followed the Enemies to Gaza, a City of
the Philistines, being 44 miles, 1 Mac. 9.

From Gaza he returned to Jerusalem, being 44 miles; there he caused the Arm of
Nicanor (whom a little before he had slain at the Battle of Adarsa) to be cut
off, and his Tongue to be cut out of his Head, shred small, and given to the
Fowls of the Heaven, and his Head to be cut from his Shoulders; because
therewith he had blasphemed the Lord, and the Temple, swearing Desolation and
Destruction to it and the Jews, 1 Mac. 7. 2 Mac. 15.

A little after, that is to say, almost at the end of the sixth year of his
Government, Judas Macchabeus went out with 3000 chosen men in his Army, and
pitched his Tents near Laisa, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the West: but
when the Jews perceived the mighty Army of Bacchides (for he had 20000 foo^,
and 2000 Horse in his Host) there were many of them discouraged, so that all
left him but 800 men; yet nevertheless, Judas constrained by necessity,
withstood Bacchides, and so manfully behaved himself in the Battle, that he
overcame him, and put him to flight, 1 Mac. 2.

His Enemies being thus put to flight, he pursued them to the Mountains of
Azotus and Gazeron, which was six miles; where, being oppressed with the
multitude, and hemmed in amongst them, was slain. He died in the Month Nisan,
which answers to our April, Anno Mundi 3810. and before Christ 158. 1 Mac. 9.

From the Mountains of Azotus and Gazeron his dead Body was carried back again
to Modin, being 6 miles, and there buried. So his Travels were 915 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Mispa, Iamnia, and Laisa, you may read before.
Of Caspin.
THIS City stood not far from Iamnia, 16 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west. This Town, though it was strongly fortified, yet Judas Macchabeus
won it, 2 Mac. 12. It is called Caspin, of Keseph, which signifies, Silver.
There was another City called Casphor, that is, the Silver Mountain, this stood
in the Land of Gilead near Mispa, which Judas also won, 1 Mac. 4.

Of Asseremoth, otherwise called Gazaron.
GAzaron or Gareza was a City of the Philistines near Ekron, sixteen miles from
Jerusalem toward the West. It is so called from the Cliff of a Rock; being
derived of Gezer, which signifies a Cliff. Here Judas Macchabeus was slain, 1
Mac. 6.

Of the Tubiani.
TVbiani are a People that dwelt beyond Jordan, in that part of Arabia-Petraea
which is called Nabathea, of Nabaioth the Son of Ishmael, near to a Mountain of
the Gileadites, not far distant from Abel of the Vines, where it is thought
Balaam's Ass spoke. This Land is called Thubin, and the Inhabitants Tubiani;
because all that Country brings forth very pleasant and excellent Wine; being
derived of Zob, which signifies good, and Iaiin, Wine. In this Country Judas
Macchabeus continued three days with his Army.

Of Caphar-Salama.
THIS Town stood twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North: In Herod the
Great's time in was enlarged and made a very fair City, which he caused to be
called Antipatridis, after the Name of his Father Antipater; of which you may
read more in the Travels of the Apostle Paul.

Of Adarsa.
THIS was a Town in the Tribe of Ephraim, between Antipatridis and Bethoron the
lower, twelve miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west. It seems to be
thus called from a noble Gift, for it is derived of Adar, which signifies
illustrious, and Schal, a Gift.

The Typical Signification of Judas Macchabeus.
JVdas Macchabeus is a Type and Figure of our Lord Jesus Christ; and Antiochus
of that wicked Antichrist, as the Interpretation of their names do evidently
declare; for, Judas signifies a Confessor, praising God and glorifying his Name
for all his Benefits; so Christ the Son of God is the Praise and Glory of his
Father, for that in him, and by him, God the Father is praised, as is evident
in the Song of Simeon. In like manner our Lord Jesus Christ is worthily called
Macchabeus, for Macchabeus is a surname of the Jews, which is written after
this manner, (...) Machabai, every Letter of which signifies a several Word,
according to the Song of Moses in the fifteenth Chapter of Exodus, where are
these Words, Michamocha baelim Jehovah, that is, Who is like unto thee amongst
the Gods, O Lord? Thus did the Children of Israel sing with Moses, when God led
them out of the Land of Egypt through the Red Sea: and this Sentence Judas
Macchabeus continually used as an Adage; and the Letters at the beginning of
these Words being joined together into one Word, make the surname Macchabai.
Therefore as he had always this golden Sentence in his Mouth, so had he it
likewise in his Name, yea, in his Ensigns. Wherefore this name likewise is
worthy to be attributed to Christ; for he is that perfect Image and Glory of
his eternal Father, Heb. 1. who is called Michael, that is, Who is like unto
God? and Macchabeus, or Machabai, that is, Who is like unto thee amongst the
Gods, O Lord. Therefore he says thus, I am that great God that will deliver
you from all evil. Ecce, Deus fortis foelix, de morte resurgo:
Tartareosque unguens, Daemona ipse ligo.
Behold, I am the God of Might, from death to Life that rose:
I bind the Devil to my Will, his Furies I oppose.


But Antiochus signifies an adversary, or an opposer, or one that fights
against God. The same also does Satan signify in Hebrew. He is therefore a
fit Type of that great opposer of God and Man, (Antichrist) who fights
against Christ, that Judas Machabeus, and true Captain of the Church. For as
the one ( viz. Antiochus) was an adversary against the Jews, the Children of
God; so the other, (that is, Antichrist) is an adversary and Enemy against
Christ and his Church, etc.

The Travels of Jonathan, the brother of Judas Macchabeus.
JOnathan, or Jonathas, and Theodo^us, has but one signification, that is, The
gift of God. This man, the same year that Judas his Brother died, succeeded him
in the Principalit^, and governed the Jews eighteen years, 1 Mac. 9. Joseph.
lib. antiq. 3. But understanding that Bacchides, chief Captain of Demetrius
King of Syria, went about to take away his life by craft, he and his Brother
Simon went from Modin, and pitched their Tents in the Wilderness of Tecoah,
near to the Lake of Asphar, which was twenty miles.

From thence they sent their Brother John with certain Riches to the
Nabathians, which dwelt in Medaba in Arabia (twenty eight miles) desiring them
in Friendship to receive their Goods into the Town, and to keep them for their
use: but the Sons of Iambri and the Nabathians issued out of Medaba unawares,
fell upon John, put him to death, took away all his Wealth, and returned into
their City with great joy.

But Jonathan and Simon took this injury very heavily, and much bewailed the
death of their Brother: Wherefore, that they might be revenged of the
inhabitants of Medaba, they went thence twenty eight miles, and hid themselves
among the Mountains, just in the way that led from Medaba to Canaan; for they
had heard that the Sons of Iambri and the Inhabitants of Medaba were gone forth
with great Jollity to fetch home a Bride, which was a Princes Daughter of the
Land of Canaan; Now as they were merry upon the way, Jonathan, and Simon his
Brother, with their Army, went out from among the Mountains, and put a great
number of them to the Sword, taking away a mighty Spoil.

From Medaba they went to the River Jordan, which was three miles, where, upon
the East side of the River they pitched their Tents; here he was constrained to
fight a cruel Battle with Bacchides upon the Sabboth-day; but as he was in the
fight, he met Bacchides, and lift up his hand to strike at him; but he seeing
the danger, retired. Nevertheless he put to the Sword 1000 of his men, and
after, he and his Followers leapt into the River and swam over: so they all
escaped without Danger.

In the fifty sixth year of the Grecians Government in Syria, which was the
fifth year of the Principality of Jonathan, Bacchides returned again with his
Army into Iudaea, and besieged Jonathan and Simon in Bethbesan, otherwise
called Bethgalam, some three miles distant from Jordan. Here Jonathan, leaving
his Brother Simon in the City, stole out by a Postern, and went to all the
Villages near adjoining, from whence he gathered an Army of Chosen men, and set
upon Bacchides: Simon also broke out of the City, and set upon him, so that
they greatly oppressed him and burned his Tents, 1 Mac. 1. Wherefore, when
Bacchides understood that Jonathan and Simon had fortified that City, and that
the Jews were ready to defend it, he concluded a Peace with Jonathan; the
Captives of either part were re-delivered, and the Jews lived in Peace a good
while after, 1 Mac. 9.

From Bethbesan, Jonathan went to Michmas, being six miles: here he dwelt for a
while, and judged the People of Israel, cherishing the good, and rooting out
the Evil from amongst them, 1 Mac. 1.

From Michmas he went to Jerusalem, which was ten miles. Hither Alexander King
of Syria, and Son of Antiochus Epiphanes, sent him a Purple Robe and a Golden
Crown, and ordained him High Priest of the Jews. Wherefore Jonathan, on the day
of the Feast of the Tabernacles, which was in the year before Christ, 150, took
upon him the Office to be high Priest, 1 Mac. 10. The next year after, which
was the tenth of Ionathan's Rule, (after the death of Demetrius King of Syria,
who was slain in the Wars against Alexander) there appeared a Comet of an
Extraordinary greatness, which was of such an exceeding brightness, that it
took away the darkness of the Night; and the Writers of those times affirm it
to equal the Sun in greatness. After this Prodigy, the Romans began the third
Punick War against the Carthaginians. Vide Camerar. lib. 2. de ostent.

Jonathan in the eleventh year of his Reign, went from Jerusalem to Ptolemais,
being seventy six miles, to the Marriage of Alexander King of Syria, and
Cleopatra the Daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, where he was
entertained very honorably, 1 Mac. 10.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was seventy six miles; 1 Mac. 10.

From Jerusalem he went to Ioppa, and won the Town, which was twenty miles.

From Ioppa he went to Asdod, which was twelve miles; there he burnt the Temple
of Dagon, and all that were in it.

From thence he went with his Army to Ascalon, being twelve miles; this Town
willingly yielded unto him.

From Ascalon he returned to Jerusalem, which was 38 miles, 1 Mac. 10.

In the fifteenth year of his Government he went to Io^pa, being twenty miles,
to meet Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, and stayed there all that night, 1
Mac. 11.

The next day he went with the King of Egypt to the River of Eleutherius,
which was 200 miles.

From thence he returned back again to Jerusalem, which was 200 miles.

Here he besieged the Tower of Acropolis, because there were many wicked men
got into it.

In the sixteenth year of his Government he went from Jerusalem to Ptolomais,
to Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria, which was 76 miles.

From Ptolomais he returned back to Jerusalem, which was 76 miles.

From Jerusalem (in the seventeenth year of his Government) he went beyond the
River Euphrates, which was accounted four hundred miles; and there gathered an
Army, in Aid of Antiochus the younger, the Son of Alexander, and went against
Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was 400 miles.

From Jerusalem he went with his Army to Ascalon, which was thirty miles.

From thence he came to Gaza, which was eighteen miles: this Town he besieged,
and after a sharp Battle won it.

From Gaza he went to Damascus in Syria, which was about 200 miles.

From thence he returned to the Lake of Genesereth, which was 104 miles. Here
he opposed the Army of Demetrius Nicanor King of Syria.

From thence (before day) he removed his Camp to Chazor, which was thirty two
miles; where, when part of his Army was put to flight by a Stratagem, he tore
his Garments, put dust upon his head, and prayed earnestly unto the Lord for
aid and assistance: so having recovered his strength and former courage, he
returned with those few that he had left him to the War, where he put the Army
of King Demetrius to flight, and slew 3000 of his men with the Sword.

His Enemies being thus dispersed, he pursued them to their Tents, near Cades
in Galilee, being six miles.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem with a glorious victory, which was about
some ninety two miles. Here he made a League with the Romans and Spartans, 1
Mac. 11. 12.

From Jerusalem he went with his Army into the Country of Hemath, that is,
Syria, to the River Eleutherius, being 200 miles; here he put his Enemies to
flight, after they had burnt and consumed their Tents.

From thence he went to Nabathia in Arabia, being 120 miles. Here he conquered
the Arabians and Zabadians, and spoiled their Land.

From thence he went through all that Country, and wasted it, till he came
within eight miles of Damascus

From thence he returned home to Jerusalem, which was 160 miles. In the
eighteenth and last year of his Reign he caused the Walls of Jerusalem to be
built, and began to fortify many places in Iudaea, 1 Mac. 12. Also the same
year (which was the 160 year of the Government of the Graecians in Syria) the
second Book of Macchabees was written, as appears, cap. 1.

After, from Jerusalem he went to Bethsan to meet Tryphon, being forty four
miles: here, being deceived by the fair speeches of Tryphon, he discharged his
Army all but 3000.

From thence he took these 3000 with him, and went with Tryphon to Ptolomais,
which was thirty two miles; into which Town he was no sooner entered, but
Tryphon caused the Citizens to shut the Gates, where all his men were slain.

From Ptolomais, Tryphon brought Jonathan the High Priest to Addus, upon the
Borders of Iudaea, which was sixty eight miles; from whence he sent to Simon,
the Brother of Jonathan, whom he kept Captive in a Castle near adjoining;
promising to release his Brother, if he would send his two Sons to be Hostages,
and let him have a hundred Talents of Silver, that is, 60000 Crowns.

So Simon sent his two Sons, together with the Money, to Tryphon; but Tryphon
took them and the Money, and led them captive with Jonathan their Father from
Add^s to Addor, a Town in Idumaea, which was forty eight miles.

From thence he carried them to Baschaman in the Country of the Gileadites,
which was ninety six miles; where, in the Winter Season, in the year before
Christ, 141, this cruel and perfidious Tyrant put Jonathan and his Sons to
death.

From Baschamah of the Gileadites Simon removed the Bodies of Jonathan and his
Sons to Modin, being sixty miles, where he buried them, 1 Mac. 13. So all his
Travels were 3007 miles.

The description of the places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Michmas and Cades you may read before.

Of Medaba.
THIS City is situated beyond Jordan in the Tribe of Reuben, twenty eight
miles from Jerusalem toward the East. It seems to take the name from a hot
Bath that stood near it; for there were many Baths and wholesome Springs stood
beyond Jordan, as Ios. Lib. Ant. 17. c. 9. witnesses. The same things are also
mentioned, Esa. cap. 26. For Medaba is derived of Maiim and Doba, which
signifies, warm or boiling water.

Of Bethbesan.
THIS Town was situated in the Tribe of Benjamin, near Gilgal, twelve miles
from Jerusalem toward the North-East. The Castle of this Town Jonathan and
Simon fortified and repaired, that it might be a strong place for them to
retire to from the danger of Bacchides, 1 Mac. 9. Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 1.
says, that this Town was called the House of blushing, being derived of Bos^h,
to blush, and Bethagla, a round House.

Of Ptolomais.
IN ancient times this Town was called Acon, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, between Tyrus and Mount Carmel, in the Tribe of Aser, 76
miles from Jerusalem toward the North. But the Aserites could not cast out the
Canaanites out of that City, Ptolomeus King of Egypt conquered this Town and
rebuilt it, calling it after his own Name, Ptolomais, which signifies, to make
War. In times past it was a goodly City, strongly fortified with Towers,
Bulwarks, Ditches, and Walls: it was built in a triangular Proportion, like to
a Shield, two parts whereof was compassed in by the Sea, and upon the third
there stood a fruitful Plain, wherein were Corn-Grounds, Pastures, Medows,
Vine-yards, and Orchards, adorned with diverse kinds of Fruits. It had a very
fair and spacious Haven for the preserving of Ships: it was beautified with
Arcinals, Castles, Temples, and many other Buildings, very stately and curious;
but at this day it is utterly desolate, and scarce to be perceived where it
stood.

Of Eleutherius.
ELeutherius was a River upon the Borders of Phoenicia and Syria, near to the
City Orthosia, at the foot of Mount Libanus, 200 miles from Jerusalem toward
the North; of which you may read in the History of Jonathan, 1 Mac. 11. 12.
There is also another River of that name, between Tyrus and Sarepta, upon the
Borders of Palestina, 108 miles from Jerusalem toward the North.

Of Genezereth.
IT is a Sea in Galilee, so called from the Land of Genesara, which lies about
it; here sometimes Capernaum stood; it signifies a Princely Garden, being
derived of Gen, that is, a Garden, and Sar, a Prince: for the Country round
about it was very pleasant. You may read more of this in the Travels of our
Savior Christ.

Of the Field Chazor.
THIS was a Plain near to the Town Chazor, or Hazor; which is described in the
Travels of Joshua. It stood in the upper Galilee, 84 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North.

Of Zabadei.
ZAbadei were a People inhabiting Arabia Desarta, near to the River
Eleutherius, on the North-east side of Syria and Damascus, two hundred miles
from Jerusalem. Arabia is threefold; the one part thereof is called Deserta,
which extends it self toward the North, to Syria and Damascus; the other is
called Petraea, in which vast Wilderness the Children of Israel traveled; the
third is called Arabia Foelix, which is toward the South, extending it self
from the East to the Gulf of Persia, and upon the West it is shut in with the
Gulf of Arabia. But the Zabadei, they inhabited in Arabia Deserta, and were a
People of a liberal and free condition: from whence it seems they are so
called; for Zabab signifies, to endow, or bestow.

Of Addus.
ADDVS is called by Josephus (lib. antiq. 13. cap. 9.) Iadah: it was a Town
near Arimathea in Mount Ephraim, sixteen miles from Ierusasalem toward the
North-west; and is so called from a Congregation, being derived of Iaad, that
is, He has assembled with Authority; and Edah, a Congregation, or Synagogue.

Of Ador.
THIS was a City of the Idumaeans, forty eight miles from Jerusalem toward the
South-west. Ador signifies, a beautiful City, being derived of Adar, that is,
famous and illustrious; and Or, that is, Light.

Of Baschamah.
BAschamah stands in the Land of Gilead, beyond Jordan, fifty two miles from
Jerusalem toward the North-east; and is so called from sweet Gums, of which
there is great Plenty in that place.

The Travels of the High Priest Simon, the Brother of Judas Macchabeus.
SIMON signifies an Auditor, and one that hears; being derived of Schamah, He
has heard. This man did many worthy Acts during the Life of Judas Macchabeus;
for, being sent into Gal^lee, (in which Country there were many that rebelled)
he suppressed the Insurrection, and pursued the Enemies into the City of
Ptolomais, which was seventy six miles.

From Ptolomais he brought his Army to Arabath, 36 miles.

In this place, after he had assembled all the Religious Israelites
thereabouts, and their Wives and Children, he brought them thence to Jerusalem,
44 miles.

After, he went with his Brother Judas to many places, and behaved himself
manfully in all his Enterprises, 2 Mac. 8. 14. He went also with him to the
Battle fought between Azotus and Gazeron, where Judas was slain, being 20 miles
from Jerusalem Westward, 1 Mac. 9.

Simon and Jonathan brought the dead body of their Brother Judas to Modin, six
miles, and there buried him by his Father Mattathias, 1 Mac. 9.

Afterward, Simon and his Brother Jonathan went from Modin to the Lake Asphar
in the Wilderness of Tecoa, which was twenty miles.

From the Desert of Tecoa they went to Madaba, which was twenty eight miles.

After, they returned thence to the River of Jordan, where, upon the East side
of the River, they pitched their Tents, twelve miles. Here they fought with
Bacchides.

After, they went thence to Bethbesan, three miles.

From thence they went to Jerusalem, twelve miles, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 18. cap.
1.

From Jerusalem they went to Ioppa, twenty miles, and won the Town, Ios. lib.
Ant. 13. c. 6.

From Ioppa they went to Asdod, twelve miles, and in the way they put the Enemy
to flight.

From Asdod they went to Ascalon, twelve miles, 1 Macc. 10.

From Ascalon they returned to Jerusalem, being thirty miles, 1 Mac. 10.

From thence he went to Bethsura, half a mile; this Town he won, and placed a
Garrison in it, 1 Mac. 11.

Also, in the absence of his Brother Jonathan, Simon went with his Army to
Ascalon, which was thirty miles from Jerusalem, 1 Mac. 12.

From thence he went to Ioppa, which was twenty miles. This Town the second
time he took, and placed a Garrison therein, 1 Mac. 12.

From Ioppa he returned again to Jerusalem, which was twenty miles, Ios. Ant.
lib. 13. cap. 8.

From Jerusalem, in the last year of his Brother Ionathan's Government, he went
to the Plain of Sephala, about fourteen miles, where he built the Hold of
Abida, 1 Mac. 12.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, fourteen miles; There, after the
Captivity of his Brother Jonathan, (whom Tryphon by cunning had betrayed, as is
before-said) he was chosen by the People of the Jews into the Principality.

From thence he went to Addus, to meet Tryphon, sixteen miles; where he would
have ransomed his Brother Jonathan, 1 Mac. 13.

From Addus he went to a City of the Idumeans called Ador, or Adaram, forty
eight miles.

From Ador he returned into Judea with his Army, forty miles, that he might
oppose the Invasion of Tryphon, and his Soldiers, lest they should have
destroyed the Country, and got Jerusalem in his absence.

Tryphon having put to death his Brother Jonathan, (which was in the year
before Christ 140.) Simon entered upon the Office of High Priest the same year,
and continued in the Government eight years. In the first year of his
Government he went from Jerusalem to Modin, fourteen miles. Here he buried the
Body of his Brother Jonathan, in his Father's Sepulcher, very honorably, and
richly beautified it.

From Modin he returned to Jerusalem, fourteen miles, where he executed his
Priestly Function diligently, and repaired the Holds and decayed Towns of
Judea, compassing them about with Stone Walls, and fortifying them with Towers
and Bulwarks.

From thence he went to Gaza, forty four miles from Jerusalem South-westward.
This Town he took.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, which was four and forty miles. There he
repaired the Tower of Acropolis, wherein he dwelt.

From Jerusalem he went to Ioppa, and won the Town, which was twenty miles.

From Ioppa he returned to Jerusalem, which was twenty miles, where, for a time
he lived very honorably, and kept a Princely Court, 1 Mac. 14.

Lastly, he went with his two Sons, Judas and Mattathias, and his Wife, to
visit his Father-in-law Ptolomeus the Son of Abodus, to the Castle of Doch,
which was near to Jericho, some ten miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-east. Here he was slain by his Father-in-law at a Banquet, in the year
before Christ 132, in the eleventh Month, which answers to our February, 1
Mac. 16. So all his Travels were 799 miles.

The Description of the Places mentioned in his Travels.
Of Arabath.
ARabath, or Araba, was a City near to the Lake or River Merom, not far from
Dothan, forty four miles from Jerusalem toward the North. It seems to take the
name from Locusts, whereof there are many kinds, 1 Mac. 5. for there are
Locusts that live upon Herbs and Flowers: others that fly in great swarms in
the Air; and some also that live in the Waters, not much unlike Crabs, or
Cray-fishes, their Tails only excepted. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 12. reckons up
another kind of Locusts, whereon John Baptist did feed, and it was lawful for
the Jews to eat of them: he describes them to have four Feet, and Wings, so
that they can either fly, or leap upon the Earth. They can be resembled to
nothing more fitly than to Grasshoppers. These the Hebrews call Robae, Levit.
11. Mat. 3. because of the abundance of them; being derived of the Verb Rabah,
He has multiplied, or increased; because these kinds of Locusts come in mighty
great swarms and multitudes into the East part of the World. Of these kinds of
Locusts Arabath took the Name, but they are not known to us; nevertheless such
there are; and, as it appears in Leuit. 11. were permitted to be eaten among
the Jews. From whence may be concluded, that John Baptist lived upon these kind
of Locusts, and not upon Crabs, or Cray-fish, or any such kind of Locusts, Mat.
3.

Of Sephela.
SEphela is a Plain compassed about with Mountains, near the River Sorek. It
lies fourteen miles from Jerusalem Westward. Here Simon built the Castle
Adida, and fortified it very strongly. Afterward there was a City built near to
this Tower, called Eleutheropolis. It was a free City in the Tribe of Judah,
half way between Jerusalem and Ascalon; of which St. Ierom speaks, lib. de
Locis Hebr.

Of Doch.
THIS was a strong Tower, the Ruins whereof may be seen to this day. It was
situated near Jericho, in the Field of Hiericuntis, ten miles from Jerusalem
North-eastward; where Ptolomeus the Son of Abodus persidiously put to death his
Son-in-law Simon, High Priest of the Jews. From this Tower you might have seen
all the Country of the Gileadites, the two Tribes of Gad and Reuben, and the
half Tribe of Manasses, with the Mountains of the Moabites, Nebo, Pisgah, and
Abarim. Vid. 1 Mac. cap. ult.

The Travels of John Hyrcanus.
JOHN Hyrcanus was made Captain over all the Men of War, by his Father Simon,
and went from Jerusalem to Gaza, forty four miles, where he dwelt, 1 Mac. 13.

From thence he returned to Jerusalem, forty four miles, in the fifth year of
his Father's Government, to let him understand how Cendebius had invaded the
holy Land, 1 Mac. 16.

From Jerusalem, he and his Brother Judas went with their Army to Modin,
fourteen miles, where they stayed all night.

The next morning, before day, they gave Battle to Cendebius, not far from
Modin, overcame him, and put him to flight. So he pursued the chase till he
came to the Fortress of Cedron, which stood in the Field of Azotus, even eight
miles.

From the Field of Azotus, he and his Brother Judas returned to Jerusalem,
being twenty two miles, 1 Mac. 16.

From Jerusalem he returned to Gaza, 44 miles. Now when Sorius Ptolomeus, the
Son of Abodus, (who a little before had treacherously slain his Son-in-law
Simon at a Banquet) heard of John's coming into the Town, he sent forth certain
Traitors and Homicides to put him to death also: but Hyrcanus having certain
intelligence of the matter, prevented the mischief, and put these Traitors to
the Sword, 1 Mac. 16. So all his Travels were 176 miles.

Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in these Travels, you may read
before.

Of the Kings of Syria that succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, and made War upon
the Macchabees. And first, of the Travels of Antiochus Eupator.
THIS Antiochus the younger succeeded his Father Antiochus Epiphanes, in the
149 year of the Grecians Government in Syria, which was the 161 Year before
Christ, and he continued King of Asia and Syria three Years. Lysias the King's
Substitute for Syria, called this man by the name of Eupator, that is, a good
Father; because Kings ought to be Fathers of their Countries.

This Antiochus Eupator in the second year of his Reign, came with a great Army
from Antiochia to the Town of Modin, which was 380 miles.

From Modin he went to the Hold at Bethsura: this he sharply besieged; being 12
miles.

From Bethsura he went to Bethsachara (almost a mile) to meet with Judas
Macchabeus, who put him to flight, and killed 600 of his Men, 1 Mac. 6.

From Bethsachara he returned to the Hold of Bethsura, and won it, being almost
a mile.

From Bethsura he came to Jerusalem, which was half a mile.

From Jerusalem he went with his Army to Ptolomais, being seventy six miles.

From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, two hundred and four miles and a half.

Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before.

The Travels of Demetrius Soter, the Brother of Antiochus Epiphanes.
IN An. Mundi 3809. before Christ 159. Demetrius Soter the Son of Seleucus
Philopater, who was sent to Rome, brought a Navy from thence through the
Mediterranean Sea, and came to Tripolis in Syria, which Journey was two
thousand, six hundred, and eighty miles, and usurped upon the Government of
Syria against young Antiochus, the Son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7.

From Tripolis he went to Antiochia, where the King kept his Court, eighty
eight miles. Here he caused young Antiochus and Lysias to be slain, and after,
reigned in Syria ten years. At length he was slain in a great Battle, by
Alexander the Son of Epiphanes, 1 Mac. 7. So all his Travels were 1760 miles.

Of Tripolis.
THIS was situated in Phoenicia, a Province of Syria, on the Shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, 170 miles from Jerusalem toward the North; and was so
called because there dwelt in it three sorts of People, viz. Tyrians,
Sydonians, and Arabians. It is a very famous City even to this day; the Ocean
Sea coming into every street, and principal place of it, and full as Populous
as Tyrus. For there inhabit Grecians, Latins, Armeni^ns, Maronites,
Nestorians, and People of many other Nations of diverse Conditions and Customs
in manner of living. It abounds also with great abundance of costly Tapestry,
which is made so curiously, and with such cost, that it is very delightful to
such as look upon it. It is credibly reported, That there are found within the
City of Tripolis 4000 men that do little else but Weave and make Tapestry, and
such like costly hangings. The Country round about where it stands is very
pleasant, and because of the great abundance of Vines, Olives, Figs, and other
Fruits and Flowers (which yields a comfortable smell, and is profitable for
the maintenance of life) it is called Paradise. There is a Field before the
City, some two miles in length, and one in breadth, in which there are to be
seen very curious Gardens, and artificially contrived.

About six miles from the City stands Mount Libanus, at the foot whereof
rises a goodly Fountain, which with great violence runs thence, but
suddenly falls into the Valleys, it joins with other Waters, and becomes a
fair and pleasant River, watering all the Gardens of the Plain between Tripolis
and Libanus, but especially the Mountains of the Leopards, which is not far
off. In the Canticles, cap. 4. there is mention of this Hill; Come with me my
Spouse, from the Denns of the Lions, and the Mountains of the Leopards. The
Water of this Spring is very clear, pleasant, cold and healthful; upon the
Banks of it there stands many Churches and Religious Houses; it is called the
Fountain of the Gardens, and is divided into three Rivers or principal,
Streams, besides many other small Brooks, which run thence and fall into the
Sea; so that the Sentence, Est. 9. is verified of this, A small Fountain shall
increase to a great River, and shall be poured out against many Waters.

The Travels of King Alexander, Son of Epiphanes, and Brother to Antiochus
Eupater
OF this Alexander, Justin writes, lib. 35. where he shows, that he was not
Son to Antiochus Epiphanes, as was supposed, but had to name Prompalus, being a
man of the meaner sort of People: but the Antiochians, for the great Tyranny of
Demetrius, falling into Rebellion, gave unto him the Name of Alexander, and
withal caused it to be published abroad, that he was the Son of Epiphanes,
which by reason of his youth was easily believed. And at this time, Demetrius,
because of his cruelty, being much hated of all sorts of People; it came to
pass that most, and those of the greatest also, combined with this young man,
supposing him indeed to be of noble Descent, and the Son of a King, Wherefore
Alexander, or Prompatus, being thus encouraged, took upon him to be the Brother
of Antiochus Eupator, and called himself the Lawful Heir and Successor to the
Crown of Syria, going from thence to Ptolomais, where he kept a Royal Court;
and in the year of the World 3818, before Christ 150, by the help of the
Antiochians, and others the Inhabitants of Syria, he took upon him the
Government of that Country, and reigned five years. This man suffered many
varieties and changes of Fortune: at first was put to flight by Demetrius;
after he put Demetrius to flight, and at length put him to death and usurped
upon his Government. In the third year of his Reign he married Cleapatra the
Daughter of Ptolomeus Philometor King of Egypt, by whom he had his Son
Antiochus. To this Marriage Jonathan was invited.

In the last year of his Government, he went from Ptolomais to Antiochia, which
was 200 miles, where he opposed himself against Demetrius Nicanor, the Son of
Demetrius Soter, 1 Mac. cap. 10.

From Antiochia he went to Cilicia, which was 120 miles, to suppress the
Rebellion of his Subjects: but when he heard that Ptolomeus Philometor his
Father-in-Law had taken up Arms against him, conquered Syria, and given his
Wife to Demetrius Nicanor, which had been married unto him two years before, he
gathered all his forces he could, and with all expedition made good the War
against Ptolomeus: but he was overcome, and fled into that part of Arabia which
bordereth upon the Mountain Emanus for refuge, where Zabdiel the Governor of
that Country, fearing left he should fall into the displeasure of Ptolomeus,
caused his Servants to cut off his head, and sent it to him into Syria; Within
three days after which sight, he died, being mortally wounded in the former
Battle, Ios. li. Ant. 13. c. 17. So all his Travels were 320 miles.

Of Amanus.
AManus was a Mountain between Syria and Cilicia, which extends it self to
the River Euphrates. Between this Amanus and Euphrates, Arabia Deserta is
scituat^d, 400 miles from Jerusalem Northward, and signifies the Mountain of
Truth; from Aman, True and Faithful.

The Travels of Demetrius Nicanor, the Son of Demetrius Soter.
IN the 165 year of the Government of the Grecians in Syria, which was 131
years before Christ, Demetrius, surnamed Nicanor, which signifies Victory,
sailed out of Creet into Cilicia, which was 600 miles, Ios. Ant. 13. c. 6. 1
Mac. 10.

Out of Cilicia he came into Syria the lower, 160 miles, where, joining with
Apolonius, he took upon him the Crown and Kingdom of Syria. Afterward Apolonius
went into Iudaea with a great Army, and besieged Iamniah. Ptolomeus Philometor
also assisted the proceeding of Demetrius, seeing Alexander his Son-in-law
beginning to decline; and the better to strengthen their Alliance, matched him
to Cleopatra his Daughter, which before had been Wife to Alexander; by which
policy, he added to the Kingdom of Egypt all Asia, over which he ruled two
years, 1 Mac. 11.

After, Demetrius Nicanor came out of Syria the lower, with Ptolomeus
Philometor, to Antiochia, which was eighty miles, 1 Mac. 11.

From Antiochia they went with their Army to a Plain near the Mountain Amanus,
120 miles; where in a sharp War they overcame Alexander and put him out of his
Kingdom, Ios Ant. li. 3. c. 7.

Now after the death of Ptolomeus Philimetor, Demetrius Nicanor returned to
Antiochia, 120 miles, where he governed the Kingdom of Syria two years.

From Antiochia he went to Ptolomais, which was 200 miles; to which place
Jonathan the High Priest came to meet him, where he gave to him many Presents
and great Gifts to win his Favor, 1 Mac. 11.

From Ptolomais he returned to Antiochia, 200 miles. There his Soldiers and
the City of Antiochia rebelled against him. For which cause, Jonathan the
High Priest sent him 3000 men, which delivered the King out of danger, put to
the Sword 100000 of the Seditious, and burnt the City of Antiochia 1 Mac. 11.
But after, Demetrius showed himself unthankful, he was driven out of his
Kingdom by Tryphon and young Antiochus the Son of King Alexander, who was also
called Theos, which signifies God.

In the 172 year of the Reign of the Grecians in Syria, which was 138 years
before Christ, Nicanor having slain Antiochus the Son of Alexander, he would
have reigned alone in Syria, wherefore Demetrius who was the lawful King of
Syria, being three years before driven thence, went 1200 miles, into Media to
crave aid against Tryphon; but Arsaces King of the Medes, Parthians and
Persians, sent the chief Captain of his Host against Demetrius, who burned his
Tents, took him Prisoner, and carried him back to his Master, to Hecatompilon
the chief City of his Kingdom, distant from Syria 1220 miles toward the East,
Justin. lib. 36. 38.

From Hecatom^ylon, Arsaces sent him to Hyrcania, the metropolitan City of that
Country, which was 176 miles; where, although Arsaces kept him as a Prisoner,
yet he allowed him royal Attendance, and after married him to his Daughter,
Just. lib. 38.

After the Death of Arsaces, with singular Industry and Policy, he got out of
Captivity, after he had been twelve years Prisoner in Hyrcania, and came into
Syria, which was fourteen miles, where he recovered his Kingdom, and reigned
four years. So all his Travels were 4156 miles.

Of the Places to which he traveled.
Of Creta, now called Candia.
THIS is an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, diftant from Jerusalem 600 miles
westward, very fruitful and pleasant, in which there grows great plenty of
Cypress Trees, and Grapes of diverse kinds, but principally such whereof Malmsey
and Sack are made. Here Titus, Paul's Disciple, was Bishop; wherefore you shall
read more of it after.

Of Seleucia.
SEleucia is a famous City of Syria, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, 280 miles from Jerusalem Northward, near to which the River
Orantes runs, and the Mountain Casius stands, which is four miles high,
Plin. l. 5. c. 22. You may read more of this in the Travels of St. Paul.

Of Syria.
SYria was sometimes called of the Hebrews, Aram, of Aram the Son of Sem, of
whom all Armenia took the Name. Aram signifies, A man of great Spirit and
Dignity, being derived of Rom, that is, lifted up; for he was a man of an
excellent Spirit, Genesis cap. 10. Syria signifies a great Tract of Land, and is
divided into two parts, the upper and the lower. In the upper Syria are these
Cities, Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodicea, and Apamea: in the lower Syria are
Sydon, Tyrus, Berytus, Tripolis, and Orth^sia. This Country is situated in a
very temperare Zone; from whence it happens that it is neither oppressed with
too much Cold nor Heat. There are that divide Syria into four parts, that is,
into Syria, Assyria, Leucosyria, and Coelosyriae. Also Pliny, lib. 5. cap. 12.
attributes Mesopotamia and Babylonia to Syri^. But it is evident, that these
were distinct Countries from them, in the which there reigned Emperors and
Kings which had large and spacious Dominions. For Syria is situated between
the Mediterranean Sea and Euphrates; but Mesopotamia (which is so called
because it is situated in the middle of Waters) is separated from Syria and
Assyria, with the Rivers Euphrates and Tygris; and Arabia is separated from
Syria and Babylon with many vast Wildernesses. Therefore these Countries cannot
properly pass under the denomination of Syria.

Of Parthia.
PArthia is a spacious Country, full of Mountains and Deserts, lying upon the
Borders of Media, Westward; the Metropolis whereof his Hecatompylon, taking the
name of an hundred Gates wherewith it is fortified. It lies (as Stephanus
says) 1512 miles from Jerusalem Eastward. Here Arsaces, that mighty King of
the Parthians, kept his Court, who had under his Government Media, Parthia,
Persia, Hircania, and the greatest part of all the Countries toward the East.
It is called Parthia, because of the fruitfulness of the Soil, being derived of
Parah, to fructify.

Of Hyrcania.
HYrcania is a fruitful and pleasant Country, bordering upon Media, and the
Caspian Sea, for the most part plain and champian, beautified with many fair
Cities, the chief of which are, Hyrcania, (the Metropolis of the whole Kingdom)
Talebrota, Samariana, Carta, and Tape. It was so fat and fruitful, that the
Inhabitants use not to till and dress the ground, as they do in other places,
but the Seed that falls from the husk upon the Earth, springs up, and
brings forth great Plenty and increase, without farther labor. The Dews also
falling upon the Trees, there droppeth from them Oil and Honey in great Plenty.
It takes the name (as it is thought) from a Wood called Hyrcania, In like
manner, the Caspian Sea, which bordereth upon it, of this Country, is called
Hyrcanum. Many cruel Beasts are found therein, as the Panther, the Tiger, and
the Leopard. The Panther is of a whitish color, inclining something to yellow,
spotted all over with round shining spots; in like manner are their Eyes. She
is a friend almost to all kinds of Creatures, except the Asp and Dragon, and
(as Oppianus says) never taken but when she is drunk, or in her sleep. She is
the Female to the Leopard. The Leopard is of the same color, and of the nature
of a Wolf, being full, he hurts nothing; but if empty, he preyeth upon every
thing; yea, even upon men: his Breath is very sweet, with which many other
Creatures being delighted, he often preys upon them; but being full, he
sleeps sometimes three days together. The Tiger also is a very swift and
cruel Creature, from whence he is so called; his skin is yellow, and full of
black Spots, round and shining. If the chance to lose her young, she never
leaves seeking till she finds them out.

The Travels of Tryphon, that put Antiochus to death.
IN An. Mundi 3826, before Christ 142. Tryphon, sometime chief Captain to
Alexander King of Syria, who was slain in Arabia, went to Emal^uel, Prince of
Arabia Deserta, with whom Antiochus the Son of Alexander was brought up; where
he so wrought with him, that he got the Boy from him, and brought him thence
into Syria, 160 miles; and within a while after, besieged Antiochia, took the
Town, drove thence Demetrius Nicanor, and crowned young Antiochus King of
Assyria. This Journey to and again was 320 miles, 1 Mac. 11.

In the second year of the Reign of young Antiochus, Tryphon went from
Antiochia to Bethsan, where he perfidiously betrayed Jonathan the Brother of
Judas Macchabeus, 1 Mac. 12. being 36 miles.

From Bethsan he went to Ptolomais, 32 miles.

From Ptolomais he went to Addus, a Town upon the Borders of Iudaea, sixty
eight miles, 1 Mac. 13.

To Addus, Simon sent his Brother's Children, and his Ransom, which was 60
Talents of Silver: but after he had received the Money, he broke his Word, and
went thence with Jonathan and his Sons to Ador, which was forty eight miles.

From Ador he went to Baschaman in the Land of Gilead, ninety six miles. Here
he put to death Jonathan and his Sons.

From the Country of the Gileadites he returned to Antiochia, which was 240
miles. Here he put to death young Antiochus, being but a Boy of seven year of
age, and usurped upon the Government in his place. He began to reign in the 172
year of the Grecians Government in Syria, and reigned three years, 1 Mac. 14.
Ios. lib. ant. 13.

About the end of the three years, which was in the 174 year of the Grecians
Government in Syria, Antiochus Sedetes (Brother of Demetrius Nicanor) made War
upon Tryphon, and compelled him to fly from Antiochia to Dora, 240 miles from
Antiochia toward the South, 1 Mac. 85.

But Antiochus Sedetes followed him thither, and so straightly besieged Dora,
that he was constrained to steal thence in a Ship, and ^ail to Ortho^ia, which
was 160 miles.

Lastly, In the way, as he was going thence to Apamea, which was an hundred and
twenty miles he was taken and put to death. So all his Travels were 1360 miles.

Of the Places mentioned in his Travels, which have been formerly recited.
Of Dora.
DORA was a Haven-Town situated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, forty
eight miles from Jerusalem Northward, in the midway between Carmel and Caes^rea
Strato. In Joseph. cap. 17. it is called Dor, that is, ^ durans.

Of Orthosia.
THIS was a City of Assyria, situated upon the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea,
near to the place where the Eleutherius falls into it, 200 miles from
Jerusalem Northward; being so called of Diana, whom the Grecians called
Orthosia, that is, Exalted or lifted up. Hither Tryphon sailed when he fled
from Antiochus Sedetes, 1 Mac. 15. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 20.

Concerning the Travels of Apolonius, Nicanor, Bacchides, and Cendebius;
because they are sufficiently described in the Travels of the Macchabees, I
thought it unfit to speak further of them.

The Travels of Heliodorus.
HEliodorus signifies the House of the Sun. He was Secretary and chief
Governor of Antiochi^ in Syria, for that mighty King Saleuchus Philopator, who
was Brother to that cruel Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, and was sent by his Lord
and Master Seleuchus from Antiochia to Jerusalem, which was eighty miles, to
spoil the Temple of the Lord: but the Lord sent an Angel richly beautified with
Armor of Gold, fitting upon a Horse; who went to Heliodorus, and with his
Horse trod him under his feet; and there appeared two other Angels full of
Majesty and Power, that struck Heliodorus and beat him with Whips, so that he
lay upon the Floor of the Temple as a Man half Dead, and could not go forth
until he was carried out, 2 Mac. 3.

From Jerusalem he went with that good man Onias chief Priest of the Jews (at
whose earnest Prayers and Supplications he was made whole) to Antiochia, 280
miles; where he told Seleuchus Philopator of the wonderful Works of the Lord.
So all his Travels were 580 miles.

The Travels of the High Priest of the Jews, that ruled before the Macchabees,
as they are severally mentioned in the Books of Maccabees. and first, of the
Travels of Onias the High Priest.
ONIAS signifies the Riches of God; from On, Opulency, and Iah, God: for
although he was afflicted with Poverty in this World, yet he was rich in God.
He succeeded his Father Simon the Just, An. Mun. 3757. before Christ 211.
Antiochus the Great being King of Syria. He was High Priest thirty nine years
until the death Seleuchus Philopater; at the end of which time, one Simon the
chief of those that kept the Temple, being ambitious of Rule, fell to words
with Onias, and from words to blows; so that there were many outrages committed
by the Friends of Simon. Wherefore Onias, to give place to the Fury of his
Adversaries, went from Jerusalem to Antiochia, which was to hundred and eighty
miles. But Seleucus Philopator being dead, and Antiochus Epiphanes in the
Government, who was a covetous and cruel Prince; good Onias, partly for fear of
him, and partly of his Brother Jason (who had but a little before purchased the
Office of High Priest for three hundred and sixty Talents of Silver, and
promised to pay a yearly Tribute of eighty Talents) durst not return home to
Jerusalem, but went to a Sanctuary that stood in the Wood of Daphne, which was
about one mile from Antiochia, in hope of safety: to which place, one
Andronichus, chief Captain to Antiochus, came to him, and with fair Speeches
and flattering Words, allured him out of the Sanctuary, and traitorously put
him to death. So all his Travels were two hundred eighty one miles.

The Travels of the High Priest Jason.
JAson and Jesus have both one signification: he entered upon the Office of
High Priest in the first year of Antiochus Epiphanes, which was one hundred
seventy three years before Christ. He went from Jerusalem to Antiochia, which
was two hundred eighty miles, where, after the death of Onias, he paid to
Antiochus for the Office of High Priest, almost three Tuns of Gold, with
promise to pay a yearly Tribute of 48000 Crowns.

From Antiochia he returned to Jerusalem, two hundred eighty miles; where he
began to build the Tower of Acropolis in Mount Acra: and that he might please
that wicked King, and keep his favor, he built certain Theaters in Jerusalem,
and caused Interludes and Plays to be acted in them, at such times and upon
such days as the Poeple were wont to meet in the Temple to serve God. Also King
Antiochus Epiphanes in the fourth year of his Priesthood coming to Jerusalem,
he gave him royal entertainment.

The same year Jason was put out of his Office of High Priest by the policy and
cunning of his Brother Menelaus, and was constrained to fly into the Land of
the Ammonites beyond Jordan, being forty miles.

Two years after, when Antiochus Epiphanes invaded Egypt, there was a vain
rumor that he was slain; wherefore Jason, with a thousand Soldiers, returned
to Jerusalem, being forty miles, and broke suddenly into the City, so that
Menelaus was constrained for safety of his life, to fly to the Garrison of the
Syrians that were in Jerusalem.

But Antiochus hearing what had happened, came out of Egypt with ^ great Army
of Jerusalem, wherefore he fled thence back again to the Ammonites, forty
miles; but they fearing that Antiochus would come thither with his Army, he was
accused before Areta, King of Arabia, and constrained to fly from one City to
another for safety.

Wherefore, when he perceived that he could not live there secure, he went
thence into Egypt, 280 miles.

From thence he went to the Lacedaemonians, six hundred miles, where he died in
Exile, being cast out unlamented or buried. So all his Travels were 1560 miles.

Of Lacedemonia, the Metropolitan City of Peloponnesus.
LAcedemonia, or Sparta, was famous City of Peloponnesus, distant from
Jerusalem six hundred miles toward the West; which although it had no Walls,
yet was it one of the most fair and most populous Cities in all Grecia; and was
called Sparta of Spartus, who was King thereof, and rebuilt it, adorning it
with fair and goodly Buildings. At first it was built by one Lacedemon, who was
sometime King thereof, and of him called Lacedemonia: and after, Menelaus, that
mighty King of the Grecians (who had to Wife Helena the fairest Woman of all
Grecia) kept his Court there. Here also Lycurgus, that famous Philosopher,
reigned as King, and prescribed to the Citizens and Inhabitants excellent Laws,
by the observance whereof they became famous in after-Ages, and performed many
noble Wars and Exploits against their Enemies, Jonathan and Simon held a
friendly league with the Lacedaemonians.

The Travels of the High Priest Menelaus.
THIS Menelaus, called alos Onias, was (as Josephus says) the third Son of
Simon the Just, and Brother of Jason, although, 2 Mac. 3, 4, he is said to be
the Brother of one Simon of the Tribe of Benjamin, who was chief of those that
kept the Temple, of whom you may read before. This man, in the fourth year of
Antiochus Epiphanes, was sent by Jason his Brother to Antiochia, being two
hundred and eighty miles, upon certain business, but principally, to carry the
King Money. Where he made a secret Contract with hm, to pay him thirty Talents
That is, 180000 Crowns.
beside all that his Brother Jason had paid him, if he would insti^ute him to
be High Priest. The King in hope of profit, gave (...) to his motion, and under
pretense of Injury and Wrong offered by Jason, constrained him to leave his
Office, and fly from Jerusalem into the Land of the Ammonites for his Safety,
and so instituted Menelaus to be chief Priest of the Jews; who entered upon his
Government in the year before Christ one hundred sixty nine.

Wherefore Menelaus returned from Antiochia to Jerusalem, two hundred and
eighty miles; where he began to govern, not as chief Priest, but as a cruel and
wicked Tyrant, 2 Mac. 4.

But, when in the beginning of his Government he could not pay that great sum
of money which he had promised, the King sent for him to Antiochia, being two
hundred and eighty miles, where for that time he was removed from his Office,
and his Brother Lysimacus ordained chief Priest in his room.

Wherefore Menelaus being sore troubled, vexed, and grieved in mind, for that
which had happened in the first year of his Priesthood, returned back from
Antiochia to Jerusalem, being two hundred and eighty miles.

But a little after, when Antiochus Epiphanes brought an Army into Cilicia, to
suppress the Rebellion of the Tha^sians and Mallotans, Menelaus taking
advantage of the Kings absence, went to Andronichus (who was chief Agent for
the King in Syria) to Antiochia, two hundred and eighty miles, and there gave
him certain golden Vessels and Jewels that he had stolen out of the Temple, ot
hire him to be his friend, and help him to his Office of High Priesthood again.
But Onias the elder hearing of this Sacrilege, greatly reprehended Menelaus
for shameful Fact; but he taking it in ill part, combined with Andronichus, who
by fair speeches alluring him out of the Sanctuary in the wood Daphne, put him
to death, after he had been five years in exile. But King Antiochus returning
from Antiochia, accused Andronichus of Treason, and by the means of a certain
Courtier, received Menelaus into favor.

From Antiochia, Menelaus returned to Jerusalem, two hundred and eighty miles;
where, by the help of his brother Lysimachus, he stole a great mass of money out
of the Temple. Which Sacrilege being known to the People, they fell to uproar,
and killed Lysimachus close by the Treasury, They accused Menelaus also before
Antiochus; 2 Mac. cap. 4.

Antiochus, in the second year of his Priesthood, went to Tyrus, which is one
hundred miles, where he so corrupted certain Courtiers with money, that he
procured the favor of Antiochus, and caused his Accusers (good and just men)
to be banished thence, as slanderers, and such as went about to defame Menelaus.

From Tyrus be returned back again to Jerusalem, one hundred miles, where he
fell into his old cruelty, and in the third year of his Government, received
Antiochus Epiphanes with his Army into the City of Jerusalem, who cruelly
murdered the Citizens, and spoiled the Temple, 2 Mac. 5.

After the death of Antiochus, who as it is said perished of a grievous
disease, and was buried at Babylon; his Son Antiochus Eupator came with a great
Army into Iudaea in hostile manner. Wherefore Menelaus, in the last year of his
Priesthood, went out to meet him. But Lysi^s accused him unto the king, as one
that was the only Author of all the Evils that had happened to the Jews.
Wherefore Antiochus willed Lysias to take him Prisoner; who brought him to
Berea a Town in Syria, distant from Jerusalem 360 miles Northward; where, upon
the top of a Tower, fifty Cubits high, he was tied to a Wheel, and had all his
Joints broken, and through the extremity of the pain, died, 2 Mac. 3. So all
his Travels were two thousand two hundred forty miles.

The Travels of Alcimus, High Priest of the Posterity of Aaron.
THIS Alcimus, after the death of Menelaus, which was the year before Christ
one hundred fifty, went with certain impious and wicked men to Demetrius Soter,
who lived in Antiochia in Syria, being two hundred eighty miles, and there
accused Judas Macchabeus and all the Godly Jews; using such flattery toward the
King, that he obtained the Principality and Office of High Priest, which he
held three years, 1 Mac. 7.

From Antiochia, he and Bacchides returned back again of Jerusalem, where he
was instituted in the Office of High Priesthood, which is two hundred eighty
miles.

But when he saw that he was not able to withstand the power and singular
virtue of Judas Macchabeus, he returued back to Antiochia, two hundred eighty
miles; where after he had accused the good men among the Jews, he obtained the
Aid of Demetrius, who sent Nicanor with a great Army into Iudaea against Judas,
to establish Aleimus in the Priesthood.

So Alcimus and Nicanor returned into Iudaea, two hundred eighty miles.

But Alcimus seeing familiar Conference to pass between Nicanor and Judas
Mac^habeus, he went back again to Antiochia, two hundred eighty miles, where he
told Demetrius of the perfidious dealing of Nicanor, Wherefore Demetrius, being
very angry at what had happened, wrote a sharp Letter to Nicanor, giving him to
understand, That it was much against his mind that he should make a League with
Judas: and further willed him (the said League notwithstanding) to bring him
bound to Antiochia, Upon the receipt of which Letter, he made War upon Judas;
in which expedition Nicanor was taken, and had his head cut off. All this
happened the first year of the Priesthood of Alcimus.

But when Demetrius heard of this overthrow, he sent Bacchides and Alcimus with
a great Army, who went to Antiochia, and came to Mastoth in the Country of
Arbela, one hundred ninty two miles, where they made Incursions upon the Tribe
of Naphtaly, and slew a great multitude of the Israelites, 1 Mac. 9.

From Masloth they went with their Army to Gilgal, seventy six miles, This
happened in the second year of the Priesthood of Alcimus.

From Gilgal they came to Jerusalem, which was about twelve miles, 1 Mac. cap.
9.

From thence they brought their Army to Berea, being twelve miles: here they
were overcome, and put to flight by Judas Macchabeus, 1 Mac. cap. 9.

From Berea tho fled amongst the Mountains which are between Azotus and
Gazeron, six miles. Here Judas Macchabeus was slain.

Wherefore Alcimus returned thence back again to Jerusalem twenty miles, and
caused the Walls of the inner house of the Temple, and the Monuments of the
Priests, to be taken down and destroyed: but before his command was fully
executed, the Lord struck him with a dead Palsy, of which he lay a time dumb,
but within a while after he died of that disease, in the second year of his
Priesthood, An. Mundi, three thousand eight hundred and eleven, and before
Christ, one hundred and fifty seven. Alcimus being dead, Bacchides returned
back to Demetrius in Syria, 1 Mac. 9. For seven years after there was no
High Priest in Jerusalem, till Jonathan the Brother of Judas Macchabeus took
upon him that Office, 1 Mac. 10. So all his Travels were 1717 miles.

Of the places to which he traveled.
Of Arbela.
THIS was a City in the upper Galilee, belonging to the Tribe of Naphtaly,
ninety six miles from Jerusalem Northward* of which Town all the Country is
called Arbela, being derived of Arab, to lie hid.

Of Masloth.
THIS also is a Town of Naphtaly, ninety two miles from Jerusalem Northward;
and is derived to Maschal, which signifies, he has governed.

Of Berea.
TO this City Iotham sometime fled from the Fury of his Brother Abimelech,
Judge of Israel, Judge. 9. It is situated twelve miles from Jerusalem Westward,
and signifies, a clear Well.

Thus by God's Providence have I described the Travels and Journeys of the Holy
Patriarchs, Kings, and Prophets, etc. as they are severally mentioned in the
Old Testament; that so, gentle Reader, thou might understand what difficult
and tedious Journeys, and in them what great Labor and Vexation they were
constrained to bear in this World, till God of his Mercy took them out of this
Vale of Misery, and placed them in everlasting Happiness, where now, without
doubt, they remain in peace.

The Quantities of the Moneys both Silver and Gold, as they are severally
mentioned in the Scriptures, reduced to our Weights and English Valuations.
EVER since the time that Moneys have been allowed as current in Exchange
betwixt man and man (which for that purpose, as Aristotle says, was first
ordained) it has passed according to the valuation of a certain Weight, which
for the most part is Universal, according to the worth and estimation thereof
in the several Countries where it is to be sold and exchanged; or else by Coin,
which is current according to the valuation that is imposed upon it by the
consent of a State, or command of a Prince. In both which, there have been used
sundry distinctions of greater and less valuations of Weights and Coin,
according to the necessity and estimation thereof in several Kingdoms and
Governments. As amongst the Jews they used Weights and no Coin, and these
distinguished in several sorts, and, as is thought, separated with sundry
Marks, that they might be known each from other. The Weights that they used
were commonly three, viz. the Centiner or Talent, the Mina, and the Sicle;
according to the Opinion of Josephus, Budaeus, Hostius, and many others.

Of a Sicle.
A Sicle was a kind of Weight, current among the Jews, containing precisely
half an ounce of silver or Gold; which, that it might be distinguished, had a
particular Effigies or Superscription; viz. upon one side was to be seen the
measure wherein they kept Manna in the Sanctuary, with this Superscription, The
Sicle of Israel; and on the other the Rod of Aaron flourishing, with this
Inscription, Holy Jerusalem, which is ordinarily worth in English money 2 s. 6
d. and Gold 15s. and more or less according to the pureness or baseness of
either.

A Sicle was divided into these parts.
1. Into a Dram, i. e. 7 d. ob. whereof four make a Sicle, Genesis 13. 15. Exodus
21. 32, etc.

2. Half Sicles, mentioned Exodus 30. 13. 15. ca. 38. 26. which was the yearly
Tax imposed upon every man toward the building of the Tabernacle, i. 15 d.
English.

3. Quadrans Sicli, or the fourth part of a Sicle, which was also in use among
the Jews, 1 Samuel 8. 9. which amounts to a Roman penny, and in our money to 7
d. ob. and by the Grecians were called Dram.

4. Gheras, Exodus 30. 13. which was the twentieth part of a Sicle, and was
worth 1 d. ob.

Of Sicles there were three sorts.
1. A common Sicle, which weighed a quarter of an ounce, and was worth 15 d.

2. The Kings Sicle, which weighed three Drams, that is in our money 22 d.
ob.

3. The Sicle of the Temple, which weighed directly half an ounce, and was
worth 2 s. 6d.

Of a Mina.
A Mina was a pound weight among the Jews, and were of two sorts, one of Gold,
which weighed 100 Drams, another of Silver, weighing 240 Drams. These
were called the ancient Weights; but there was later, which is said to contain
100 Denaria's or Attick Drams, which seem to be so called because of the
Traffic the Jews had with the Grecians, among whom it was worth 100 Attick
Drams, i. 3. l. 2 s. 6. d. English.

Of Mina's there were three sorts, as appears in Ezech. 45.
1. The common Mina or Pound (weighing twenty five half Ounces or Sicles of the
Temple) amounted to sixty Drams, i. 37 s. 6 d.

2. The King's Mina or Pound (weighing twenty half Ounces or Sicles of the
Temple (amounted to eighty Drams, i. 50 s.

3. The Mina, or Pound of the Temple or Sanctuary, (which weighed 25 half
Ounces or Sicles) makes 100 Drams, i. 3 l. 2 s. 5 d.

Of a Talent.
THE He^rew Talent ordinarily weighs 125 Pounds, which being divided,
amounts to 3000 Sicles or half Ounces, as it plainly appears, Exodus 38. 25,
26. where it is said that 600000 men offered so many half Sicles, which make
300000 Sicles, the 100th part of which make a Talent, from whence it appears,
that 3000 Sicles make a Talent. Also Epi^hanes observes, lib. 1. de Pon. That
the Attick Talent is equal in weight with the Hebrew; for, as the Hebrew
contains 3000 Sickles, which make 125 l. so the Attick contains 1200 Drams,
which make the same weight, and is worth 375. l. of English Money. But the
Hebrew Talent of Gold, which for the most part is used in every place, is worth
4500 l. in our Money.

The Jews had three sorts of Talents.
1. The common Talent (weighing 3000 quarters of an Ounce, or common Sicles)
amounts to 6000 Drams, which is 187 l. 10 s.

2. The Kings Talent weighed 3000 of the Kings Sicles, which amounted to 9000
Drams, which 281 is l. 5 s.

3. The Talent of the Temple or Sanctuary, weighed 3000 Sicles of the Temple,
which are precisely so many half Ounces, which amount to 375 Pounds.

From hence then may easily be gathered, that although the Jews had several
Weights and denominations of Silver and Gold, yet only one kind was usually
observed in traffic with other Nations, and that had correspondency with
their Weights, the rest being only for the common sort, or particular uses; for
although there were diverse Sicles, Mina's and Talents among themselves, yet the
common weight (whether it was of Sicle, Mina or Talent) was usually that which
they termed the Talent of the Temple, and that had a just correspondency with
the Grecian Talent both in weight and in worth; and this not only among them,
but also by relation from them to the Italians; and that Nation obtaining an
universal Monarchy, made it common with us also.

Of other Weights used among the Jews.
THEY had also other Weights which they used, passing under several
denominations and differing value; as Keseph, a Silverling or Nummus; which
name is very often used for a Sicle, as appears, Genesis 20. 16. and 23, 16. 43,
21. 2 Samuel 18. 11, 12. The Chaldaeans called this Silga, and the Hebrews,
Shekel, being precisely half an Ounce, and worth 2. s. 6 d. For thirty of these
Silverlings of the Sanctuary our Savior Christ was sold, Matthew. 26. which
amounts to 3 l. 15 s. English.

There was also another kind of Silverling or Nummus used, which was called
Siclus, but it was the common or Vulgar Sicle, which was but a quarter of an
Ounce, and was worth but 15 d.

There was another kind of Silverling or Nummus used, which was called
Keshitah; of which you may read in three several places of Scripture, Genesis 33.
19. Ios. 24. 32. Job 42. 11. and was signed with the Image of a Lamb upon it,
from whence it is so called. The ancient Nummus of the Arabians and Chaldeans
was like unto this, as may be gathered by many circumstances out of the places
where it is mentioned, and was of the same valuation as the Grecians was
amongst the Jews, which was 1 d. ob.

But the Silverlings mentioned Act. 1. 9, 19. are intended to be Grecian
Silverlings or Nummus, and is worth an Attick D^rachma; for the Grecians reckon
their Sums of Money by Drams, as the Jews and Romans by Sicles and
Sestertia's, and is worth of our Money 7 d. ob.

You shall read in Mat. 17. 24. of a Didrachma, which is worth in our Money 15.
d.

Also Mat. 17. 27. of a Stater, which is a Greek Coin, worth 2 s. 6 d.

And Mat. 18. 22. and 22. 19, etc. of a Denarius, which was a Roman Coin, which
is evident Mat. 21. because the Image of Caesar was upon it, and was worth 7 d.
ob.

1 Samuel 2. of a Scruple, which was worth 1 d. ob. q. O.

In Exodus 30. Number. 3. Ezekiel. 45. of an Obulus, which was 1 d. q.

In Mat. 12. o^ a Minutus, with was, ob. q.

And in Mat. 12. Mat. 5. you shall read of a Coin called Quadrans, being
something more than half a farthing. These are briefly the Weight, and Moneys
the Jews used, both foreign and domestic, in their Trade and Commerce.

Of the Gold Weight among the Jews.
THE Jews also had their particular Weights for their Gold, as they had for
their Silver, the least of which were called Zuza, or Dram, which is worth 7
s. 6. d. and more or less according to the pureness or baseness of it. It was
also called Daikemonim, Esd. 2. and Nehem. 7. The Chaldaeans call it
Edarchonim, Esd. 8. The common Sicle of Gold weighed two Drams, and was
worth 15 s.

The Kings Sicle weighed 3 Drams, and was worth 22 s. 6. d.

The Sicle of the Temple weighed 4 Drams, being precisely half an ounce,
and was worth 30 s.

The common Mina or pound of Gold weighed 60 Drams or Hungarian Ducats,
which is worth 22 li. 10 s.

The Kings Mina or pound, 80 Drams, or Hungarian Ducats, which is 30 li,
English.

The Mina or pound of the Temple weighed 100 Drams or Hungarian Ducats,
which was 2250 li.

The Common Talent of Gold weighed 6000 Drams, or Hungarian Ductas, and was
2250 li.

The Kings Talent weighed 9000 Drams or Hungarian Ducats, which was 3375 li.

The Talent of the Temple weighed 12000 Drams, or Hungarian Ducats, which
was of our money 45000 li.

Of Gold Weights which were not originally the Jews, but borrowed of other
Nations, and used amongst them.
THere are four kinds of Weights that are mentioned in the Scriptures, which
were common amongst the Jews, besides the former, viz. Zahab, of which you may
read, 2 King. 5. 5. 2 Chr. 9. 16. and is called by the name of a Nummus. The
Sicle of Gold, 1 Chronicles. 21. 25. which is there also called Nummus. Both which
being so called, seem to signify a Didrachma of Gold: and these two were
properly belonging to the Jews. The other that follow belonged not to them, but
they received them from other Nations; as the Stater, Drachmon, and Adarchon.

The Stater was an ancient piece of Gold, common amongst the Persians, the
Grecians, the Romans, and other great Governments, being distinguished by the
Superscription of the Kings or Countries where they were made or coined; as the
Stater Philippici, Stater Darici, Stater Alexandrei, Stater Romani, etc. They
were pure fine Gold, some of which were as much in value as a double Ducat,
others as four Hungarian Ducats, and some as Portugues.

The Drachmon, (of which you may read, Ezra 8. 27, etc.) is a Persian Coin, as
it seems, for the Grecian Interpreters call it Drachmen, which is as much more
as the Attick Dram, and in our money is worth 7 s. 6 d.

Adarchon also seems to be a Persian Coin, and does imply the name of a Prince,
or Daricum signifies the Gold of the Persians: For Darius the Son of Hystaspis
then reigned, when these Nummus of Gold, thus called, were dedicated to the
Building of the Temple; and this man, for the most part, coined singular good
Gold, as Herodotus in Melpom. says: wherefore they were either called Darici,
because they we coined by the Persian Kings, or else, as Plutarch in Artax.
observes, because the Image of Darius stood upon one part of it. And was worth
of our money seven shillings and six pence.

Thus you may perceive what diversities of Weights were used amongst the Jews;
being crept in amongst them, partly because of their Captivity, and partly
because of their Commerce and Trade with other Nations. It is therefore worthy
of observation, that if at any time you read of any weight of Money, Brass, or
the like, in the Holy Scripture, to consider of what sort of Weight it is, viz.
whether a Weight of the Jews, or some Foreign and strange Weight. If of the
Jews, whether it be the common Sicle, the King's Sicle, or the Sicle of the
Temple. But if these may be discerned, you shall for the most part find the
Addition, which may easily distinguish them. But if there be no addition, that
is the King's Sicle, or the Sicle of the Temple, then you may presume that it
is the common Sicle. And so for other Weights and Moneys.

That these things may appear the plainer unto you, I have here added the
principal Sums of Money, reduced to our English Valuations, as they are
severaly mentioned in most places of Scripture. And first out of Genesis.
GENESIS.
ABimelech King of Gerar said to Sara, I have given your Brother an hundred
silverlings, which were common Sicles, 62 l. 16 s. cap. 20.

Abraham bought a burying-place for his Wife Sara, for 400 Sicles of Silver,
which are common Sicles, that is, 25 l. cap. 24. v. 22.

Abraham's Servant gave Rebecca half a Sicle of Gold, and two Bracelets upon
her hands, weighing ten Sicles, which are intended to be common Sicles, because
there is no addition; which was 4 li. 2 s. 6 d. cap. 15. v. 16.

Joseph was sold by his Brothers for 20 silverlings, that is, common Sicles,
according to the seventy Interpreters, cap. 27. ver. 28. i. 1 l. 5 s. But the
Silverlings our Savior was sold for were as much again, being Sicles of the
Temple, which were precisely half ounces.

Exodus.
THe mulct that was prescribed by the Lord to pay by him who had an Ox that
gored or hurt another man's Servant, was thirty common Sicles, that is, 3 l. 15
s. cap. 31. ver. 32.

When the People were numbered, each man was to give half a Sicle of the Temple,
i. 1 s. 3 d. cap. 30. v. 31.

The seven Lamps in the Temple, with their Snuffers and Snuffing-dishes, were
made of a Talent of fine Gold, after the weight of the Temple, and were worth
4500 li. cap. 37. ver. 24.

All the Gold that was occupied in all the Work wrought for the holy Place,
which was the Gold of the Offering, was 26 Talents, and 370 Sicles, according
to the Sicle of the Sanctuary, being 130596 li. 5 s. cap. 38. v. 25.

But the Silver of them that were numbered in the Congregation, was 100 Talents,
and 1775 Sicles, after the weight of the Temple; amounting to 37721 li. 18 s. 6
d. cap. 38. v. 25.

Moreover, there were 100 Talents of Silver to cast the Sockets of the
Sanctuary, and the Sockets of the Vail, 100 Sockets of an hundred Talents, a
Talent for a Socket, which was 375 l. a Socket, and in the Whole 37500 l. cap.
38. ver. 27.

Leviticus.
IF any man shall make a Vow of a Person unto the Lord, by the estimathen then
thy estimation shall be thus; a male from twenty years old unto sixty years old
shall be by thy estimation a fifty Sicles of Silver, after the Sicle of the
Sanctuary, which is 6 l. 5 s. cap. 17. v. 2, 3. 15. 6, 7.

Ver. 3. But a Female, then but thirty Sicles of Silver, i. e. 3 l. 15 s.

Ver. 4. And from five years old to 20 years old, thy valuation shall be for
the Male twenty Sicles of Silver, i. e. 50 s. and for the Female ten Sicles of
Silver, i. e. twenty five shillings.

Ver. 5. But from a Month old to five years old, thy price of the Male shall be
five Sicles of Silver, i. e. 12 s. 6 d. and for the Female three Sicles of
Silver; which was 37 s. 6 d.

Ver. 6. And from 60 years old and above, if he be a Male, then 15 Sicles, i.
e. thirty seven shillings six pence.

Numbers.
FOR the redeeming of the 273, which were more than the Levites of the
Firstborn of the Children of Israel, there shall be taken five Sicles a man,
after the Weight of the Temple, cap. 3. 46, 47. i. e. 12 s. 6 d. a man; and for
the whole 170 l. 12 s. 6 d.

The Princes of Israel, being twelve in number, offered unto God each of them a
Silver Charger of 130 Sicles weight, and a Silver Bowl of seventy Sicles, after
the Sicle of the Sanctuary, cap. 7. 13. i. e. 25 l. a Prince, and amounted in
the whole to 300 l. and an Incence Cup of Gold of ten Sicles, for evry Prince,
which was 7 l. 10 s. a man, which in the whole amounted to 90 l.

Deuteronomy.
IF any man take a Wife, and when he has layn with her, hate her, and lay
slanderous things to her charge, and she prove not guilty of the fact, he shall
be condemned in 100 common Sicles of Silver, cap. 22. v. 19. i. e. 6 l. 5 s*

If a Man lie with a Maid, he shall pay unto her Father 50 Sicles, viz. common
Sicles, cap. 22 v. 29. i. e. 3 l. 2 s. 6 d.

Ioshuah.
AND Achan answered Ioshuah, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord;
for I saw amongst the Spoils a goodly Babylonish Garment, and 200 Sicles of
Silver, cap. 7. v. 20 ( i. e. 12 l. 10 s.) and a Wedg of Gold of fifty Sicles,
i. e. 37 l. 10 s. English.

Judges.
GIDEON gathered of the Spoils of the Midianites for a present 1700 Sicles of
Gold, cap. 8. v. 26. i. e. 1275 l.

The Princes of the Philistines promised the Harlot Dalilah, if she could
betray Sampson, to give her 1100 Silverlings, i. e. common Sicles, which was 68
l. 15 s. cap. 16. 5.

The Body of the Image in the House of Micah in Mount Ephraim, weighed 200
Silverlings, i. e. common Sicles, which is 12 l. 10 s. cap. 17. v. 4.

And the sum of Money which Micah's Mother missed was 1100 common Sicles of
Silver, for which she cursed; i. e. 68 l. 15 s.

To the Levite that served Micah, she gave yearly a Suit of Apparel, tenths,
and ten silverlings, or Sicles of the Sanctuary, for with that kind of Money
the Levites were rewarded, i. 1 l. 5 s.

I Samuel.
AND all that remain in the house of Eli shall come and bow down to him for a
piece of Silver, in Hebrew it is Agorah, which Fore^tarius and Avenarius
interpret Scrupulo Argenti, which was 1d. ob. q. But if you take the ancient
Interpreters, it was Obulum, that is, 1 d. q. cap. 2. v. 36.

When Saul sought his Fathers Asses, his Servant had about him the fourth part
of a common Sicle of Silver, that is, 3 d. ob. q. cap. 9. v. 8.

The Brigandine of the Great Giant Coliah weighed 5000 Sicles of Brass, which
at sixteen Ounces in the Pound, comes to seventy eight Pounds and two Ounces:
and the head of his Spear weighed sixty Sicles, that is, after the same weight,
nine pound a quarter and half of Iron. cap. 17. v. 5.

II Samuel.
AND David won the Town of Rabba, and took the Kings Crown from his head and
set it upon his own head; which weighed a Talent of Gold, and was (according to
our common Interpreters in these times) a common Talent of the Jews, i. 46 l.
14 Ounces, worth 2250 l. English. cap. 12. v. 30. But other Writers,
considering that if it had been so heavy, the King could not have worn it,
therefore they think it to be a Talent, according to the Syrian weight, which
is not above a quarter of an Hebrew Talent, and was of our weight eleven Pound
four Ounces, that is, 551 l. And the reason of their opinion was, because
Rabbah and the whole Country of the Children of Ammon lay in the Land of Syria,
and therefore it must necessarily follow, that their Weight was Syrian Weight;
the King of Rabbah never wearing this Crown but when he made some Solemn Feast
or Triumph. There are others that value it according to the worth of the Crown,
not of the Weight; and for that it was made of fine Gold, set with precious
Stones and other Jewels, therefore it weighed a Talent, that is, it was worth a
Talent; according to that of Zach. ca. 1. So they weighed fro my Wages as much
as I am valued, i. e. thirty Silverlings. Thus have I set before you three
Interpretations, follow which you like.

And Ioab spoke unto the man that brought him word that Absalon was hanging
upon an Oak-tree, saying, If thou had smote him to the ground, I would have
given thee ten Sicles of Silver, or ten Silverlings, which was 12 s. 6 d. The
man answered him and said, If you had laid 1000 Silverlings (that is 62 l. 10
s.) in my hand, yet I would not have laid my hand upon the Kings Son, cap. 18.
v. 11.

When the Angel of God stretched forth his hand over Jerusalem, and struck the
People with the Pestilence; at the commandment of Gad the Prophet, David went
to Araunah the Iebusite and bought his threshing-floor for fifty Sicles of
Silver, of lthe common Weight. Some say that every Tribe gave fifty Sicles,
being 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. a Tribe; and in the whole amounted to 37 l. 10s. cap. 25.
v. 25.

I. Kings.
THE Queen of Saba gave unto King Solomon 120 Centiners, or Talents of Gold;
being 265000 Pounds English; this was pure Arabia Gold, and therefore,
according to the worth of Gold in these days, much more than is set down, cap.
5. v. 28.

King Solomon had brought into his Kingdom in one year 666 Talents or Centiners
of fine Arabian Gold; which at 4500 Pound the Talent, is 2997000 l. viz. two
millions nine hundred ninety seven thousand Pounds English. But the Silver that
Solomon had, was not to be numbered. cap. 10* v. 14.

And King Solomon caused 200 Targets to be made of the finest Gold, each Target
weighing 200 Sicles of Gold, that is 600 Hungarian Ducats; and was worth 225 l.
a Target; which in the whole amounts to 4500 l. English. cap. 10. v. 16.

There came and went up out of Egypt a Chariot worth 600 Sicles of Silver,
which is 37 l. 10 s. and a Horse worth 150 l. that is 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. cap. 10.
v. 29.

II. Kings.
NAaman General of the King of Syria's Host, when he traveled to Samaria to be
healed of his Leprosy, took with him ten Talents of Silver, that were of the
common Weight, each Talent worth 187 l. 10 s. being in the whole 1875 l. But if
you account it after the Syrians Talent (as some would have it) which is but
the fourth part of the Hebrew; then it came to 46 l. 17 s. 6 d. the Talent, and
in the whole to 468 l. 15 s. He also brought 1000 Drams of Gold, being so
many Hungarian Ducates, being worth 375 l. English. cap. 5. v. 5.

Being healed of his Leprosy, he gave to Gehazie, two Talents of Silver in two
Bags; which if they were according to the Weight of the Jews, amounted to 375
l. and was as much a man could carry. But if according to they Syrian Weight,
then it came but to 95 l. which he might well carry and not be discovered. cap.
5. v. 5.

Benhadad King of Syria of straightly besieged Samaria, that an Asses head was
sold at eighty pieces of Silver, or Silverlings, which is five Pound; and a
quarter of a cabe of Doves Dung, at five pieces or Silverlings that is, 5 s. 4
d. But after the Lord struck the Syrians so that they fled from their Siege,
and the Citizens opened their Gates, and rifled their Tents; by which means
there was such Plenty, that two Measures of Barley were sold for a Sicle,
that is, fifteen pence, and two Measures of fine Flower, at fifteen pence.

When Phul King of Assyria invaded Menahem King of Israel, he vvas^ constrained
to give him a thousand Talents of Silver, that is, 187500 l. that his help
might be with him to establish a Kingdom in his hand, and depart: for the
payment of which Money, all the men of Substance in Israel were constrained to
pay fifty Sicles of Silver a piece, that is, 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. a man.

I. Chronicles.
IT was said that David left Solomon toward the building the Temple 10000
Talents of Gold, that is, 450000000 l* four hundred and fifty millions of
Pounds. cap. 22. v. 14.

Also he left him for the finishing of the same work 1000000 Talents of Silver,
which amount unto 375000000 l. viz. three hundred seventy five millions of
pounds.

Also David dedicated to the Temple, of his own Goods, 3000 Talents of Gold,
that is, 135000 l. And of Silver 7000 Talents, that is, 2625000 l. viz. 2
millions six hundred twenty five thousand Pound, English.

The offering which David gave toward the building of the Temple, was 5000
Talents, and 10000 Adarcons, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, that is, 22507500 l.
viz. twenty two millions five hundred seven thousand five hundred Pounds. So
all that was given by David toward the building of the Temple was 8 hundred 47
thousand millions, 3 hundred 82 thousand 5 hundred Pounds.

II. Chronicles.
SOlomon made 300 Shields of fine Gold, every Shield weighing 300 pieces of
Gold, that is, 112 l. 10 s. so in the whole they came to 33650 l.

Esdras.
SOME of the chief of the Jews, when they returned from the Captivity of
Babylon unto Jerusalem, gave to the building of the Temple 61000 Drams, or
Hungarian Ducats of Gold, cap. 2. Ver. 69. that is, 21525 l. also five thousand
pound of Silver, which at 37 s. 6 d. the pound, comes to 9375 l.

ARTASHAST (who in some places is called Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus,
commanded his Treasurer to give unto Esdras toward the building of the Temple
of Jerusalem, 100 Centiners or talents of silver cap. 7. v. 21. 22. which (at
187 li. 10 s. the talent) comes to 18750 li. according to the Hebrew common
weight; for as often as there is no addition, it is to be intended in every place
the common weight.

The King of Pers^a and his Nobles, with all Israel, gave to the building of
the Temple in Jerusalem 650 Centiners of silver, of the common weight, cap. 8.
v. 16. 26. which (at 187 li. 10 s. the Talent) comes to 121875 li. also in
silver vessels 100 Centiners or Talents which (at 187 li. 20 s. the Talent)
comes to 1875 l. also 100 Centiners or talents of Gold, which (at 2250 l. the
Talent) in the whole comes to 225000 li. or thereabouts; also 20 cups of Gold,
weighing 1000 Drams or Hungarian Ducats, that is, 375 li. each of which
cups were worth 18 li. 15 s.

Nehemiah.
THE Tirshatha (or as some have it Nehemiah) gave to the work 1000 Drams of
Gold, cap. 7. v. 37. which was 275 l. and some of the Fathers gave to the Work
20000 Drams, or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, which came to 5500000 l. also
2200 pounds of Silver, which was 4125 l. and the rest of lthe People gave 20000
Drams or Hungarian Ducats of Gold, Which came to 5500000 l. also 2000
pieces of Silver, which were common pounds, which comes to 3756 l.

Ester.
PRoud Hammon offered 10000 Centiners, or Talen ts of Silver, to destroy the
Jews; cap. 3. v. 9. which (at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent) comes to 1875000 li.

Ezekiel. chap. 45. v. 43.
A Sicle of the Temple shall be twenty Gerahs, that is, 2 s. 6 d. (for in this
place he speaks of that which belongs ot the Sanctuary) and the Mina (that
is the Kings Mina) shall be twenty Sicles: and 25 Sicles shall be the Mina of
the Temple; and fifteen Sicles shall be the common Mina; of which you may read
before.

Tobias chap. 1. v. 10.
OLD Tobias willingly lent to the poor man Gabel, in Rages, a Town in Media,
ten pounds of Silver, that is, 18 l. 15 s. But if it be according to our
translation, that is, ten Talents, at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, is 1963 l. after
the common Weight. But if after the Weight of the Temple, it comes to as much
more.

I Macchabees. chap. 10. v. 40. 42.
Demetrius King of Syria offered to give yearly unto the Jews for the building
of the Temple, 15000 Sicles of Silver, of the Temple Weight; that is, 1000
Mina's, which (at 37 s. 6 d. the Mina) comes to 1875 l. And, if they would aid
him, he would restore the Money again, which his Officers had kept back of the
Revenues of the Temple; which was yearly five thousand Sicles of the Temple, of
Silver; that is 2500 Crowns English; which is, 625 l.

Jonathan the High Priest of Jerusalem, wrought so well with Demetrius King of
Syria, that he released the Jews of their yearly Tribute, and made them free;
for which freedom he gave three hundred Centiners of Gold, or common Talents;
cap. 11. v. 28. Which at 2250 l. the Talent, comes to 6750000 l.

Simon to release his Brother, sent to Tryphon, the King of Syria's General of
his Host, one hundred Centiners or Talents of Silver, of the common Weight,
cap. 13. v. 16. 19. which at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, amounts to 18750 l.

Simon the High Priest of Jerusalem sent to the Romans a great Shield of Gold,
weighing one thousand pounds; cap. 14. v. 14. which is one hundred thousand
Hungarian Ducats, thirty seven thousand five hundred Pound English. Antiochus,
Demetrius his Son, King of Syria, asked of Simon the High Priest of Jerusalem,
for the Redemption of certain Towns that he had taken, five hundred Centiners,
or common Talents of Silver: and for his charges as much more; cap. 15. v. 31,
35. in all, a thousand Centiners or Talents: that is 187500 l. in English
Money. But Simon refused the proffer, yet nevertheless, that he might live in
Peace, he offered him 100 Talents of Silver, which (at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent)
amounts to 18750 l.

II. Macchabees.
WHEN Heliodorus would have robbed the Temple, there was in it 400 Centiners of
Silver (of the weight of the Temple) which at 375 l. the Talent, comes in the
whole to 150000 pounds English; also two hundred Centiners of Gold, which at
4500 l. the Talent, amounts to 900000 l. chap. 3. v. 11.

Jason, that wicked Priest, deceived his Brother Onias of the Office of
High Priest, and gave to King Antiochus for it, first, 360 Talents of Silver;
then 80; after, 150: cap. 4. v. 8. and 19. 2, 4. all the common Weight; which
were in the whole 590 Talents, and amounted at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent to
110625 l.

The wicked Jason being High Priest, hearing that Antiochus held a great Feast
in Tyrus, sent 300 Drams of Silver, that is, 9 l. 7 s. 6 d. for a Sacrifice
to Hercules. But if you change these into Hungarian Ducats (as there are some
think them to be Gold) then they came to 112 l. 10 s.

Menelaus, being sent by Jason the High Priest to the King, he behaved himself
in such cunning manner, that he got the Highpriests Office; promising the King
300 Centiners or Talents of Silver more than Jason would give; which at 187 l.
10 s. the Talent, comes to 56250 l. 10 s. But being unable to perform his
promise, he was put from his Office of High Priest.

Antiochus paid yearly to the Romans 2000 Talents of Silver, that is, 375000
l. cap. 8. v. 10.

Antiochus took 1800 Centiners or Talents of Silver of the Temple of Jerusalem,
which at 187 l. 10 s. the Talent, comes to 3375000 l. cap. 5. v. 21.

Nicanor caused to be proclaimed, that he would sell the captive Jews, 19 for a
Centiner, that is, for every Jew 9 l. 17 s. 4 d. q. c. cap. 8. v. 10.

Judas Macchabeus sent 2000 Drams of Silver to Jerusalem for a Sinoffering,
that is, 62 l. 10 s. cap. 12. 43.

Now follows the Reckonings of the Moneys in the New Testament,
And first of Matthew.
HE that agrees not with his Adversary, shall be cast into Prison, and not
come forth (so says our Savior Christ) until he has paid the utmost
farthing. The Hebrew and Latin Translations have it, Quadrans, or a ^ourth
part, that is, a farthing in our Money: but if you account according to the
Roman Coin, it was ob. q.

Do not men buy two Sparrows for a Penny? cap, 10. v. 29. that is, something
more than half a farthing.

When our Savior Christ went into Capernaum, the Receivers of Tribute spoke to
Peter, saying, Does not your Master pay Tribute? The Tribute Money in the Text
is called Didrachma, cap. 17. v. 25. which was 15 d. for so much every man paid
for Tribute: from whence may be gathered, that the Penny that Peter took out of
the Fishes Mouth, was worth 2 s. 6 d.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a King that would call his Servants to
account, and when he began to reckon with them, the one owed him 10000 l. in
Hebrew Weight; which at 37 s. 6 d. the Pound, comes in the whole to 18750 l.
so much was the wicked Servant in Debt to his Master. And on the contrary, one
of his Fellow Servants owed him 100 Pence: in the Hebrew Text it is Centum
Obulus, and one Obulus was 1 d. q. that is, 10 s. 5 d. so that the bad servant
owed his Master 30000 times more than his Fellow Servants owed him.

The Greek Text says, that this fellow owed him Centum Derius; that is, 3 l. 2
s. 6 d. which is yet a great deal of difference; for the wicked Servant owed
his Master above 6000 times more than his Fellow Servants owed him.

The Lord of the Vineyard agreed with his Laborers for a Penny a day; cap. 2.
v. 9. In the Hebrew Text it is Zuza; and in Greek Denarius; both which are of
like value English, that is, 7 d. ob. so much each Labourer had by the Day.

When the Pharisees and Herod's Servants, tempting Christ, asked him, whether
it was lawful to pay Tribute unto Caesar or not: Christ answered and said, You
Hypocrites, why tempt you me? show me the Tribute Money, and they brought, him
a Penny: where it is expressed by the word Zuza, or Denarius, that is 7 d. ob.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that traveling into a far Country,
called his Servants, and delivered unto them his Goods; to one he gave five
Talents; that is, 937 l. 10 s. with which he gained just as much more, that is,
937 l. 10 s. to the second he gave two Talents, of the common weight also,
which ws 375 l. and he also gained just as much more, that is, 375 l. and to
the third he gave one Talent, that is, 187 l. 10 s. and he gained nothing with
it, but hid the Talent in the Earth.

Judas Iscariot betrayed our Savior Christ for thirty Pence, or pieces of
Silver, cap. 26. v. 14. which were so many Sicles of the Temple, each Sicle
be^^g half an ounce, which were accounted worth 2 s. 6 d. so the whole came to
3 l. 15 s for which our Savior Christ was betrayed. And with it they bought a
Potters field.

Mark.
OUR Savior Christ sat over against the Treasury, and beheld how the People
cast into the Treasury; and many rich men cast in much; and there came a
certain poor Widow, and she threw in two mites, cap. 12. v. 41, 42. which is a
farthing or Quadrans, which was the fourth part of an Assis, being almost a
Penny English.

Our Savior Christ being a Bethanie, in the house of Simon the Leper, there
came a Woman having a box of Ointment of costly Oil, called Spikenard, and she
broke the box, and poured it upon his head; therefore some murmured among
themselves and said, To what end is this waste of Ointment? for it might have
been sold for more than three hundred Denarios, or pence, cap. 14. v. 15. that
is, 9 l. 7 s. 6 d.

Luke.
OUR Savior Christ says, Are not five Sparrows sold for two farthings? cap.
12 v. 6. that is, Assibus duobus, which is 1 d. ob.

Or what Woman having ten pieces of Silver, that is, ten Drams or Groats,
(each being worth seven pence ob.) and lose one, will not (...) till she find
it, etc. cap. 15. v. 8. So these ten were in English Money 5 ^. ^ d.

A certain Nobleman went into a far Country to receive for himself a Kingdom;
and he called his ten Servants and delivered them ten p^eces of Money, or ten
pounds, or Mina's (according to the weight of the Temple) which came to (at 3
l. 2 s 6 d. the Mina) in the whole 31 l. 5 s.

John.
WHEN our Savior Christ would feed 5000 men, besides Women and Children, he
said unto Philip, Where might we buy Bread that these People might eat? (which
he spoke to prove Philip.) Philip answered and said, That 200 penny worth of
Bread will not be sufficient for them that every man might take a little. The
two hundred penny worth of Bread are called D^narios, which was worth 7 d. ob.
in our Money, and in the whole is worth 6 l. 5 s. From whence may be gathered,
that there being 5000 every one of them should have had no more bread than
might have been bought with a Farthing, Mite and half of our Silver.

As our Savior Christ, six days before the Passover, was eating in the house
of Lazarus, (whom he had raised from the dead in Bethania,) Mary, Lazarus's
Sister took a Box, some say a pound of Oil of Spikenard, and anointed Jesus
Feet, and wiped them with her Hair; and the whole house was filled with the
savor of the Ointment. Then said one of his Disciples, even Judas Iscariot,
Simon's Son, Why was not this Ointment sold for 300 pence; cap. 12. ver. 5.
that is, Denarios, every Denarios being worth 7 d. ob. which amounted in the
whole to 9 l. 7 s. 6 d.

When Christ's body was to be buried, Nicodemus came and brought Myrrh and Aloes
mingled together, about 100 pound weight, chap. 19. v. 39. according to the
common weight, which was 2500 half ounces, and came to 78 pounds and eight
ounces English.

Acts.
IN Asia many Books were burnt, to the value of 50000 pieces of silver, that
is, Roman Denarios, every of which was 7 d. ob. the whole amounting to 1562 l.
10 s.

Thus have I briefly set forth to you the several Weights that were common
amongst the Jews, both as they were originally from themselves, and as they
received them from other Nations, comparing them with the Scriptures, as they
are severally mentioned, and reduced them to our Valuations. In casting up of
which, if there shall chance to be any error, you may with the due
examination of the vvorth of every piece of Silver or Gold (according as you
may find them at the beginning of this Treatise) easily reform them, and bring
them to your own understanding.

Of the ancient Money and Coin that was used amongst the Grecians and Romans.
FROM what has been said, may be gathered, that the Jews used no Coin, but
Weights only, though perhaps, to put a distinction betvveen those Weights,
there was used some impression: yet that cannot properly be said Coin. But in
all other Kingdoms (where Money was current) there was used Coin; and that
valued according to the will or command of the Prince or State where it was
coined; which also because of the captivity of the Jews, came amongst them,
and past as current according to their vvorth; of which Coins I have already
spoken. Yet because there are many other Coins and Weights mentioned in the
Epistles of the Apostles, which were partly of the Grecians, partly of the
Romans, into which Governments most of them traveled; I will therefore
endeavor to set before you the valuation of the Grecian and Roman Coins and
Weights, reduced to our Valuation and Weights, that so those Moneys mentioned
in the New Testament, and in this Treatise omitted, may with the more facillity
be apprehended and made plain unto you.

Of the Grecian Coin; and first of their Silver and Brass Nummus, or Money.
The Attick Dram.
AN Attick Dram, was a proportion for almost all the Greek Moneys: for the
Grecians numbered their Moneys by Drams, as the Romans by Sestertia's. [This
was the Nummus or Coin amongst the Athenians] and was the eighth part of an
Ounce, which is worth in our Money 7 d. ob.

The Stater, which was also called Tetradrachma, upon the one side whereof was
the Head of Minerva, upon the other the Owl: was worth four Attick Drams,
as is manifest, Mat. 17. 25. which is in our Money 2 s. 6 d.

The Didrachma, which was also amongst the Athenians, called Bos, because it
was signed with the similitude of an Ox upon the one side of it (of this
Theseus was the first Author) as Plutarch remembers: it was worth half a
Stater, or two Drams, that is in our money 15 d.

The Tridrachma, which was three Drams, and worth in our Money twenty three
pence, ob.

The Obulus Atticus, which was the sixth part of an Attick Dram, was worth
in our Money 1 d. q.

The Semiobulus, which was the least of the Greek Silver Coin, was worth ob. ^.

There was also a Diobulus, which was the third part of a Dram, and worth 2
d. ob.

Triobulus, which was half a Dram, and worth 3 d. ob. q.

Tetrobulus, which contained two third parts of a Dram, and was worth 5 d.
English.

The Aegina Dram.
THE Dram of Aegina contained ten Attick Obulus's, and was worth, 1 s. ob.
English.

Obulus Aeginus, was the sixth part of Dram of Aegina, and was worth 2 d.
half farthing and a third part of a farthing.

Triobulus Aeginaeus, was half and Aeginus Dram, and of ours was worth six
pence q.

Stater Corinthius, was worth ten Obulus's of Aegina, and of ours one shilling
eight pence, ob. q.

Stater Macedonius, was worth in ours 2 s. 9 d. q. and three seconds of a
farthing.

Of the Asiatick Silver.
THE Asiatick Money was of less Valuations, and other Denominations than the
rest of Greece; for the greatest of their Silver Coin that was usually current,
was but ten pence: and was called by the name Siglus, which was worth seven
Attick Obulus's and an half, as Xenophon says: but, as Hesychius says, it was
worth eight Attick Obulus's, and four Scruples, which is 10 d. in our Money.

Cistophorus was also Asiatick silver, and was so called, Lucian in Car^nt.
Suid, loc. alleg at Hysich. in.
because of the Image that was upon it: and was worth of our money 4 d. ob. c.

Danaces, which piece of Money the Grecians usually put into the mouth of the
dead, to pay Charon for their passage to Elisium, was worth ob. q. and two
third parts of a farthing.

Of the Brass Money among the Grecians.
THey had but two sorts of Brass money, that is mentioned to continue current
among them; and they were Aereolum and Minutum.

Aereolum was worth the sixth part of an Attick Obulus, according to the
Opinion of Suidas and others, which in our money is q. c. and one third part of
a Mite.

Minutum, is the seventh part of that, which is little more than half a Mite.

Of the Gold Coins among the Grecians.
IN the next place, is to be described the quantity and valuation of their Gold
Coins, of which there is any mention in ancient Authors: and they were among
the Athenians an Attick Stater, which weighed two Drams, as Pollux says,
and was worth with us fifteen shillings, and a Daricus, which was worth 15 s.

A Stater was divided into these parts, that is, a Semi Stater, which was worth
7 s. 6 d.

A Tetrestater, of which Aristotle and Pollux speaks, lib. 9. which was worth
of our Money 3 l.

And the Macedonian Golden Stater, coined by Philip, Alexander, Lysimachus,
Demetrius, and others which succeeded in Macedonia, Syria, and Asia, which was
worth of our Money 18 s. 4. d

Of the Asiatick Gold.
STater Daricus, which before was called Adarchon, was a Nummus, or a piece of
Coin of the Persians, and worth a Didrachma, having upon it the similitude of a
Sagittarius, according to Plutarch in the Life of Agesilaus, and was worth with
us 15 s.

Semi Daricus, of which there is mention in Xenophon, lib. ^. was worth half a
Darick Stater, and weighed an Attick Dram, being worth with us 7 s. 6 d.

Cizycenus, was a piece of Coin so called, as may be thought, of a Town called
Cizycus, of which you may read, Strabo, lib. 14. and was worth 7 s. 6 d.

Of the Grecian Mina and Talents.
THE Attick Mina's weigh one hundred Drams, and was equal to the Mina of
the Temple amongst the Jews, according to the opinion of Xenophon and Plutarch,
and was worth with us 3 l. 2 s. 6 d.

There were di^^rs kinds of Talents, according to the opinions of Pollux and
Varro, most of which weighed sixty Mina's, and a Mina one hundred Drams,
and for the most part, six thousand Drams (of the Country where the Talent
was) make a Talen.

The Attick Talent contained six thousand Attick Drams, according to the
opinion of Pollux and Festus, and is equal to the common Talent among the Jews,
worth in our Money 187 l. 105.

But according to the opinion of Livie and Priscianus, there was an Attick
Talent worth eight thousand Drams, which was 250 l.

The Egyptian Talent, according to the opinion of Pliny and Varro, weighed as
much, that is, 250 l.

The Syrian Talent contained 1500 Attick Drams which was 46 l. 17 s. 6 d.

The Eubeian Talent (according to the opinion of Pompey and Festus) weighed
four thousand Denarios, that is, Drams, and was worth 125 l.

The Rhodian Talent contained 4500 Attick Drams, and worth 240 l. 12 s. 6 d.

The Babylonian Talent was 7000 Attick Drams, worth 218 l. fifteen
shillings.

The Aegina Talent was 1000 Attick Drams, that is, 312 l. fifteen shillings.

The Alexandrian Talent is 12000 Attick Drams, which was as much as the
Talent of the Temple, which is 375 l. English.

The ancient Talentum Siculum (according to the opinion of Pollux) was six
Drams, which was 3 s. 9 d. English.

The Neapolitan Talent was as much, according to the opinion of Varro, that is,
3 s. 9 d. English.

The ancient Talentum Siculum, and the Sicilian Talent (as Varro says) is all
one, and is worth 1. s. 10 d. ob.

The Regian Talent was but half a Dram, and is worth 3 d. ob. q.

Of the Coins and Moneys of the ancient Romans: and first of the Brass Money.
AS (as Varro says) is as much as Aes, that is, Brass: for Aerius was a Coin
weighing a pound weight: but after many changes that happened in the Roman State,
it came to be worth the tenth part of a Roman Penny, which with us is worth
ob. q.

Semissis, is as much as half an As, according to Varro: and was worth q. c.

Triens, that is, the third part of an As, which was half a Farthing.

Quadrans, was the fourth of an As. Pliny calls it Triuncis; Cicero, Triunus,
because it was a diminution of the former pound, containing three Ounces, and
with us worth three Mites.

Sextans, that is, the sixth part of an Assis, which was worth q. or two Mites.

Vncia, the twelfth part of an Assis, worth one Mite, c.

Semiuncia, worth half a Mite.

Sextula, that is, the sixth part of an Ounce, worth the sixth part of a Mite.
These are the ancient Brass Moneys usual amongst the Romans; but there were
greater used in later Times, according to the opinion of Varro.

Of the Silver Money amongst the Romans.
DENARIVS was so called because it was worth ten Asses; but it was not always
of one worth and estimation amongst the Romans, for the ancient Roman Denarius
or penny, which was current in the time of the Consuls, weighed but the seventh
part of an Ounce (according to the opinion of Celsus, and many other Authors)
and was worth of our Money 8 d. ob. c. and one seventh part of a Mite.

Denarius Novus, or the new Penny, was first coined in Claudius the Emperor's
time, and was worth (acording to the opinion of Pliny and others) precisely a
Dram, that is, 7 d. ob.

Bigatus and Quadrigatus, is all one with the Roman Penny, and was so called,
because these words were stamped upon one side of it, and was worth 7 d. ob.

Victoriatus, was a Coin first brought up by the Law of Claudius amongst the
Romans, being so called, because the Image of Victory was upon it; and
according to Pliny, was half a Denarius, and is worth 3 d. ob.

Sestertius is so called of Sesquitertiers, according to Priscian, it was two
Asses and a half, and was worth 3 d. ob. q.

Obulus, is the sixth part of a Denarius, and worth 1 d. q.

Libella, is the tenth part of a Denarius, and worth ob. q.

Simbella, so called, because it was half a Libella, and was worth farthing and
half.

Teruntius, was the fourth part of a Denarius; and was worth two mites and a
half.

Of the Gold among the Romans.
THere were also gold Denarius's amongst the Romans; either so called because
they had the same stamp; or else because they were about the same bigness to
see to, coined in the time of the Consuls; worth in English money 17 s. ob. a
piece.

The other was coined later, about the beginning of the Emperors, and weighed
two Drams; being of equal weight with our English Spurroyals, which are
worth 15 s. This was after the first five Emperors much diminished in weight:
Nero made it lighter by two or three grains; Galba, Nerva, Trajanus, and
Hadrianus, by eight grains: but those that Vespasian and succeeding Emperors
coined, were precisely two Drams.

A Semissis of gold, weighed a just Dram, and was worth 7 s. 6 d.

AT remissis of Gold, which was three parts of an Is, and worth 5 s.

Of the Gold after the Seat of the Empire was translated to Byzantium, or
Constantinople.
COnstantine the Great diminished that Coin which was a Dram, to a
Didrachma, and the seventh part of a Dram; and was worth of our money, 8 s. 6
d. ob.

And thus they continued till the time of Valentinian the Emperor, who caused
six of them to be coined out of an ounce of Gold, and therefore, as Isidore
says, were called amongst the Graecians (...), that is, Sextuala, because it
was the sixth part of an ounce, and was worth 10 s.

The Semissis of Valentinian Gold was worth 5 s.

The Triens or Tremissis, was worth 3 s. 4 d.

The Scruple, which was the fourth part of a golden shilling, 2 s. 6 d.

Of the Silver and brass Money of the Empire; after it was trans^ated to
Constantinople.
MIlliarissimum weighed two Drams (according to the opinion of Cedrenus)
and was worth 15 d.

Ceratus, was a piece of Coin, called also Siliqua Cornuta, because there was
stamped upon it the Moon increasing; by which mark it was known to be more
than the common Ceratio or Siliqua, and was vvorth 7 d. ob.

The common Siliqua or Ceratio, was so called, because it was worth four
grains of Gold (which is the weight of a A Silique is the Fruit of a
Charob-tree, which carries certain sweet Cods or Husks about five inches long,
and as broad as a man's Thumb: six Carobs, or Charob-Bean-cods weighed a
Dram, or Carract.
Silique) and according to Justinian was vvorth 5 d.

Follis, of which there is often mention in the History of Eusebius, was a
brass, or (as Lampadius says) an iron coin, so called, because there was
stamped upon it the similitude of a leaf, and was vvorth farthing, half, and
one third.

Of the Roman sums of Money.
A Sestertium (being taken in the neuter Gender) contains a thousand
Sestertius's, and is vvorth 7 li. 16 s. 3 d.

A Pound weight, containing twelve ounces of silver, which is vvorth 3 li.

A Talent, containing 24 Sestertias, 6000 Denarios; being of equal weight and
vvorth to the Attick Talent, and is vvorth 187 li. 10 s.

I will also add that which is called Sportula, because it was a certain
small Sum of 400 Quadrans, which makes 10 Sestertios; of which you may read
in Suetonius, in the Life of Domitian Nero, and contained 1 s. 6 d. ob. q.

The Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Measures reduced to ours, whereby you may find
the Quantity of all such Measures as are mentioned in the Old and New Testament.
BUT now, having briefly, and as exactly as I can, described the Weights and
Valuations of the ancient Moneys that were current amongst the Jews, Graecians
and Romans, as well those that are mentioned in the Scripture as others; It
rests (that I might make this a perfect Work) to say something of the
Measures mentioned in the Scriptures, which I will (as near as I can) reduce to
the quantity of our Measures which are common amongst us.

Of the Corn Measures.
A Gomer is a Gallon or thereabouts with us, according to Budaeus, in Mensuris
Herb.

An Attick Chenix (according to Budaeus) is the third part of a Gomer, or half
Modius, which measure is almost three pints.

Stater was a Measure containing three Gomers or Simodio's, and is with us
three Gallons and three Pints, or thereabouts.

An Epha was as much as Medimnicus Atticus, which, according to the opinion of
some Authors, is a Pottle less than our Bushel: but if you follow the
proportion of Budaeus, it is ten Gomers or Gallons, or more, which is a Bushel
and a Peck and our Measure and more.

A Letech is the half of a Corus, and contained five Epha's, or Attick
Medimnos, i. according to Budaeus, six Bushels and a Peck.

A Cor or Corus, following the same Proportion, was two Letechs, i. ten Attick
Medimno's; and of ours twelve Bushels and half.

Of the Measures of Wine and Beer.
HEmina (according to Georgius Agricola and Budaeus) was three quarters of a
Pint.

A Sextarius was two Hemina's, i. a Pint and a half.

A Lag was as much.

A Congius contained six Sextario's, i. nine Pints.

A Hin was twelve Sextario's, i. eighteen Pints.

A Cad was sixty Sexntario's, i. fifty five Quarts.

A Bath was seventy two Sextario's, i. forty four Quarts.

A Homer was a great Measure containing 720 Sextario's, that is, sixty seven
Gallons and Pottle.

An Urna, according to Capulis, contained twenty four Sextario's, that is,
thirty six Pints, which make four Gallons and a half of our common Measures.
But according to Budaeus's account, it comes but to three Gallons and a half or
thereabouts.

An Amphora was a Measure common amongst the Graecians, of which there is
mention made of three sorts, the one containing three Gallons and a Pottle; the
other, eight Congio's or forty eight Sextario's, which was 9 Gallons of our
measure; the third (as Pliny says) was an Amphora, which contained twenty
Gallons and a half.

A Modius contained sixteen Sextario's, which was twenty four Pints, that is
three Gallons or thereabouts; but according to the opinion of some Authors, it
is but a Peck and some small matter more.

A Semimodius was eight Sextario's, that is, a Gallon and half.

A Gomer was somewhat less than a Semimodius: and contained but seven Sextario's
and a fifth part of a Sextario, which is some ten Pints and a quarter and three
spoonfuls.

A Quartarius contained one Sextario and a half, which was a Quart and the
fourth part of 2 Pint.

A spoonful.

A Cyame is two spoonfuls.

A Mystrus and Cyame, according to the Opinion of some, is all one.

A Cyathus contains four spoonfuls.

An Hemila Cottila is six times so much, which is twenty four Spoonfuls, i.
three quarters of a wine Pint.

The Measures mentioned in the old Testament, And first, Genesis. Cap. 18. v. 6.
WHen Abraham received three strange men, he went to his Wife Sera into the
Tent, and said, Make ready at once three Measures of fine meal, which,
according to some Divines, was three Zata's; according to others, forty four
Sextarios, which was of our Measure, at a pint and a half the Sextario, a
Bushel and a quart.

Exodus, cap. 16. v. 31, 33, 34, 37.
MOses said to Aaron, Take a pot, of the quantity of a Gomer, (which was seven
Sextario's, and a fifth part, and is of our Measure a Gallon, a Quart, and four
Spoonfuls) to keep for your Posterity. In the same Chapter Moses ^aith, that a
Gomer is the tenth part of an Epha, which, as is said, is more than our Bushel.

Cap. 29. v. 49. You shall present upon the Altar two Lambs of a year old every
day, the one Lamb in the morning, and the other in the evening; and to each
Lamb the tenth part of an Ephah (which was five Quarts and and half a pint) of
fine flower with the fourth part of an Hin, i. four pints) of Wine for a
drink offering.

Cap. 30. 33. The anointing Oil of the Sanctuary was made of the best and
sweetest Spices that could be gotten, viz. of Myrrh 500 Sicles, or 250 ounces;
of Calamus 125 ounces, of Cinnamon 125 ounces. All this was mixed with an Hin
(i. 18 pints) of Oil Olive, as the Apothecaries make it.

Leviticus, cap. 5. v. 11.
HE that sinned, and was not able to bring two Turtle Doves, or two young
Pigeons for an offering, he must bring the tenth part of an Ephah of fine
flower, that is, ten pints and a half.

Cap. 14. 19. When the Leper was visited, and found to be infected with the
Leprosy, the eighth day after, he was to take two he-Lambs of a year old
without blemish, and an Ewe Lamb of a year old, without blemish, and three
tenth parts (that is fifteen quarts as pint and half) of fine flower for a
Meat Offering, mingled with a Lag of Oil, that is, a Pint and half.

Numbers, chap. 15. v. 4.
TO a Meat Offering was added the fourth part of an Hin (that is four Pints and
a half) of Oil, and as much Wine, and the third part of an Hin (that is six
Pints) of Oil, and as much Wine. Some say half a Hin, that is nine Pints of
Oil, and as much Wine.

Deuteronomy, chap 25. v. 13, 14, 15.
THERE shall be two sorts of Epha's within thine house; which concludes there
was a greater and a lesser.

Judges, chap 7. v. 16.
WHEN Gideon would have set upon the Midianites, he gave each of his Soldiers
a Trumpet in one hand, and an empty Pitcher in the other hand, with Lamps
therein. These Pitchers were called Cados minores, as some say, that is, Oil
Cans, like Lamps, wherein they used to set Tedae nuptiales, or Bride-candles.
For such was the usual custom in those days, that the Bridegroom went to fetch
his Bride by Night, and then certain Virgins were appointed to beat the Wedding
Candles or Lamps before them. Whereof our Savior Christ made that notable
similitude of the ten Virgins that went to meet the Bridegroom, Mat. chap. 25.
This difference is herein to be noted, that in the Lamps of the Virgins whereof
our Savior Christ speaks, there was Oil, but in Gideon's Pitchers there was no
Oil, but they were empty Oyl-Pitchers, with thick bellies and narrow necks,
wherein stood Lamps or Candles, such might be called Cades Minores, being not
very great, but so light that they might easily be carried in one hand without
trouble: but what their measure was is not specified.

Ruth, chap. 2. v. 31.
THE young Widow Ruth, the Moabite, was not slothful nor yet idle, but went
into Boas's Field, where she gleaned so many ears of Corn after the Reapers in
one day, that at night when she had threshed the ears, it was an Ephah, i. e. a
Bushel, or thereabouts; for there were two kinds of Ephahs, as you may read
before.

Chap. 3. When Ruth laid her self down at the feet of Boas, and desired him
that he would marry her; in the morning when Boas rose, he gave her six
measures of Gomers, i. e. six Gallons of Barley or thereabouts.

1 Samuel. chap. 17. v. 17.
WHEN Saul was gone out to fight against the Philistines, and that Goliath daily
mocked the Host of the Israelites, the Lord stirred up Ishai the Father of
David, to send him to his Brethren to the Host, with an Ephah of parched Corn,
that is, a Bushel or thereabouts,

Chap. 25. v. 18. David being upon the way, meaning to destroy the Fool Nabal,
Abigal, Nabal's Wife, a very wise and discreet Woman, went to meet him, and
finding David, she appeased his wrath, by a Present of 200 Loaves of Bread, two
Bottles of Wine, five Sheep ready dressed, and five Zata's ( i. e. fifteen
Gomers, which is fifteen Gallons and somewhat more) of fine Flower, 100 Frailes
of Raisins, and 100 of Figs; which laded upon an Ass, etc.

1 Kings, chap. 7. v. 23, 25.
THE Molten Sea that stood upon the twelve Knops like Cucumbers, was very
curiously made of diverse sorts of Metals, being ten Cubits wide, and five high:
it held 2000 Baths, that is, 27000 Gallons English, or thereabouts; every Bath
containing (according to the opinion of Iosepus) 72 Sextario's, that is, at a
pint and a half the Sextarius, thirteen Gallons and a half.

Chap. 7. v. 38. King Solomon caused ten Copper Kettles to be made, that stood
upon ten Stools, each Kettle containing forty Baths, every Bath 72 Sextario's,
which come to 13 Gallons and a half English; so that every Kettle contained 540
Gallons.

Chap. 17. v. 12, 13, 14. When the Prophet Eliah desired the Widow of Sarepta
to fetch him a little Water and a bit of Bread, she answered and said, as true
as the Lord your God lives, I have not any Bread, but only a handful of Flower
in a Cabe (which was a kind of Vessel that held eight quarts) and a little Oil
in a Pitcher. And Eliah said unto her, Thy Meal, etc.

Chap. 18. v. 32. 34. The Prophet Eliah being upon Mount Carmel about the time
of the evening Sacrifice, built up an Altar in the sight of the whole
Congregation of the People of Israel, and laid Wood upon it, and upon the Wood
an Ox cut in pieces for a Sacrifice, and caused a Ditch to be dug round
about it, of such wideness and depth, as might contain two Zata's, that is six
Gomers and something more; about six Gallons and a half of our Measure. And
there was twelve Cads (that is 175 Gallons) of water cast on the Sacrifice; but
when Eliah called upon the name of the Lord, fire fell from Heaven, and
devoured the Sacrifice, dried up the Water, and burned the Wood and Stones of
the Altar to dust.

II. Kings. chap. 6. 25.
WHEN Benhadad King of Syria besieged Samaria, there was such a Famine and
dearth in the City, that they sold an Asses head for eighty Silverlings (that
is, common Sicles, which is, 5 l. English;) but some Texts read it, 8
Silverlings, that is, 10 s. And the fourth part of a Cab, (that is, a Pint and
half of Pigeons dung) was sold for five pieces of Silver, that is, 6 s. 3 d.

When the Syrians were stricken by the Lord, and fled from the Siege of Samaria,
Corn became so cheap (according to the Prophecy of Elisha) that under the
Gates of Samaria one Zata (which contained 24 Sextarios, that is, half a Strike
and a Pottle of fine Flower) was sold for 15 d. and two Zata's of Barley was
sold for 15 d.

II. Chronicles. chap. 2.
SOlomon gave to the Carpenters, etc. that cut and hewed down Wood in Mount
Libanus, for the building of the Temple, 20000 Corus of Wheat, and 20000 of
Barley; every Corus containing ten Medimnos Atticos, which, according to
Budeus's account, came to twelve Bushels and a half English, and in the whole
to 150000 Bushels. But if you account it according to the opinion of some of
our English Authors, it comes but to nine Bushels and seven Gallons and a
Pottle the Medimna, and in the whole to 198750 Bushels. And besides, Solomon
gave them 20000 Baths of Wine, and as much Oil; every Bath containing thirteen
Gallons and a Pottle, which amounts to in the whole, 8437 Barrels and a half.

The Measures mentioned in the New Testament.
And first of Matthew. chap. 13. 33.
THE Kingdom of God is like unto a piece of Leaven, which a Woman takes and
puts into three Measures, or Zata's of Meal, which make a Bushel.

Luke, chap. 16. v. 9.
WHEN the unjust Steward called his Masters Debtors to account, the first was
Debtor 100 Baths of Oil, that is fifty one Barrels and eighteen Gallons; and he
bid him write down half, that is, twenty five Barrels and a half. The second
Debtor owed 100 Corus of Wheat, which at nine Bushels and seven Gallons the
Corus, comes to 988 Bushels, or thereabouts; and the unjust Steward willed him
to set down eighty Corus, that is 790 Bushels, and one Gallon and a half.

So the unjust Steward deceived his Master of 25 Barrels and a half of Oil, and
of 198 Bushels and one Gallon of Wheat, and gave to his Masters Creditors.

John, chap. 2. v. 1. 11.
AT the Marriage at Cana in Galilee, our Savior Christ changed the six
Pitchers of Water into Wine, every Pitcher containing two or three Cads, every
Cad holding 60 Sextario's, that is, 11 Gallons and a Quart, or thereabouts.
Some say, that the first three Pitchers held each three Cads, or Metreta's,
which, if it should be so, every of them should hold 33 Gallons and three
Quarts: then say the other three held each two Metreta's a piece, that is,
twenty two Gallons and a Pottle a piece; then the whole that our Savior Christ
gave unto the Bride and Bridegroom, amounted to 168 Gallons and three Quarts,
or thereabouts.

Revel. 6. 6.
I heard a voice saying, A Chenix (that is, three Pints of Wheat) for a
Denarius (that is, 7 d. ob.) There being eighty five times so much, and a Quart
over in a Bushel, it would amount unto 51s. 8 d. the Bushel, or thereabouts,
which would be a great Dearth.

Here is to be observed, that the Grecians in times past were very strict in
their housekeeping, and for that cause, confined their Servants to certain
Measure, that is, to a Chenix, which was three Pints of Meat; and to a
Sextarius, which was a pint and half of Wine for every day: and by this means
the Master could readily tell what his Servants Meat and Drink would cost him
in a year, that is 365 Chenixes; which in our Measure, at three Pints the
Chenix, comes to eight Bushels, two Pecks, and a Pint; and 365 Pints of Wine,
that is, forty five Gallons, a Pottle, and a Pint: so much did every Servant
eat and drink in a year. But God fed the Israelites forty years in the
Wilderness with a greater quantity; for he gave each man daily an Omer (that
is, three Chenixes) of Manna, i. e. a Gallon and something more.

Cicero, in his eighth Oration for Verres, writes, that a Modius of Wheat
(which was a Peck wanting a Pint) was commonly sold in Sicilia for three
Sestertio's, about 6 d. sterling, and so much had every Servant in Grecia
daily, and a Pint of Wine to drink.

These Customs, howsoever in these Countries they might be tolerable, in regard
they lived in a hot Climate; yet to us, where it is much colder, our Bodies
require a greater quantity for Nourishment: nevertheless, a mean and spare Diet
is both more healthful and profitable for the body, than excess; because the
Stomach being surcharged, it cannot duly concoct that which it receives,
whereby the Body is filled with many Crudities and noisome Diseases.

And thus have I, as exactly as I can, reduced the Hebrew, Greek and Latin
Measures to ours: but if there be any who in casting up these quantities of
Measures mentioned in the Scripture, shall chance to find any error, or would
reduce them to a more near Estimation (because I have in this Treatise
principally followed Budaeus) to our Measures, he is then to understand, that
there is another course to be taken, namely by Weight; four ordinary Spoonfuls
of Water weigh an Ounce, 12 Ounces of Troy weight make a pound, 8 Pounds of
Troy weight make a Gallon, and 32 Gallons make a Barrel, etc. The same course
may be taken in the account of Corn-measures there going eight Gallons after
the same proportion to a Bushel. So that what I have set down may be rectified
by your own industry, and made more capable to your understanding.

Examples collected out of Profane Histories, by which you may perceive the
profit that may arise by the due use of this Treatise, to all such as read the
Grecian and Roman Histories.
IN the time of Claudius, Emerour of Rome, there was so great a Famine
(according to the Prophecy of Agabus, Act 1.) that a Modius, that is, a Peck
wanting a Pint of Wheat, was sold at six Drams, which at 7 d. ob. the
Dram, comes to 3 s. 9 d. English. This great Famine is specified by Suetonius
and Dion, where they say, that but a little before, the same measure of Wheat
was worth but four Sestertia's, which was 7 d. ob. English.

Of Pythius King of Lydia. Herodot. 7.
PYthius King of Lydia, who entertained that mighty Emperor Xerxes, and all
his Army, would have lent him three Millions of Talents of Silver toward the
charge of his War; which according to the Attick Talent, (that is, 187 l. 10 s.
the Talent,) amounts to 562 millions five hundred pounds. And further, he would
add to it four millions of Daricons, which at 15 s. the Daricon, comes to
three millions of Pounds. But Xerxes being greatly pleased with his Hospitality
and Liberality, that he might make evident his Noble Disposition, refused his
offer, and gave him by way of Gratuity 7000 Darico's, which was in our Money
5250 l.

Of Croesus, the mighty King of Lydia.
THIS King Croesus sent an Ambassador to Delphos, to ask the Idol of Apollo if
he should prosper in the Wars he took in hand against Cyrus King of Persia;
withal sending diverse rich Presents, and amongst the rest, a Lion of Gold,
most cunningly wrought, weighing 100 Talents, every Talent weighing 4500 l.
which in the whole amounted to 450000 l. Moreover, two Cups, whereof one was
fine Gold, cunningly wrought, weighing eight Talents and a half, which at 4500
l. the Talent comes to 36000 pound; the other Cup was made by that noble
Workman Theodorus Sanius, of pure Silver, very curiously and artificially
wrought, containing forty Gallons; but of what valuation it was, is not set
down. For this great and rich present King Croesus received of the Devil a
double and deceitful answer, whereby he was not only provoked to make War
against Cyrus, but by that means lost his Kingdom; and being taken Prisoner, he
was set upon a pile of wood to be burnt: but crying with a loud voice, O Solon,
Solon, (thereby showing, that wise Solon had foretold him, That no man is to be
accounted happy before his end.) King Cyrus granted him his Life. This
recompense did the Devil return to Croesus for so great a Present. Such and
many other the like Histories by this Book may be understood.

The first rule for Drams.
IF you have any number of Drams, divide them by eight, and the production
will be English Crowns; according to Budaeus 100 Drams make a Mina, which
is about 12 Crowns, or 3 l. sterling.

The second rule of Mina's.
THE Mina multiplied by twelve, the production is Crowns: for twelve Crowns
English is a Roman Mina, or a Mina of the Temple; 125 Mina's make a Talent; so
that multiply 125 by 12, and the production will be 1500 Crowns, which makes a
Talent.

The third rule of Talents.
THE Talent multiplied by twelve, the production is Crowns. (...) 125 Mina's
being multiplied by twelve, makes 1500 Crowns English, which is a Talent; and
3000 Crowns is two Talents, etc. by which means you may reduce all Drams
and other less Weights mentioned in the Scriptures to Mina's, and Talents; and
these again into Crowns. But concerning the distinction of Talents, you may
read before. Notwithstanding observe this, that if you chance to read of any
Talent, Mina, or Sicle, in the Scripture, whereto there is not an addition of
the Kings Talent; or, the Talent of the Temple (as I have said) you may then
presume that it is the Common Talent. And this shall suffice for the Weights,
Measures, and Moneys mentioned in the Scriptures.

A Catalogue of the principal Authors out of whom this foregoing Treatise of
Weights and Measures, etc. was gathered.
AMbrosius Calapinus. Aulus Gellius. Cassarus Peucerus. Athenaeus. Flavius
Joseph. Galenus. Guilihelmus Budaeus. Hesychius. Saint Jerome. Ioachim
Camerarius. Johannes Avenarius. Johannes Fosterus. Julius Pollux. Martin
Luther. Matthew Hostius. Paulus Eberus. Philip Melancthon. Priscian
Grammaticus. Sebastian Munster. Septuaginta Interpretes. Suidas. Volutius
Metianus.
The due Proportion of Weights and Measures are also found in Myropolis.

ITINERARIVM Novi Testamenti.
Wherein is contained the Travels of the Virgin Mary, and Joseph; also of the
Wise men of the East, of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles.
BUT since I have briefly related the Travels of the ancient Patriarchs,
Judges, Kings, and Prophets, (which things I know cannot be unprofitable unto
such as are judicious) mentioned in the Old Testament; that I might make a
perfect end of what I have begun, I will proceed, and show unto you the Travels
of all the holy Men and Women mentioned in the New Testament; where, by due
observation of this discourse, you may well understand, that as all the Nations
of the World were derived from one man, that is, Adam; so all the Righteous,
and such as are to be saved, are derived from one man, that is, Christ Jesus.
For, as by the first Adam Sin came into the World, and by Sin, Death and
Damnation; so by the second Adam that Sin is pardoned, and Man made partaker of
Eternal happiness. And that these things might be the more apparent unto thee,
I have described the Towns, Cities, and Places mentioned in their several
Travels; both what they were in former times, and what they are at this
present: that so by the due consideration of both, thou might observe the
mutation and change of Estates; since, through the revolution of Times, those
things which seem most permanent, have within the compass of a few years been
subverted, and the ruins of those Cities which have been greatest, left to
make evident lamentable Examples of vast and unheard of destructions; from
whence, such as have any small knowledge of the Spirit, may draw such
comfortable resolutions, that neither Poverty can subvert them, nor Riches and
Honor exalt them; but, according to S. James, ca. 1. they may possess
themselves in peace; since neither the Prosperity of the World is permanent,
nor the adversity thereof intolerable. The knowledge of both which, howsoever
to some it may seem ridiculous, yet to such as are at all touched with the
sense of Worldly Affairs, it cannot choose but take a deep impression, and draw
them thence to the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and of his Doctrine. To which
end, and for which purpose, I have principally endeavored to publish this
Treatise, that so comparing the Estate of man in this present World, with the
Estate of Grace in the World to come, they might perceive the impotency of the
one, and the permanency of the other, and from both draw immovable Axioms,
that there can be no Salvation where there is no Humility, nor no Prosperity
where there is not a knowledge of Christ Jesus in his Humanity: and thence
gather, that the afflictions of this World, to which he is most subject through
the whole course of his Life, is the ready means to honor and immortal Glory.
But that these things may the better appear unto thee, I will endeavor to lay
before thee the Beginning, and (so far as the holy Scripture leads me) the
ending of our Savior. From whence thou may draw such comfortable
Resolutions, that in what Estate soever thou art, whether in Prosperity or
Adversity, thou may therewith rest content, etc.

Of Zacharias the Father of John Baptist.
ZAcharias or Zachariah, signifies Gods Remembrance. This man was the Father of
John the Baptist, being a Priest, of the Tribe of Aaron, and dwelling at a Town
called Abia, of which you may read, 1 Chr. 24. There were three famous men of
this name, as Basilius says. One that was a Prophet of the Lord, and lived 520
years before the birth of Christ; Zach. 1. And another, that was the Son of
Iehoiada the high Priest, who at the command of that ungrateful King Ioas, was
stoned to death in the upper Court of the Temple, 2 Chr. 24. And a third, which
was this Zacharias, the Father of John Baptist, and Son of Barachias, that is,
the Blessed: who, according to the Opinion of Basil, was slain for no other
cause but for saying that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. This man had to
wise Elizabeth, of the Posterity of the High Priest Aaron, and by her had a Son
called John; so named of the Lord, who was afterward called John the Baptist.
Elizabeth signifies, the rest of God, being derived of Eli and Scabbath, that
is, the Rest and Sabbath of the Lord. The Inhabitants of the holy Land take
upon them even to this day to show the House were Zacharias and Elizabeth
dwelt, in a Town that stands on the right hand of the way as you go from
Emmaus to Jerusalem. But Saint Luke, ca. 1. says, that Zacharias dwelt not in
a Town or Field, but in the City of Judah, which was situated in the mountain
of Judah. Risnerus and Johannes Hedenus write, that Zacharias dwelt in
Jerusalem, in the part of the City situated upon Mount Bezetha, as in the
first Book of the description of Jerusalem has bin declared. And this seems
to be verified out of Nehemiah, cap. 3. Yet there are some of opinion that he
dwelt at Hebron, because that was the chief City of the Tribe of Judah, and a
Town of the Priests.

The Travels of the Virgin Mary.
MARY, if it be derived of Marah, signifies such a Person as is oppressed with
carefulness and grief, one that is laid open to all misery and calamity,
pressed with continual vexation and mourning. She was born upon the eighth day
of September, 14 years before the birth of Christ; and in the fifteenth of her
age brought forth her only begotten Son, according to S. Hierome and others.
Her Fathers name was Eliakim, of the House of David.

Upon the five and twentieth day of March, in the same year that our Savior
Christ was born, Mary being then fourteen years old, the Angel Gabriel declared
unto her the Embassy of the Conception of our Lord Jesus Christ. A little
after, about the beginning of April, An. M. 3967, she went from Nazareth in
great haste over the Hills to Jerusalem, sixty four miles, to the House of
Zacharias, and there saluted her Cousin Elizabeth, Luke 1.

From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was sixty four miles.

And when the command came out from Augustus, that all the World should be
taxed, then Joseph and Mary went from Nazareth to Bethlehem, seventy two miles:
and there the time of Marys deliverance drew near, and lo, she bare the Son of
the living God, our Lord and Savior Christ. Luke. 2.

From Bethlehem, Joseph and Mary brought the Child Jesus to Jerusalem, and
presented him in the Temple, which was six miles, Luke. 2.

And when they had accomplished all things according to the Law, they returned
back again to Nazareth, a Town in Galilee, sixty four miles.

From Nazareth they went back again to Bethlem, seventy two miles* Thither the
wise men, coming out of the East, brought the Child Jesus Gold, Frankincense,
and Myrrh, Mat. 2.

From Bethlehem (the same night that Herod caused all the Infants of two years
old and under to be slain) Joseph and Mary fled with the Child Jesus to
Hermopolis, a City in Egypt, which was 296 miles. Mat. 2. Zozom. lib. 6.

From thence they returned back again with the Child Jesus to Nazareth, 368
miles: for they were greatly afraid lest Archilaus (who succeeded his father
Herod in the Government of the Jews) would seek the Child's life, Mat. 2.

From Nazareth, Joseph and Mary came every year to Jerusalem, which was sixty
four miles, to the feast of the Passover and so many miles back again; which
for ten years continuance, came to 1280 miles.

When Christ was twelve years of age, and at the beginning of the thirteenth,
he went with his Parents from Nazareth to the Feast of the Passover, being
sixty four miles, Luke 2.

And when the days of the Feast of the Passover were accomplished, they
returned home again. But the Child Jesus stayed at Jerusalem, and his Parents
knew it not, for they thought he had been among the company. Wherefore, when
they had traveled a days Journey (that is, twenty miles) they missed their
Son.

After, they searched through the company, but could not find him: wherefore
they returned back to Jerusalem, being twenty miles; where, on the third day
after, they found him in the Temple, sitting among the Doctors, and disputing
with them. So the next three days he returned back again with his Parents to
Nazareth, being sixty four miles, and was obedient to them, Luke. 2.

After, Joseph and Mary went every year, during the life of Joseph, up to
Jerusalem to the Passover, and without all doubt took Jesus along with them.
Thus they continued for the space of three years, about which time Joseph died,
Christ being then sixteen years of age: which three years Travel from Nazareth
to Jerusalem and back again, comes to 384 miles.

From that time forward he continued with his Mother till he was thirty one
years of age, which was the first year of his Ministry. Mary, his Mother, being
then forty five years old, was invited to a Marriage in Cana a City of Galilee,
which stood eight miles from Galilee toward the North-West, John 2. Here our
Savior Christ wrought his first miracle by changing water into wine.

From Cana in Galilee she went with our Savior to Capernaum, a City of
Galilee, a little before the Feast of the Paschal Lamb, which was twenty miles.

From Capernaum she returned back to Nazareth, which was accounted twelve miles.

In the thirty second year of the age of our Savior Christ, which was the
second of his Ministry, Mary went from Nazareth back again to Capernaum, where
our Savior Christ cast forth a Devil, Mat. 12. Mark 3. which was 12 miles.

From thence she returned back again to Nazareth, which was twelve miles: for
in this Town she dwelt, whilst Jesus traveled from place to place, teaching
and preaching the Word of God, Mark 6.

And although she oftentimes went from Nazareth with him to many places,
continuing still in his company; yet then especially, when he was to sustain
the wrath of God, and punishment for the Sin of man, which was in the thirty
fourth year of his age. In which year she would not forsake him till his death:
for she went from Galilee to Jerusalem with him, which wa^ sixty four miles; a
great Journey for one of her age (being then forty eigh^ years old.) And when
our Savior was crucified, she stood close by the Cross with a heavy and
pensive countenance, bewailing the death of her Son. Then was the Prophecy of
old Simeon accomplished, And a Sword shall pass through thy Soul. But after, by
his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, she was revived and comforted. From
the Passion of Christ to the death of the blessed Virgin Mary, was twelve
years: all which time she lived with John the Evangelist in Jerusalem, and then
being fifty nine years of age dyed, and was buried (according to the opinion of
Nicephorus and others) in the Garden called Gethsamene. So all her Travels were
3506 miles.

Now follows the description of the Towns and Places to which she traveled.
Of Nazareth.
THIS was a Town almost of no estimation; situated in a certain Mountain in
Galilee the lower, sixty four miles and something more from Jerusalem toward
the North, in the Tribe of Zabulon. In this Town our Savior Jesus Christ was
brought up, Luke 1. 2. Some say that it was nineteen or twenty miles from
Jerusalem, but they mistake themselves; yet I will not dispute thereof, but
follow my Authors, Iacobus Ziglerus, and Tilmanus Stella. There is not any
mention made of it, that is extant in the Old Testament. It has a twofold
derivation, the one by Zain, and the other by Zade. If it be written by Zain,
it may have a twofold signification, since the exposition of this name does
depend upon the Verb Nazar, which signifies, to consecrate and keep; from hence
Nezaer, a Garland of Flowers, or a Crown set with precious Stones, etc. such as
Kings and Highpriests are accustomed to wear. Also from the same word Nazar,
is derived Nazir, and thence Nazaraeus, which is as much as to say, He is
separated from the use of Wine; and suffering his Hair to be un-cut, as being
dedicated to the Lord. Therefore our Savior Christ is justly called a
Nazarite, Luke 2. For ^aezer first signifies a holy man, who has made a holy
Vow unto the Lord: Secondly, it does denote a Crown or wreath of Sincerity,
Exodus 29. 39. Thirdly, a holy Ointment, wherewith Kings and Priests were
anointed, Levit. 27. And fourthly, this word Nezaer signifies, a Princely
Crown, 2 Samuel 1. 2. Kings 11. Psalm. 89. 132. So that Nazareth, being derived of
Nazar and Nazir, may signify both a Crown, and a holy City, Judge. 13. but if
Nazareth be written by Zade, it signifies a flourishing plant or Graff,
according to that of Isay, c. 11. But there shall come a rod forth of the stock
of Ishai, and a Graff shall grow out of his root, and the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him. The Inhabitants of this Town at this day show certain
Monuments and Relics of what had happened in preceding Ages: as, two
Churches, one built there where the Angel Gabriel saluted the Blessed Virgin,
and she conceived by the Spirit; in which there stands three Altars, hew'n out
of a Rock: and the other built (as they say) where the house of Joseph and Mary
stood, because there our Savior Christ was brought up. Also they show a Well,
where the Child Jesus drew Water, and ministered to his Mother; they also show
the vast Ruins of the Synagogue where our Savior Christ expounded the sixty
first Chapter of Isay, for which cause they would have thrown him headlong down
the Hill, Luke 4. and many other things, of which you may read in Borchardus
the Monk. In Saint Ierom's time, some forty years before Christ, Nazareth was a
small Town called Nazarah.

Of the Mountains by which Mary passed when she went to visit her Cousin
Elizabeth.
BEtween Nazareth and Jerusalem, there stands many high Hills, as, Mount
Gilboa, whereon King Saul killed himself; Mount Gerisim, and Hebal, upon which
Hills the Blessings and Cursings were pronounced, Deuteronomy. 27. and Mount Ephraim,
upon which Ehud killed Eglon King of the Moabites, Judge. 13. Over this
Mountain, being very great and steep, Mary traveled when she went to visit her
Cousin Elizabeth.

Of Bethlehem.
THERE were two Cities called by this name, the one Bethlem Judah; the other
Bethlem Euphrata, where our Savior Christ was born, and signifies fruitful,
or the house of Bread: It stood upon a Hill, some six miles from Jerusalem
toward the South. The Inhabitants take upon them to show the place where our
Savior Christ was born, which stood upon the East side of the City, close by
the Wall thereof; where, as Eusebius says, Hellen, the Mother of Constantine
the Great, caused to be built a fair and stately Church, three hundred and
twenty years afte^ the Nativity of Christ. This Church was dedicated to St.
Mary, and remains to this day, being had in great honor, both amongst the
Christians, and the Turks, and Saracens. This Church is such a stately
building, that it is thought to exceed all the Churches of Christendom, for
Beauty and curious Workmanship: It is two hundred twenty eight Foot long, and
eighty seven Foot wide, being built all of Marble of diverse colors, and
covered with Lead: there are in it four rows of Marble Pillars, wonderful to
look upon, not only in regard of their number but of their greatness, for there
is fifty Pillars in every row. The Body of this Church, the Pillars from the
bottom to the top, the Walls, and every part of it, is beautified with lively
Pictures, adorned with diverse Colors, Silver, Gold, and curious Workmanship,
so as it is wonderful to behold. The Pavement of it is of Marble, polished, and
of diverse colors, so cunningly set in Works, and with such variety, that it is
very delightful to such as look on it. There is painted on the Pillars and
Walls, almost all the Stories of the Old Testament, till the Birth of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, with such excellent cunning, and so lively, that it
is to be admired. In the Quire of this Church there is found two Altars, one
close by the Chapel of St. Katherine, at the East end thereof; not far distant
from which, they show the place where our Savior was circumcised: and in the
middle of the Quire there stands another Altar, where they say the Wise men
left their Dromedaries, and prepared their Gifts to present unto our Savior,
when they worshipped him. Upon the South side of this Quire, toward the East,
they descend by ten stone steps into the Chapel of the Nativity of Christ,
richly beautified, and curiously wrought, paved with polished Marble. This
Chapel is not very great, but wonderful fair and sumptuous. When the Holy Land
was overrun by the Gentiles, this (as many other places were in that Country)
was all polluted with Filth and Dirt, that they had much ado to make it clean a
great while after. Upon the place where they said our Lady the Blessed Virgin
Mary brought forth our Savior into the World, there is placed a Table of white
Marble, after the manner of an Altar: about some four Foot from this they show
the place where the Manger stood, a part of it yet remaining, cut out of a
Rock, not of Marble, but of other stone, as many other Mangers are in that
Country. Close by that there is an Altar, where they say the Wise men presented
their Gifts to our Savior Christ, and worshipped him. At the entrance into the
Church, there stands a goodly Building, which in times past seemed to have
been some Archbishops See, but now is called St. Mary's Church. Upon the North
side, they descended by certain steps into the Chapel of St. Ierom, who lay a
long time buried there, till his Bones were removed thence to St. Mary's in
Rome.

About a mile from Bethlehem, Southward, stood the Tower of Eder, being a
Watchtower of the Bethlehemites, and so called, because there resorted thither
many flocks of sheep: for Aeder ^ignifieth a Herd. Round about this Tower were
fair and fruitful Pastures, to which many Shepherds resorted to feed their
Flocks; to some of which Shepherds the Angels told the glad tidings of the
Birth of our Savior, and that he was laid in a Manger at Bethlehem. For which
cause, in after times there was a Church built just in the place where the
Tower stood; and in Saint Ierom's time called by the name of Angelos ad
Pastores: the same Luther affirms, that it is yet standing. Jacob sometime
dwelt in that Place, and buried his wife Rachel thereabouts. The Monument that
he set upon her grave remains to this day, which was twelve Stones pitched an
end, standing about a quarter of a mile from this place, upon the right Hand as
they go to Jerusalem: of which Grave, all the Country thereabouts is called by
the name of Rachel.

Of the Way between Judea and Egypt.
BEtween Egypt and Judea lies Arabia Petraea: a Land for the most part barren
and unfruitful, full of Sands, Rocks, and Mountains, destitute of Water, and
subject to many dangers: being in the Summer Solstice scorched with extremity
of heat, the Sun being then perpendicular over them (according to Munster) in
the day time; and in the night, troubled with extreme Winds, which, blowing the
Sand with great violence, it casts it upon great heaps and Mountains, by
which dust, both Beasts and sometime men are suffocated and slain.

Moreover, there dwelt in this Desert, a rude and dangerous People, called
Saracens; who take their beginning from Ishmael, and are therefore also called
Ishmaelites, being given to cruelty and malitiousness. They get their living,
for the most part, by Theft and Violence: and as Ishmael was an excellent
Archer, so they also are very cunning in shooting and hunting, using to this
day their ancient evil custom of robbing and spoiling all that pass that way;
insomuch as Merchants are constrained to go in great companies, lest they
should be endangered by them, and by reason of the Winds and Sands, are
constrained to guide their Journey by the Compass, as men do that sail upon the
Sea. Through this Wilderness did Joseph and Mary pass, when they went with the
Child Jesus out of Iudaea into Egypt; where they were in danger of Thieves,
subject to be smothered by the Sands, constrained to travel over high Rocks and
Mountains, and to rest in Fear, because of Lions, Bears, and other Beasts which
greatly abound in that Place. Besides, diverse other discommodities were
incident unto them, as want of Meat, Drink, and other necessaries, there being
little Water to be found there, insomuch as had not the Lord by an express
command charged him in a dream to go down into Egypt, Joseph durst hardly have
ventured upon so difficult and dangerous a Journey. But the Lord so mercifully
provided for him, that he both went and returned safe. Thus may we see to what
dangers these good People were exposed, and what miseries they sustained from
the beginning because of their Son Christ Jesus.

Of Hermopolis.
HErmopolis was called the Town of Mercury, distant from Jerusalem 304 miles
toward the South-West: it was one of the chief Cities in Egypt, as Appianus
writes. Nicephorus and Zozemenus affirm, lib. 5. cap. 22. that Joseph and Mary
came and lived in this Town, where they continued all the days of Herod, that
cruel King. But Ziglerius says, that they lived in the Land of Gosen, where
the Patriarch Jacob and his Posterity lived: which agrees well with the words
of S. Matthew, cap. 2. and Hosea 11. Out of Egypt have I called my Son. This
Land of Gosen lay 200 miles from Jerusalem, toward the South-West. The
Inhabitants of Alcair in Egypt take upon them to show the place where Joseph
and Mary dwelt, when they went down into that Country; but how true it is I
cannot tell, because there is no Author for it.

Of Canah in Galilee.
THis was a City in Galilee, distant from Jerusalem sixty eight miles toward
the North; of which you may read more in the Travels of our Savior Christ.

Of Capernaum.
THis Town stood upon the Sea of Galilee, sixty eight miles from Jerusalem
toward the North; of which you may read more after.

The Trav^ls of the Wise Men of the East, which came to Bethlehem to see Jesus.
THE Magi were certain wise men of Persia, so called from Meditation, being
derived of Hagah, that is, he has meditated; and taken in the third
Conjugation, it signifies, to find or search out a thing, they being such as
gave themselves to the knowledge of hard things, and to find out the Secrets
and mysteries of Nature. But, according to Varinus, they were not only
Philosophers, but Priests also. And Pla^o upon Alcibiades, says, Magia est
Deorum observantia sive ^ultus divinus; that is, Magic prescribed the due
observance and divine worship of the Gods. Strabo says, Geogra. lib. 6. That
the Magi were such among the Persians, as those whom the Indians call
Gimnosophists and Academians; the Babylonians, Chaldaeans; and the Hebrews,
Prophets, or Priests, which taught the People Divine knowledge. And when the
ten Tribes were carried into captivity by Sal^anasser Emperor of the Assyrians
(into Assyria, Media, and Persia) there is no question but they took with them
into the East, the holy Books and Volumes of the Law, and of the Prophets,
whereby, without doubt, many of the People and Philosophers of the East came to
have a taste of the true knowledge and worship of God. Also the Prophet Daniel
was brought up in all the Arts of the Caldaeans; whose Writings and Prophecies
were not only written and published amongst the Babyl^nians, but also had in
great account and estimation amongst the Magi: so that they diligently perusing
those Books, came not only to the knowledge of God, but also without doubt, to
the knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, whom they called the Star of Jacob;
from whence may be concluded, that the Wisemen that came to see our Savior
Christ, were rather of Susa in Persia, than of Zaba in Aethiopia.

Wherefore these Wise Men came from the Academy of Susa in Persia to Jerusalem,
which was 920 miles; saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we
have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him. This happened in the
month of January, in the second year after the birth of our Savior; for Herod
in the seventieth year of his age caused all the male Children of the
Bethlemites of two years old and under (according to the time that he was told
of the Wise Men) to be put to the Sword.

From Jerusalem they went to Bethlehem, which was six miles, where, upon the
sixth of January they offered their Presents which they brought out of Persia,
to our Savior; viz. Gold, as to a King; Frankincense, as to a Priest; and
Mirth, as to a Mortal man, Mat. 2. So let us offer unto Christ our Savior, the
Gold of Faith and heavenly Doctrine; the Frankincense of earnest Prayers, and
the Myrrh of Patience in the midst of Calamity.

Afterward, the Wisemen (as they had been warned in a dream) returned another
way to Susa in Persia, which was 920 miles. So their Travels were 1846 miles.

Of Susa you may read before in the Travels of the Old Testament.

Of the Star that appeared to the Wisemen in the East.
SInce this Star appeared in the lower Region of the Air, (as it is apparent it
did) from thence it may be concluded, that it neither was any of the fixed
Stars, Planet, or a Comet, because they commonly are seen in the upper Region
of the Air; but rather, according to the opinion of some, it was an Angel of
God, appearing in the form of a bright shining Star, to direct the Wise Men in
their way they went to the Town of Bethlem; and so by little and little
descending from the sublimity of the Air, pointed out unto them the very house
where they might find Mary the Mother of our Lord, and the Child Jesus; almost
after the same manner as the Angel of the Lord in the time of Moses appeared to
the Children of Israel; that is, in the day like a cloudy Pillar, and in the
night like a flaming Fire, to direct them their way, Exodus 13. 14. 34.
Wherefore this Star without doubt was no natural Apparition, which happened in
the inferior Region of the Air, suddenly vanishing away; but, as I have said,
an Angel of the Lord representing the form of a Star. Or else, as Chrysostom
says, a certain miraculous new Star, which, according to the opinion of
Augustine, was governed by an Angel of the Lord; and for the greatness of the
Body, and variety of the Aspects, was not seen first in the Land of Iudaea, but
in Persia, a Country in the East, where the Magi dwelt, and accompanied thence
into Iudaea. And although for a short space it left them in their Journey, yet
when they came in the way to Bethlem, it appeared to them again, Mat. 2. As
Nicephorus and Chrysostom observe, the Star appeared upon the day of the
Conception of Christ, being the twenty fifth day of March; about which time the
Archangel Gabriel spoke with the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. and was seen for a whole
year and forty one weeks, that is, till the sixth of January, in the beginning
of the second year after the Nativity of Christ. It wanted eleven weeks of two
years; and therefore Herod caused all the Male-children of the Bethlehemites of
two years old and under, to be slain according to the time declared unto him by
the Wisemen. Mat. 2. Wherefore this new Star did first fore-shew the Birth of
Christ, that bright shining Star and eternal light of Glory, according to the
Prophecy of Billa, Number. 22. Secondly, the Light of God's Word and the Gospel, 2
Pet. 1. Thirdly, Godly and Faithful Ministers and Teachers, who by their
Doctrine and godly Life and Conversation, should set before their Auditors and
such as observe their actions, the way to Christ and eternal happiness, Dan.
ult.

The Travels of John Baptist.
IN the Month of Thisri, which answers to our September, Anno Mundi, 3966,
the Feast of the Tabernacles being then celebrated, the Archangel Gabriel told
Zacharias the Priest, of the Conception of John the Baptist, which should be
the voice of a Crier in the Wilderness. And a little after, that is, about the
Autumnal Aeqinoctial, John the Baptist was conceived six Months before our
Savior. The next year after, about the Month of July, he was born. Six Months
after that, our Savior Christ was born. In which year, Zacharias, the Father
of John Baptist, was slain in the upper Court, between the Altar and the
Temple, for saying, that our Savior Christ was born, and, that Mary his Mother
was a Virgin, Mat. 33. Wherefore Elizabeth, the Wife of Zacharias, fearing the
cruelty of Herod and of the Pharisees, about that time when the young Infants
of the Bethlehemites were slain, she fled from Jerusalem to Apumim, as
Nicephorus says, which was situated in the Wilderness between Jericho and
Jerusalem, where she privately brought up her Son, being thirty two miles.

In the thirty ninth Year of the Nativity of Christ, and upon the twenty fourth
day of June, John the Baptist being then thirty Years of Age, by the
Commandment of the Lord, took upon him the Ministry; for it was not lawful for
any to enter into that Function before they were thirty Years of Age, Numb. 4.
Wherefore, upon the eight and twentieth day of September, it being then the
Feast of the Tabernacles, and about the middle of the last Week spoken of by
Daniel, he went from Adumim to Bethabara, where he took upon him the Ministry
of the New Testament: Hannas the chief Priest being then newly entered into that
Office, Luke 2. (which was about four miles) and within a short time after,
that is, upon the seventh day of October, being then the Feast of Expiation,
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was baptized, when he was fully thirty Years
of Age, Luke 3. Matthew 3. John 1.

In the Year following, which was the one and thirtieth Year of the Nativity of
Christ, a little before the Feast of Easter, the Synedrion of Jerusalem sent
Messengers unto John, he then remaining at Bethabara, to know whether he was
the Christ, or Elias, or some other Prophet, John 1. Upon the eighteenth day of
September, the same Year, John entered upon the second year of his Ministry;
about which time, Caiphas began to enter upon the Office of the High Priest,
and the Sadducees and Pharisees to persecute John Baptist. Wherefore he
departed from Bethabara, and went to Aenon, a City in Galilee, which was twenty
four miles.

After that John had preached publicly and freely, by the space of a whole
year and two months; about the month of December, and the end of the first year
of the Ministry of our Savior, by the Commandment of Herod, he was taken and
led Prisoner from Aenon to the Tower of Macheruntes, which was twenty eight
miles; where he remained until his Death. So all his Travels were eighty eight
miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Adumim.
ADumim, or Adummim, (as it is in Joshua, cap. 15.) was a Tower twelve miles
from Jerusalem toward the East, situated in the Wilderness that is between
Jerusalem and Jericho; so called because of the multitude of Robberies and
Murders that were done in that place: for Dam signifies Blood. Here the poor
man that Christ mentioned, Luke 10. fell amongst Thieves; and here Eliah
continued when he was sed by the Rave^s, and drank the Water of the River
Cherith, 1 King 17. which was a notable Type of John the Baptist, who lived in
a Cave in this place. This Cave stood close by the Garden of Engedi, where in
former times the Academy and School of the Prophets Eliah and Elisha was kept:
here the Esseis (which was a Sect amongst the Jews) also continued, who led a
Monastical kind of Life, and gave themselves wholly to Prayers and good Works;
under whose Discipline and Instruction John was brought up. Mathesius wisely
observes, that of all other, the Esseis would never oppose Christ; but were a
People that lived chastely and honestly, according to the Custom of the
Nazarites, with all diligence reading the Scriptures, and avoiding idleness as
a great temptation of the Devil, giving themselves principally to the Study of
Physic. After this sort was John brought up.

Of Bethabara.
THIS was a Town situated upon the East side of the River Jordan, sixteen
miles from Jerusalem toward the East, where there was either a Bridge or a
Ferry to pass over Jordan: from whence this place was called Bethabara, being
derived of Both, a House; and Abarah, a Passage: wherefore, at a certain time,
there being assembled in this place a great Concourse and Congregation of
People, John did first enter upon the Ministry of the New Testament, and taught
the People the Doctrine of Repentance and Baptism. Here Elias the Thesbite, who
was a Type of John the Baptist, was taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot.
Here John spoke with the Messengers that came to inquire whether he was Christ
or not: to whom he answered, That he was neither Elias, nor a Prophet of the
Old Testament, but the Voice of a Crier in the Wilderness, Io. 4. Is. 40. And
in the same place where the Priests stood with the Ark of the Covenant, whilst
Joshua and the Children of Israel passed over Jordan, John baptized Christ, the
true Ark of the Covenant of the Throne of Grace, Josh. 3. 4. Mat. 4. Luke 3.
Heb. 9.

Of Aenon.
THIS Town stood upon the West Side of the River of Jordan, 42 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, a little on this side of the Sea of Tiberias, near the
mouth of the River Iaboch, where it falls into Jordan, in which place was
great abundance of Waters. Here also John sometimes baptized, Ioh. 3. it being
two miles from Salem, where Jacob in times past dwelt, Genesis 33. Of the meeting
together of the Waters this Town was called Aenon, of Ain, which signifies an
Eye, and a Fountain that springs as it were from an Eye.

Of Macherus, or Macharuntes.
MAcherus was a Town of Peraea, beyond Jordan, twenty miles from Jerusalem
toward the East, situated in a high Mountain, being derived of Macherah, that
is, a Sword. This was one of the chief Castles of Herod Antipas, who obtained
the chief Command in the City of Jerusalem, Plin. lib. 5. c. 16. In this place
John Baptist was beheaded, as Joseph. says, lib. Antiq. 80. c. 10. And
although his Disciples buried his Body thereabouts, yet long after the
Christians removed his Bones and Relics to Sebasten, that is, Samaria, where
they were the second time buried with great Honor and Reverence. Afterward (as
Nicephorus and Theodorus sa^) his Bones were taken up again by Julian the
Apostate, and burned. There are many other things that are written concerning
his Relics, which (because of the uncertainty of them) I omit to speak of;
and will proceed to a further Description of this City. Alexander, King of the
Jews, first built and fortified it; and then making War against Aristobulus, it
happened to be destroyed by Gabinus, one of his Captains, and so continued
desolate till Herod's time, who rebuilt the Town and the Castle, and fortified
it with strong Walls and high Towers, even a hundred and sixty Cubits in
height, so that a man could scarce see to the top of it. But, that God might
revenge the blood of his Saints, at such time as Jerusalem and the Holy Land
was left desolate, Lucius Bassus (a noble Roman) came to this City, and
besieged it; during which Siege, Bassus took a certain young man, which was a
Prince of the Jews, called Eleazer, and caused a Cross to be set on purpose to
have crucified him; but they which were besieged in the Town, seeing the
pitiful Lamentations this young man made, promised Bassus, if he would spare
his Life, to yield up the Town, which he did; so the Castle being taken, the
Gates of the City were set open. But the Romans fell to the Slaughter without
Mercy, and put to the Sword 1700 Persons, besides, there were a great multitude
of Women and Children carried thence into Captivity, as Josephus (lib. de Bello
Iud. 7. cap. 25.) affirms.

There were many goodly Wells and stately Buildings within this City: there is
cut out in the Castle a Rue Tree of an admirable greatness: and in the Valley,
upon the North-side of the City, the Root Baarus is found, presenting both in
Color and Figure a Flame. There are also found many hot Baths and Fountains of
wholesome Waters: but above the rest, Josephus makes mention of one in a Cave,
where two Streams issues, as it were out of two Dugs; the one hot, the other
cold; which two Waters being mingled together, are very wholesome, and cure many
Diseases, but principally the shrinking of the Sinews. And this shall suffice
concerning the Travels of John the Baptist.

The Travels of our Lord and Savior Christ in his Infancy. Matthew. 3. Luke 2.
FRom Bethlehem the Child Jesus was brought to Jerusalem, and there presented
in the Temple, Anno Mundi 3967, which was 6 miles.

From Jerusalem, Joseph and Mary, (when they had accomplished all things in the
Temple of the Lord) carried the Child Jesus to Nazareth in Galilee, which was
sixty four miles.

From thence Joseph and Mary brought Jesus back again to Bethlehem, which was
seventy two miles.

Upon the second day of January, in the second Year after the Nativity of
Christ, the wise men of Persia brought Gifts, and worshipped him. A little
after, that is, about the Ides of January, just the Night before the Command
came from Herod to kill the innocent Children, Joseph and Mary went, with the
Child Jesus, through the Mountains and Deserts of Judea into Egypt, to
Hermopolis in the Land of Gosen; which was reckoned from Bethlehem 296 miles.

From Hermopolis in Egypt (after the death of Herod) Jesus was brought back
again by his Parents to Nazareth in Judea, which was above 368 miles.

When Jesus was twelve years of age, he went with his Parents from Nazareth to
Jerusalem, to the Feast of the Passover, which was sixty four miles.

And when his Parents had lost him, and found him again in the Temple among the
Learned; then he continued in obedience unto them, and went with them from
Jerusalem to Nazareth, which was sixty four miles. So his Travels were 934
miles.

Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read before
in the Travels of the Virgin Mary.

The Travels of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, from his Baptism till the
first year of his Ministry.
CHrist, in the thirtieth year of his age, went from Nazareth and came to
Bethabara, which stood upon the River Jordan, where John baptized; and upon the
seventh day of October, in the middle of the last Week spoken of by Daniel,
cap. 9. was there baptized, at whose baptism the testimony of the Spirit
descended down upon him in the likeness of a Dove; which was fifty two miles.

From Jordan, Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of
the Devil, and there fasted forty days and forty nights: at the end of which
time, the Devil came and tempted him. How this Wilderness was called, the
Evangelist does not specify; but it is to be thought that it was the Desert of
Arabia Petraea, and that our Savior Christ fasted upon the mountain of Sinai,
where Moses and Eliah fasted forty days and forty nights, Exodus 24. 1. Reg.
19. For this Desert extends it self from the borders of Egypt and the Red
Sea, to Jordan, where John baptized: and from thence, by the Country of
Trachonites, to the mountain of Libanus. Therefore our Savior Christ might
that present seventh day of October whereon he was baptized come into this
Wilderness; and by little and little go thence to Mount Sinai, which was 136
miles. For there was no place more fit for Sath^n to tempt our Savior in, than
where the Law was delivered, which is the power of Sin: for although the Son of
God was without Sin, yet he took upon him the Sins of all the World, Levit. 16.
Joh. 1. Isa. 53. So then our Savior Christ (according to this supputation)
continued in the Desert from the seventh day of October to the sixteenth of
November, which was forty days and forty nights. Epiphanius, lib. 2. Tom. 1.
Haeres. 51. says, that our Savior Christ was baptized upon the eighth day of
November, which was the twelfth day of the month Athyr amongst the Egyptians:
but this supputation is false, and altogether repugnant to the certain
Mathematical calculation.

Wherefore, upon the seventeenth day of November, our Savior Christ hungered,
Mat. 4. Mark 1. Luke 4. and then the Devil, with an extraordinary boldness,
came unto him, and carried him from Mount Sinai with great violence through the
Air, and set him upon the top of a Pinnacle of the Temple in Jerusalem, which
was 120 miles: this Pinnacle was so exceeding high, (as you may read in the
description of Jerusalem) that whosoever looked down from it into the Valley of
Cedron, their eyes dazzled, and it seemed as though there had been Clouds in the
bottom of the Valley; for it was 600 foot from the bottom to the top, From this
place the Devil bid our Savior Christ throw himself down etc. Mat. 4.

From the Pinnacle of the Temple, the Devil took our Savior Christ and set him
upon a high Mountain; but what Hill it was, or how called, the holy Evangelist
does not set down. The Inhabitants of the holy Land think it was the Hill that
stood betwixt Bethel and Ai, upon which Hill in times past Abraham dwelt, Genesis
13. But that Hill is not very high, and there are many higher Hills in the holy
Land: wherefore it is to be thought that he was carried upon the top of that
high Mountain Nebo, which was also called Pisgah, and stood 24 miles from
Jerusalem Eastward, where God showed unto Moses all the holy Land beyond
Jordan, Deuteronomy. 34. And in this place, as God had showed Moses, so the Devil
showed our Savior the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, saying*
All these will I give thee, etc. It is to be thought, that all these sharp
temptations of the Devil were done in one day.

This Hill Pisgah is distant from Bethabara 8 miles, where John Baptist
baptized, and bare witness of our Savior Christ, Ioh. ca. 1. Now after the
Devil had left him, and the Angels had comforted him, he came thence unto John,
which was 8 miles, and John said to his Disciples, Behold, this is the Lamb of
God which takes away the Sins of the World, Ioh. 1.

So these Travels were 140 miles.

The Travels of our Savior Christ, in the first year of his Ministry, which
was the 31 of his age.
BUT yet our Savior Christ began not to preach publicly, because it was not
lawful for any to be admitted into the Ministry of the Word until they were
past thirty years of age. Now our Savior Christ, in the Months of January and
February, being then past thirty (for he was full thirty upon the 25 day of
December) began to preach publicly, but yet he had no Disciples, neither had
he wrought any Miracles. In the month of March, John Baptist testifies of
Christ before the Priest and Levites; and within two days after, Christ being
then present, John said, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of
the World, etc. Within a while after, Christ went thence toward Cana in
Galilee, in which Journey he took unto him some Disciples, namely, Andrew, and
John the Evangelist, and, as some think, Peter, Philip, and Nathaniel; near to
the Town of Bethel, where the Patriarch Jacob saw a Ladder reaching from Earth
to Heaven (for Christ makes mention of that Vision in his Journey) which was
32 miles, Ioh. 2. where he graced the Marriage with a notable Miracle, turning
six pots of Water (containing 168 Gallons and three Quarts or thereabouts) into
Wine, Ioh. 2.

After he went thence with his Mother and his Disciples to Capernaum, 20 miles:
but he stayed there but a while, for the Passover of the Jews was at hand,
Ioh. 2.

In the beginning of April, Christ went from Capernaum to Jerusalem, to the
Feast of the Passover, which was 56 miles, and there cast out of the Temple the
Money Changers, and those that sold Sheep, and Oxen, and Doves in it. This was
done about 46 years after Herod Ascalonita, King of the Jews, had rebuilded
and beautified the Temple; of which you may read in Joseph. lib. Ant. 15. cap.
14. Ioh. 2.

The first Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
This first Passover of the Ministry of our Savior Christ, of which you may
read, John 2. was celebrated upon the sixth day of April, and continued until
the thirteenth day of the same Month. During which time, our Savior Christ did
many Miracles, insomuch that many believed in his Name; and amongst the rest,
Nicodemus, who came to him by night, and reasoned with him concerning the
Kingdom of God. Nicodemus signifies the Victory of the People, Ioh. 3. At this
time he continued in Jerusalem till the month of October, and there celebrated
the Feast of the Tabernacles, and Preached the acceptable year of the Lord,
Esaias 61.

The Feast of Tabernacles being ended, Jesus with his Disciples came into
Judea, that is, he went from Jerusalem, and began to teach in Judea, and his
Disciples baptized, Ioh. 3. 4. John also baptized at this time upon the borders
of Galilee near Judea, 42 miles from Jerusalem Northward, upon the East side of
the River Jordan, for he was not yet cast into Prison. Therefore Christ chose
him a place to teach and baptize in, upon the River of Jordan near John, that
they might meet and converse together. A little after, the question was moved
concerning Purification, and John began to preach of Christ, and that he was
the Son of God, and Spouse of the Church. In this Sermon John in many places
called himself the Friend of the Spouse. From whence it is evident, that Christ
and Iohn^in the month of November, did often meet and converse together.

In the month of December, Christ being assured of the captivity of John the
Baptist, Mat. 4. Mark 1. and of the Persecution and fallacies of the Pharisees,
John 4. went from Jordan, and returned into Galilee, by the Province and
Country of Samaria: in which Country he came to Jacob's Well, which stood close
by Sichar, in former times called Sichem, about some 10 miles from Jordan
toward the West; in which place he spoke with the Samaritan Woman, (this
happened some four months before Harvest) and after went into Sichar, and
continued there for the space of two days; and after returning into Galilee,
was very acceptably entertained of the Galileans, because they formerly having
seen his miracles done at Jerusalem, were joyful to see him there.

When he had traveled from Sichar to Cana (a City in Galilee the lower, which
was 32 miles, where he had changed water into wine) there was a certain Ruler
came unto him, whose Son lay sick at Capernaum, 20 miles distant, and besought
him to heal his Son; our Savior told him that his Son was made whole: so he
believed, and his Son was made whole the same hour. This was the second miracle
that our Savior Christ did, Io. 4. It is thought that this Rulers name was
Chuza, of whom there is mention Luke 8. and was Herod's Procurator; whose Wives
name was Iohanna, which signified Gracious. This Woman ministered of all her
substance unto Christ, John 4. So these Travels were 192 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Cana in Galilee.
THis was a City of the lower Galilee, where our blessed Savior Christ turned
Water into Wine, being distant from Jerusalem 68 miles Northward. The place
where our Savior wrought this Miracle is to be seen at this day; but it is
within the Ground, and you must descend by certain steps before you can come at
it, because (as it, seems) there have been many Churches and Buildings set upon
it, which being sundry times overthrown, the ruins thereof have raised the
Earth in such sort, that the ancient Place is as it were hidden and laid under
the earth, as is also the place of the Anuntiation of the Nativity of our
Savior Christ, and many other where he wrought Miracles; to which they do
descend down under the earth by steps. Upon the North side of this Town stood a
round Hill, and upon the South a goodly Plain; being called Cana in Galilee, to
put distinction between it and another Town called after the same name, which
stood upon the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, in the Tribe of Asser; in which the
Canaanitish woman, or Syrophoenicean dwelt, which besought Christ to heal her
Daughter, who was possessed of a Devil, Mat. 15. Mark 7. Which was called Canah
the greater, as this was called Canah the less, and was distant each from the
other 44 miles.

Canah was so called, because round about it grew Reeds, and there were many
moorish and waterish grounds, whereof the Town took the name. For Canah
signifies a Reed: which is a fit type of the Church; for, as our Savior Christ
at this Town (which stood in a moorish and Reedy place) graced the marriage
with an extraordinary Miracle; so likewise will he grace the marriage of his
Church (though troubled with miseries and afflictions in this World, tossed to
and fro like a wavering Reed) with the glorious presence of his gracious
countenance, and in the World to come crown it with Eternal Glory.

Of Ca^ernaum.
THis City was so called from the pleasant and comfortable Situation of it. In
the Hebrew Text Matthew calls it Ca harnacu^, i. The Town of comfort; being
derived of No^^am, i. Consolation. In this Town our Savior dwelt after he had
left Nazareth, and in it wrought many Miracles, as the healing of the sick,
casting out of Devils, and such like, whereof you may read, Mat. 8. Mark 1.
Luke 5. 7. John 4. It stood in the Land of Genezareth, upon the West and North
side of Jordan, in an angle of Land joining to the Sea of Galilee, 56 miles
from Jerusalem Northward, in the Tribe of Issachar; and, as it is thought by
some, just in the midst of the twelve Tribes. Mat. 9. calls it the City of our
Savior. And that Christ was no Stranger, but an Inhabitant of this City, it is
manifest, Mat. 17. where Christ, when he gave Tribute to the Magistrates of
this City, asked Peter, saying, Of whom do the Kings of the Earth take tribute?
Peter said, of strangers: then, quoth he, the Children are free; yet
nevertheless, etc. From whence may be gathered, that he was no Stranger, but an
Inhabitant in Capernaum. It had upon the North side of it the three Tribes,
Ne^thalim Asser, and Zabulon; upon the South, Benjamin, Judah, Dan, and Simeon;
upon the West Issachar, Epharaim, and the half Tribe of Manasses; and upon the
East, Reuben, Gad, and the other half Tribe of Manasses: so that our Savior
Christ dwelt in the midst of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Furthermore, it was a
goodly Market Town, and had as well relation to Tyrus and Sidon (two Towns of
the Gentiles, within forty four miles of it) as to Jerusalem from whence may be
verified that saying of Esa. ca. 8, 9. The Land of Zebulon and Naphtalim, near
the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, and Galilee of the Gentiles; a People which
sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, saw a great Light. This Town is
therefore justly called the City of Comfort and Consolation; since our Savior
Christ dwelt there, who with his Doctrine and preaching refreshed and comforted
all such as were afflicted with the Burden of their Sins. But the great men
that were Inhabitants of this City, had more respect to their private profit,
than to the Doctrine and Miracles that Christ wrought among them; from whence
it came to pass, that they did as it were neglect and contemn that Good which
God had offered to them: which made our Savior say, And thou Capernaum, which
seem to be exalted up unto Heaven, shall be cast down into Hell: for if the
Miracles had been done in Sodom and Gomorrah, which have been done in thee,
they had continued until this day. Verily, verily, I say unto you, it shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for thee, Mat. 11.
For there was no such benefit offered to any City, neither such Honors and
Dignities, as were to Capernaum, our Savior himself dwelling there. Wherefore,
for their Ingratitude and Impiety, the City has diverse times been wasted and
destroyed, as well by the Romans as other Nations; so that at this day, this
Glorious City is become so Desolate, that there is scarce eight Houses
standing, and they also like small Sheds.

Of Sichar.
IN ancient time this Town was called Sichem, of which you may read more both
in the Travels of Jacob and Abimelech. After it came to be called Sichar,
according to the opinion of Luther upon Genesis, because the Inhabitants of
that Country were given to Pleasure and Voluptuousness, the greatest part of
their Delight being in drinking and quaffing: so Sichar being derived of
Schachar, signifies, to be Drunk, or inordinately to swallow sweet and
pleasant Wine, of which there was plenty in that Town, made of the Juice of
Apples, the Fruit of Palm Trees, and Honey, which may very well resemble
Hipocras or Metheglin, as some Authors have it. And although by the Incursions
of the Romans it was utterly wasted and left Desolate, yet in succeeding times
it was rebuilt, and called Nicapolis, that is, a New Town. It is situated
very pleasantly, and abounds with all manner of Delights; but it is
unfortified, neither can it by any means be fortified; neither have the
Inhabitants any help, if they be oppressed by the Enemy, but to fly: for it is
situated in the middle of a Valley, between two high Mountains, so that a man
may fling a stone from the top of one of them into the City. About two Bows
shot without the South Gate of this Town, is to be seen the Fountain or Well of
Jacob, upon the Brim of which our Savior Christ sat when he was weary, as we
may read in the fourth of John. This Well stands just in the way as Pilgrims
travel to Jerusalem. Upon the right hand above this Well, there stands a
Mountain of an exceeding height, divided into two tops, the one of them being
called Gerizim, the other Hebal. In Mount Gerizim the Patriarch Ioshuah built
an Altar, and the People standing upon Mount Hebal, he caused the whole Book of
Deuteronomy to be read over, with the Blessings and Cursings, so that all the
People might hear them; for thus we read in Ios. 8. The one half of the People
stood close by Mount Gerizim, and the other by Mount Hebal, etc. Deuteronomy. chap.
27. These two great Mountains began upon the right side of the City Sichar, and
extended themselves in length to the City of Jericho.

Upon the left side of this Well is to be seen the Ruins of a great Town, which
is thought to be the old Sichem, and by the Relics that remain there, it may
be judged to have been a very goodly City. For there are yet to be seen certain
broken Pillars of Marble, as also large and spacious Buildings, which in times
past, without Question, have been very goodly things, and stands wonderful
pleasantly; the Soil round about it being very pleasant and fruitful, only
there is want of Water. This Town lies some two Bows shot from Sichar, and the
Inhabitants of that place judge this Sichar to be Thebez, where Abimelech died,
Judge. 9. Not far from Jacob's Well, is to be seen that piece of Ground which
Jacob gave to Joseph, more than the rest of his Brethren, Genesis 48. It is a long
Valley, very fruitful and pleasant, where there lies butied, in a certain fair
Garden, the Bones of Jacob and Joseph, which were brought out of Egypt, Josh.
24. the Relics of which Sepulcher are yet to be seen. Mount Garizim or
Gerizim, is so called from the cutting down of Trees: for Garaz signifies, to
cut down. Upon this Mountain is to be seen (even to this day) the place where
the Temple stood, that was built by Sanballath, dedicated to Jupiter Olympius,
in contempt of the Temple of Jerusalem. The Chief Priest of this Temple was one
Manasses, a Fugitive, of the stock of Levi. This Manasses was Brother to
Iaddus, Chief Priest of Jerusalem, of whom you may read, Nehem. 13. But some
200 years after the first Foundation, John Hircanus, High Priest of Jerusalem,
utterly destroyed it to the Ground.

The Travels of our Savior Christ in the second year of his Ministry; which
was the two and thirtieth year of his age.
IN the Month of January, Christ went from Cana in Galilee to Nazareth, which
was eight miles. Here, upon the Sabbath Day, he went into the Synagogue, and
began to teach, insomuch as the Inhabitants were astonished at his Doctrine:
but the Citizens being ungrateful, he went to Capernaum, a City which I have
chosen to dwell in before all others, Luke 4. Mat. 4. being twelve miles, or
thereabouts.

In the Month of February, he compassed about all Galilee, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom of God, healing the Sick, and those that were diseased amongst
the People, Mat. 4. In this Visitation our Savior went to Caesarea Philippi,
which was distant from Capernaum forty eight miles toward the North. Here
Matthew was called, as he was at the receipt of Custom; and the Woman was
healed of her Bloody Issue, Mat. 9. But that Matthew was called about this
time, the circumstances of times make evident; for, a little after the second
Passover of our Savior Christ, the same Matthew was chosen to be an Apostle,
Luke 5. 6. Mat. 9. Mark 2. In the Month of March, the Inhabitants of the Towns
which Christ visited in Galilee, brought unto him many that were possessed of
Devils, and afflicted with other Diseases, all which he healed: insomuch that
there followed him a great company out of Galilee and Decapolis, and from
Jerusalem and Iudaea, and of all the Countries beyond Jordan, Mat. 3. Thus
having finished this Visitation, as it may be thought, he returned back to
Capernaum, where he dwelt, as I have told you before, which was forty eight
miles; for Caesarea Philippi stood so far from Capernaum.

The second Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
A little after these things were finished, was the Feast of the Jews, John 4.
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, John 5. to celebrate the Feast of the
Passover, which this year happened a little before Harvest, which was 56
miles. This second Passover of the Ministry of Christ fell upon the six and
twentieth day of March, at which time Christ celebrated the Passover with his
Disciples, according to the Law of God. Here, upon the Sabbath day, being the
last day of March, he healed a certain man that lay by the Pool of Bethesda,
which had been diseased eight and thirty years, Ioh. 5. And at the end of the
Passover he went with his Disciples from Jerusalem, through the Corn Fields:
but his Disciples being hungry began to pluck the ears of Corn, and to eat
them; wherefore the Pharisees being offended at them, began to reprehend our
Savior Christ and his Disciples: upon which followed the disputation
concerning the Sabbath, Luke 6. Matthew 12.

Upon the seventh day of April he went on the Sabbath day to Peraea, which
Country was in the Command of Herod Antipas, and there he healed a man with a
dried hand, Luke 6. Mark 3. The Country of Peraea beyond Jordan, is distant
from Jerusalem twenty miles.

But when the Herodian Council heard that he had healed a man on the Sabbath
day, they sought occasion how they might do to put him to death, wherefore our
Savior Christ went thence to the Sea of Galilee, which was 40 miles. Here he
went up into a mountain not far from Capernaum, and chose the twelve Apostles,
Luke 6. Mark 3. And then upon this Mountain he preached unto the People which
resorted thither unto him out of the Country round about, whom they heard with
great diligence and attendance. This Sermon being ended, he came down from the
Mountain and healed the man that was sick of the Leprosy. He also went into
Capernaum, and healed the Centurion's Servant, Mat 8. Luke 7. Afterward Christ,
in the same Month of April, when the man whom he healed of his Leprosy had
published the Miracle, he went from Capernaum into the Desert which lay near
unto Bethsaida; for there was a certain Desert, Mark 1. Luke 7. In the month of
May, our Savior went out of Galilee toward Jerusalem to keep the Feast of
Pentecost; so he came to the gates of the City Naim, which stood on the border
of Samaria, and was distant from Capernaum 16 miles. Here he recalled the
Widows Son to life, Luke 7. and after he went to Jerusalem, which was 48 miles,
that he might celebrate the Feast of Pentecost according to the Law of God,
Exo. 23. Thrice every year shall every male Child appear before the Lord thy
God. This Feast fell this year upon the fifteenth day of May, for it behoved
our Savior, according to the Law, to go every year to Jerusalem to these three
principal Feasts, that is, of the Passover, Pentecost, and of the Tabernacles.
A little after the Feast of Pentecost, John Baptist (being then in Prison)
having certain intelligence of the Miracle that our Savior wrought upon the
Widows Son at the gate of Naim; and of other wonderful Miracles that he did in
Jerusalem, and in other places in Judea, sent two of his Disciples from the
Castle of Macharuntes, to ask him the question, whether he was the Messia or
no? So when they came unto him, and delivered him their Message, at that time
he cured many of their sickness and Plagues, and evil Spirits, and to many
blind men he gave sight freely. And Jesus said unto them, Go your ways, and
tell John what things you have seen and heard, that the blind see, the halt go,
the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor
receive the Gospel: And blessed is he that shall not be offended on me, Matthew
11. Luke 7. At this Sermon it was thought he converted the sinner that washed
his feet, and poured a box of precious Oil upon his head, Luke 7.

In the month of June our Savior Jesus Christ went with the Twelve about six
and fifty miles out of Judea into Galilee, and there, in diverse Cities and
Towns he began to preach and teach the Kingdom of God. At this time there were
diverse Women followed him, whom he had healed of evil Spirits and of their
Infirmities; but principally Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven
Devils; and Joan the wife of Chuza, Herod's Procurator, and Susanna: all which
ministered unto him of their Substance, Luke 8.

Now when he had traveled from place to place some certain time, and visited
many Cities and Towns thereabout, he returned back again to the City of
Capernaum, where it is said that our Savior Christ dwelt; and there dispossessed
the man of a Devil, that was both blind, lame, and dumb, Mat. 12. Mar. 3. Luke
11. And going thence to the Sea, he recited eight Parables, Mat. 13. Mark. 4.
Luke 8. In the evening of the same day, he went six miles, into the Country of
the Gadarens, Mar. 4. Luke 8. The next day, betimes in the morning, he went out
of the Ship into the Country of the Gadarens, and healed two that were
possessed of Devils, Mat. 2. Mar. 5. Luke 8.

Out of these two he cast a Legion of Devils, and suffered them to enter into
the Herd of Swine, which they carried headlong into the Sea. Presently our
Savior Christ went thence six miles, into the Land of Genesareth, where there
was a great multitude upon the Sea shore, not far from the City of Capernaum,
that expected his coming, Mar. 5. Luke 8. Within a few days after, about the
beginning of June, he entered into Capernaum, and there he healed the man that
lay sick upon his Bed of a dead Palsy, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luke 5. After, he went
to Sea, and taught the multitude that came to him, Mar. 2.

From Capernaum he went to Caesarea Philippi, forty eight miles, where, being
invited to a Banquet by Matthew, he eat among Publicans and Sinners, and
confuted the Pharisees and John's Disciples. In the same City he restored the
Daughter of Iairus to life, Mat. 9. Mark 2. Luke 5. and as he went thence, he
restored two men to their sight, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 9.

About the end of the Month of July, our Savior Christ went from Caesarea
Philippi to Nazareth, thirty six miles; where, because of the ingratitude and
contempt of the Citizens, he did no great Miracles, Mark 6. Mat. 13.

In the Month of August, our Savior Christ went from Nazareth toward
Jerusalem, to the Feast of Tabernacles, and as he went, he visited the Towns
and Cities near adjoining. Now when he saw that they wanted Teachers, it being
at this time the second Harvest, he said unto his Disciples, Lo, the Harvest is
great, but the Laborers are few, etc. and he sent his Disciples out into the
Harvest, Mat. 9. Luke 9.

Of this second Harvest you may read, Exodus 23. where God commanded the People
that they should observe the Feast of the Tabernacles, when in the end of the
year they had gathered in all the Fruits of the Fields. Also in Levit. 23. it
is thus written, From the fifteenth day of the seventeenth Month, when you have
gathered all the Fruits of your Land, you shall celebrate unto the Lord your
God seven days, etc.

From Galilee, our Savior Christ came to Jerusalem, sixty four miles; where,
from the twentieth to the twenty seventh day of September, he celebrated the
Feast of Tabernacles, according to the Law of God.

The rest of the Travels of our Savior Christ, and the Miracles that he
wrought in this three last Months of this year, About the 18 day of October in
this year, the Practices of Sejanus were discovered, and he died miserably,
Tac. lib. 5.
viz. in October, November, and December, for their great multitude cannot be
described. So the Travels of our Savior Christ in the second year of his
Ministry were 912 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Caesarea Philippi.
THIS City is situated not far from the foot of the Mountain Antilibanus, 104
miles from Jerusalem toward the North, close by the two Wells of Jordan, Ior,
and Dan. Upon the East side of this City these two Streams meet, and make the
River Jordan.

Philip, the Tetrarch of Traconitis, called this City after his own name,
Philippus; and in honor of the Roman Caesar's, he added the name of Caesarea;
Tiberias at this time being Emperor of Rome. In times past it was called
Laisch, or Lais, which signifies a ravening or roaring Lion. But the Tribe of
Dan having conquered it and rebuilt it again, they called it Dan, and the
Inhabitants of the Holy Land, Lae^hem Dan, as you may read in the Travels of
the Danites. But the Town (as it is reported by such as have traveled into the
Holy Land, and by the Authority of Volateran) notwithstanding these names, is
often called Belenas. Here (as Eusebius, Zozomenes, and Nicephorus say in their
Ecclesiastical Histories) the Woman that was diseased with the bloody Issue,
was healed by touching the Hem of our Savior's Garment; which Woman, in token
of thankfulness for so great a benefit, and in memory of so notable a Miracle,
erected in this City, a little without the Gates of her House, a stone Pillar,
on which she caused to be set the Image of Christ made of Brass; and behind
that stood the Image of this Woman, who had been diseased twelve years with the
bloody Issue, bowing her self at the feet of our Lord, and touching the Hem of
his Garment. They also say there grew certain Herbs about this Pillar, whereby
Miracles were wrought thirty years after it was set up. But Julian the Apostate
having intelligence of these things, caused those Images to be broken down, and
erected his own in the same place. But soon after, there happened such an
exceeding Thunder, that fire falling from Heaven, struck this Image, thus set
up by this cruel Tyrant, upon the Breast, and cast the Head and the Neck
thereof with great violence upon the Earth. These things happened in Caesarea
Philippi. Upon the Borders of Caesarea Philippi our Savior Christ asked his
Disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I am, Mat. 6. Joseph. A^t. li. 20. cap.
6. says, Agrippa King of the Jews did much enlarge Caesarea Philippi, in
honor of Nero, and called it after his name Neromia, but it retained not that
name long.

Of Peraea.
PEraea, or Peraia, was the utmost part of the Holy Land, in which were the
Tribes Gad and Reuben, separated from the rest of Judea by the River Jordan,
and under the Subjection and Government of Herod Antipas. It was sixteen miles
from Jerusalem Eastward, so called of Peran, which signifies beyond, or upon
the other side, Plin. li. 4. ca. 1. In the Castle of Macharuntes, standing in
this Country, John Baptist was beheaded.

Of the Sea of Galilee.
THIS Sea lay forty four miles from Jerusalem, Northward, representing upon the
Banks a Harp in figure; whence it was called Kinnaereth, that is, the Sea of
the Harp, Number. 34. for Kinnor signifies an Harp. Toward the North it extends
it self into some breadth, but toward the South it drew into a straight Angle,
and was called the Sea of Galilee, because it bordered upon Galilee. It was
also called the Lake of Genesareth, because of the pleasantness and
fruitfulness of the Soil lying upon the North side of it. It is called ( Ioh.
6.) the Sea of Tiberias, from the City Tiberias that stood upon the shore of
it. It was but four miles and a little more broad, but in length, from the
North to the South, twelve miles. Upon the East side it had the Town Chorazin,
and upon the West Capernaum; and (as Josephus says) the Water of this Sea was
very sweet and pleasant; from whence it came to pass that Fishes did greatly
abound in it, and there were many Fishers that lived thereabouts only by
fishing in that Sea. There were many other Cities besides those two before
mentioned, that stood upon this Sea; as Bethsaida, Migdala, Tiberias, and
Trichaea; these stood upon the West. Upon the East stood Iulia and Cadara.

Of the holy Mountain near Capernaum in Galilee.
ABout a mile from Capernaum, toward the South-west, is to be seen an exceeding
high Hill, standing upon the shore of the Sea of Galilee, beautified with many
Herbs and Flowers of diverse kinds, being very fruitful and pleasant, extending
it self in length almost two Bows shoot, and in breadth one. From this Hill one
might have seen the whole Sea of Galilee, the Countries of I^ura and
Trachonitis, even to Mount Libanus, also the Mountains Sanir and Hermon, and a
great part of the upper and lower Galilee. Here also the Inhabitants of the
Holy Land show a certain Stone, on which they say our Savior Christ did
usually sit when he preached to the People; which Stone the Christians call the
Table: here was that Sermon made of the eight Beatitudes, Mat. 5. 6, 7. Luke 6.
Here were the twelve Apostles chosen, Luke 6. Mar. 3. And our Savior Christ
descending from this Mountain, in the Suburbs of the City of Capernaum healed a
Man that was infected with the Leprosy.

About thirty Paces from the foot of this Hill there arises a Fountain, which
is compassed about with a Wall, and is thought to be a Vein of Nilus, because
they find in it such kind of fishes, the like whereof are not to be found in any
other place but Nilus, Josephus calls this Spring Capernaum, and likewise all
the plain (being very pleasant and fruitful for the space of a mile, even unto
Jordan) after the same name, because it is subject to the Jurisdiction of that
City. About 20 paces from this wall, on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, there
is shown a place where they say Christ appeared to his seven Disciples after
his Resurrection, and asked them whether they had any meat? And about ten paces
from that is shown a place where they say our Saviors Disciples came to Land,
and they drew up in their nets a great draught of fishes, etc. John 21.

Of Naim.
NAim signifies fruitful and pleasant: it stood 48 miles from Jerusalem toward
the North; and typically represents the condition of the World. For the
Children of this World live in all manner of Pleasures and Delights, never
thinking of any sorrow till Death seiseth on them; but then that overturns all,
and those delights become loathsome unto them. Notwithstanding this one comfort
we have left us, Hope in Christ Jesus; who as he raised the Widows Son (at the
gates of this City) from Death to Life* will by his mighty Power raise us again
at the last day, from the Bowels of the Earth and make us partakers with him of
an heavenly habitation. It stood in the Land of Samaria; and in the tribe of
Issachar, about two miles off it, upon the East side, stood mount Tabor; and a
little from it, upon the South side, stood mount Hermon the lesser; and
extended it self thence unto the Sea of Galilee, 16 miles. Of these two Hills
you may read, Psalm. 89. and about two miles from Naim Westward Sunem is to be
seen, to which the Prophet Elisaeus sometimes resorted, 2 Reg. 4.

Of Gadara.
GAdarah or Gederah in Hebrew signifies munition; and sometimes it is taken to
compass about, of Gadar, he has hedged or compassed about. S. Jerome says, in
his time (that is, 400 years after Christ) this was a very fair City, and stood
in a very high Mountain, upon the East side of the Sea of Galilee beyond
Jordan, in the half tribe of Manasses, some 48 miles from Jerusalem Northward,
and is to be seen at this day. Strabo, lib. 6. Georg. says, that close by
Gadara there is a venomous lake, whereof what Beast soever drinks, he
immediately loses his Horns, his Hoofs, and his Hair; and there are many that
think this Lake became thus venomous, because of the 2000 Swine that were
drowned in it, when our Savior suffered the Devils to enter into them, Mat 8.
Mark 5. Luke 8. Close by this Town stood Gerasa, called also Girgesa, Mat. 8.
so named (as some think) of Girgasus the Son of Canaan, Genesis 10.

Of Genesareth.
THIS was a Country bordering upon the North-west side of the Sea of Galilee,
from whence this Sea was called the Lake of Genesareth, Luke 5. This Land was
very pleasant and fruitful, as if it had been a Princes Garden, bringing forth
fair Apples, Pomegranates, Palms, Olives, Vines, and diverse other kinds of
pleasant Fruits, fair and goodly to the eye, and therefore, not without cause,
was it called the Garden of a Prince; being derived of Began, which signifies, a
Garden; and Sur, a Prince. It is distant from Jerusalem six and fifty miles
toward the North, as you may read, Matthew. 6. and 14. The chief Cities of this
Country were Capernaum and Bethsaida; of which Cities, though in former times
they were very fair and large, there are at this day not scarce eight houses to
be seen.

The Travels of our Savior Christ in the third year of his Ministry, which was
the three and thirtieth year of his age.
FROM Jerusalem, our Savior Christ returned, some six and fifty miles, into
Galilee, and in the beginning of this year wintered in that place: so that (as
it may be gathered out of the Evangelists) he continued there the most part of
January and February, and now the Spring approaching, a little after the death
of Saint John the Baptist, (who as it is thought, was put to death between the
midst of Winter and the Spring, not long before the Feast of the Passover; so
that he lived two years and a half in his Ministry) he wrought many notable
Miracles, not far from the City of Bethsaida. The same time, the Feast of the
Passover drawing near, (which was the third Passover of his ministry) he went
thence over Jordan, and so beyond the Sea of Tiberias, Matthew. 14. Mark 6. Luke
9. At this time, the Apostles of Christ being dispersed through all Galilee and
Iudaea, teaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, hearing of the miserable
death of John the Baptist, about the beginning of the month of April, returned
with all possible speed out of every Part to our Savior Christ, that so they
might be secure against the tyranny of Herod, Matthew. 14. Mark 6. Luke 9. Also
the Disciples of John came unto him, and told him of his Death and Burial,
Matthew. 14.

Our Savior Christ therefore having by this means certain intelligence, as he
was between Bethsaida and Tiberias, of the death of S. John Baptist, in the
month of April he went into a Ship, and passed about four miles to the further
side of the Sea of Galilee, where, in a certain Desert, he sed five thousand
men with five Barley loaves and two fishes, Ioh. 6.

From thence he returned back again to the Sea, and so to Capernaum, which was
four miles: here he made that long Sermon of the Spiritual eating of his flesh,
Mat. 14. Luke 9. John 6.

From thence he went to Jerusalem, which was 56 miles, to the Feast of the
Passover, being the third Passover of his ministry.

The third Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
Upon the thirteenth day of April, being Sunday, according to the
Ecclesiastical computation, Christ (as God commanded) celebrated the third
Passover of his ministry for the space of eight days in the City of Jerusalem,
that is, till the twentieth day of the same month.

After the Feast of the Passover, the Jews took counsel how they might put him
to death, Ioh. 7. wherefore, about the end of April, he departed thence, and
went 56 miles into the Land of Galilee.

In the month of May, after the controversy that happened concerning the
Tradition of the Elders (because of the fallacies and contentions of the
Scribes and Pharisees) he departed thence into the borders of Tyrus and Sidon,
which was 56 miles, Matthew. 15. and there entered into a house, and would fain
have been private; but there was a certain Woman that was a Grecian of
Syrophoenissa, came unto him, and entreated his aid, Mark 7.

But our Savior, having a determination to depart from this place, this Woman
was very importunate that he would dispossess her Daughter of a Devil; which
(because of her importunity) he did, Mat. 15. And after he went thence into the
Country of Trachonitis, beyond Jordan, going through the borders of Decapolis,
and coming to the Galilean Sea, and in the way he healed one that was both
blind and dumb, Mark 7. and there, ascending up into a Mountain, he cured many
that were blind and lame, and the third day after fed four thousand with seven
loaves and a few fishes, Mat. 15. So this Journey was 64 miles.

Afterward, in the same month of May, he went into a Ship, and passed thence
into the parts of Dalmatia, and upon the borders of Magdala, which was four
miles, he propounded the sign of the Prophet Jonah to the Pharisees and
Sadducees, Mat. 15. and 16.

From thence he sailed to Bethsaida, which was four miles, and by the way he
admonished his Disciples to take heed of the leaven of the Sadducees and
Pharisees, Mat. 16. and as he was entering into a Town, he cured a blind man of
his sight, Mark 8.

About the end of the month of May, Christ went to Jerusalem, which was 56
miles, where, upon the second day of June, he kept the Feast of Pentecost,
according as God had commanded, Exodus 23.

The Feast of Pentecost being ended, he returned from Jerusalem into the
Country of Galilee to Capernaum, where he dwelt, which was 56 miles.

In the same month of June, he went the second time unto the borders of the
Gentiles, where Peter, in the name of all the Disciples, upon the confines of
Caesarea Philippi, made that notable confession, saying, Thou art Christ the
Son of the living God, Luke 9. Capernaum is distant from Caesarea Philippi, 48
miles.

Six, or (as Luke says) eight days after, our Savior in the month of June
went to the mountain Thabor, which stood 48 miles from Caesarea Philippi
toward the Southwest, where he was transfigured; and the next day after he
cured the Lunatic, and cast out a Devil, Mat. 7. Mark 9.

In the month of July, Christ walked into Galilee, and there confirmed his
Doctrine with many wonderful miracles, which did greatly amaze his Disciples,
where he put them in mind of the Cross and of his Death, Mat. 17. Luke 9.

From thence he returned to Capernaum, which was ten miles from mount Thabor:
at this time Peter went to the Lake of Genesareth, and there caught a fish, in
whose mouth he found a Stater, which was worth 2 s. 6 d. in our money, Mat. 17.
Here also our Savior Christ made a long Sermon, wherein he reprehended the
pride and arrogance of his Disciples, and withal taught the doctrine of the
Remission of sins, Mat. 12. Mark Luke 9.

In the month of August, he had a full determination to make a Journey through
Samaria into Judea, and so by little and little (visiting the Churches as he
went) to go to Jerusalem to the feast of the Tabernacles, John 7. but when he
came to Samaria, which was ten miles from Capernaum, the Samaritans would not
receive him, because he made as though he would go to Jerusalem; wherefore he
turned aside into Galilee, Luke 9. And as he was there visiting the Churches,
there came a certain man unto him, saying, I will follow thee whither soever
thou go. But Christ answered him, saying, The Foxes have holes, and the
Fowls of the heavens have nests, but the Son of man has not where to hide his
head, Matthew. 8. And to another Jesus said, Follow thou me. But he answered, Let
me first go and bury my father. There was another also that would have followed
Christ, but he would first go take his leave of his friends, Luke 9.

In the month of September, about the time of the second harvest, which was
next before the feast of the Tabernacles, Lev. 23. Christ began his last
visitation throughout all the Land of Judea; at which time he sent forth
seventy of his disciples into Galilee, to prepare the way, and so dispersed
Laborers into his harvest; saying, The harvest is great, but the laborers are
few, Luke 10. This Speech seems to be taken from the present condition of the
time: for it was now harvest time, it being a little before the Vernal
Aequinoctial.

About the beginning of October, when the feast of the Tabernacles drew near,
the Disciples and those that were of the kindred of our Savior according to
the flesh, went up to the Feast, but he remained in Galilee, notwithstanding a
little after he went privily up: now between Galilee and Jerusalem were
accounted 56 miles, Ioh. 7. Upon the ninth day of October was this Feast
celebrated in Jerusalem, and being now half past, our Savior Christ taught
publicly in the Temple, Ioh. 7. Upon the fifteenth day of October (it being
the last day of the Feast of the Tabernacles, and the Sabbath day) he taught
the second time publicly in the Temple, and so continued preaching and doing
miracles in Jerusalem until the Feast of the Dedication, which was kept about
the middle of Winter, Matthew. 4.

In the month of November, he preached daily in the Temple, and at night went
to the Mount of Olives, where he rested, which was about half a mile from
Jerusalem, and every morning returned back to the Temple. At this time there
came unto him certain Scribes and Pharisees, who brought a Woman which had been
lately taken in Adultery, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do with this
Woman, etc. And he answered, He among you that is without sin throw the first
stone at her, John 8. About this time also were the Sermons concerning the
Power of the Son of God, and a great disputation between our Savior and the
Jews, Ioh. 8. for which cause they would have stoned him. In the month of
December, Christ wintered in Jerusalem, and recited the Parable of the Sheep,
Ioh. 10. Also upon the Sabbath day, a little before the Feast of the
Dedication, he healed a man that was born blind, Ioh. 9.

In this feast the Jews (being angry because he had healed the blind man upon
the Sabbath day) compassed our Savior about as he was in Solomon's Porch; and
when they heard our Savior confess openly, that he was the Son of God, they
began to grow into a fury, and for very anger would have stoned him to death.
Wherefore our Savior Christ went thence beyond Jordan, and continued there the
rest of the Winter, John 10. But before he went to Jerusalem, there were
returned unto him certain of the seventy Disciples, which a little before (in
the month of September) he had sent abroad, and there at that time he recited
the similitude of the man, who descending from Jerusalem to Jericho, fell
amongst Thieves. This similitude seems to be taken from the present occasion,
because our Savior Christ going from Jerusalem beyond Jordan, was to pass
through great wildernesses just in the way as they go thence to Jericho, Joh.
10.

At the same time he went from Jerusalem to Bethania, which was almost two
miles, and there visited Mary and Martha, where Martha ministered unto him, but
Mary sitting at his feet gave diligent heed to his Doctrine, Luke 10.

At this time he took his leave of these two Sisters, and went thence to
Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John baptized, which was sixteen miles, it
being now about the midst of Winter, Christ at this time being about thirty
three years of age.

I am not ignorant that there were many which refer that long Journey of our
Savior Christ, when he went to visit all Iudaea, the sending forth of his
Disciples, and diverse other Miracles mentioned from the ninth Chapter of Luke
to the sixteenth, to the beginning of the following year. But I am of opinion
that all those things could not have been done within the compass of four
Months, and before the Feast of the Dedication: so that it must needs be that
the seventy Disciples were sent forth before the Feast of the Dedication; for
after the Feast of the Dedication (which was celebrated in the midst of Winter,
John 10.) there were but two Months between it and the raising up of Lazarus,
in which short time all those things which are described by Luke, could not
possibly be accomplished; especially considering that our Savior Christ
wintered some time in Bethabara, and there taught the multitude that came unto
him, Ioh. 2. So these Travels of our Savior were five hundred ninety six
miles, or thereabouts, besides the diverse Visitations and Journeys he went
hither and thither: which, because of the great multitude of them, it was not
possible for the Evangelist to set them down.

Of the Towns and places to which he traveled.
Of Bethsaida.
BEthsaida, signifies the house of hunting: being derived of Both, a house,
and Zaid, hunting; from Zod, he has hunted: for from this place went the
Fishers and Hunters, which fished and hunted thorough the World, Ierem. 16. In
this Town dwelt three Apostles, Peter, Andrew, and Philip, John 1. It was
situated upon the West side of the Galilean Sea; in the Tribe of Issachar,
fifty six miles from Jerusalem toward the North. And because of the abundance
of Fishes that were in the Sea of Galilee, Peter and Andrew became Fishers, and
in that Vocation got their living, till our Lord and Savior Christ made them
Fishers of Men, Mat. 4. Luke 5. Before the Birth of Christ this was but a small
Town, and without doubt was so called from hunting; because close by it stood a
Wilderness that did greatly abound with wild Beasts. Philip, the Terrarch of
Traconitis and Itura, made this a fair City, which, in honor of Iulia, he
called Iuliades. This Iulia was the Daughter of Augustus Caesar, and Wife of
Tiberias. Philip also brought many Inhabitants thither, who dwelt in that City.
But when Herod (the Tetrarch of Galilee, and Brother of this Philip) had
builded up Bethabara, (which stood beyond the River Jordan on the East side of
the Sea of Galilee) and called it by the name of Iuliades, in honor of this
Iulia. This Town, re-edified and enlarged by Philip, was called again in the
time of our blessed Lord and Savior Christ, after the ancient name Bethsaida,
and so continues to this day. From hence it is manifest, that the Sea of
Galilee was subject to the Government of both these Tetrarchs, since upon the
shore thereof on both sides they had Cities standing.

I do think the Wilderness or Wood and ^and near adjoining to Bethsaida, is
called Itura, of Ietur the Son of Ismael, Genesis 25. or else from the compass and
roundness of it; for Tur in Hebrew signifies, a circle. But that Itura stood
upon the West side of the Sea of Galilee, those that have been at the Holy Land
can testify.

This City of Bethsaida has an ancient Watercourse coming from a River not
far from it, which Josephus calls little Jordan, which falls into the Sea
of Galilee, just in the midway between this Town and Capernaum, the Channel
whereof appears to this day. Beside the many Sermons which our Savior Christ
preached here, he did many notable miracles, Mark 8. etc. But for the
ingratitude and impiety of the Citizens, the curse of our Savior fell upon
them, Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida: for if the miracles had
been done in Tyrus and Sidon, which have been done in thee, they had long e're
this repented in sackcloth and ashes: Verily, verily, I say unto you, it shall
be easier for Tyrus and Sidon in the day of Judgment, than for you, Mat. 11.
Luke 10. The prophecy of our Savior Christ fell upon them accordingly; for,
after diverse and sundry overthrows and devastations, this Town became utterly
unpeopled, and as Britenbacchus says, there are scarce six houses standing in
it at this day.

Of Chorazin.
THis City also stands upon the further side of Jordan, close by the Sea of
Galilee, in the same Country as Capernaum stands: for the City of Chorazin
stands upon the East side of the River Jordan, where it falls into the Sea
of Galilee; and Capernaum upon the West, in the half Tribe of Manasses, some 16
miles from the City of Jerusalem toward the North. This City also neglecting
the preachings and miracles of our Savior Christ, felt the efficacy and force
of the curse of the Son of God, Mat. 11. Luc. 10. For there is not at this day
a house to be seen, only some ruins where it stood. Chorazin does denote a
Dukedom or Principality, from Coh and Razon, a Prince and Duke; for Rozez
signifies, a laborious Prince. Ierom turning this word Rozez into Razi, calls
it a secret mystery, or my secret.

Of Tiberias.
TIberias stands upon the West side of the Sea of Galilee, 48 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. Before the Birth of Christ it was calcalled
Kinnereth, that is, the City of the Harp; after which name the Lake of
Tiberias, or the Sea of Galilee, is called, Numb 14. But Herod the Te^rarch of
Galilee (at whose command John the Baptist was beheaded) did beautify this
City with many fair Buildings, and compassed it about with strong Walls, and
after Tiberias Caesar's name, called it Tiberias. He also gathered thither many
Inhabitants, and endowed it with many large Privileges: for although this
place before the restoring of the City was very filthy and impure, by reason of
the dead Bodies both of Men and Beasts, which lay in that place, (from whence
it happened that the Jews shunned this place as utterly unlawful, and durst
not dwell there) yet notwithstanding, Herod, with singular Industry and
Diligence, removed all that filthiness, and in that very place built up this
City both fair and spacious; partly with Gifts, partly with fair Speeches,
alluring many Jews to inhabit therein. Many poor People also built themselves
houses at their own charge, and those that had no Children, gave way unto the
liberty of the City; besides, many rich and noble men were constrained to
remove their whole Families, and to dwell in this City, so that in short time
it became very well peopled, according to Ios. lib. Antiq. 18. cap. 4. and
Egisip. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Not above two miles from Tiberias, toward the South, upon the shore of the
Sea of Galilee, stood Tarachaea, a Town wherein Josephus dwelt. Now it happened
that the Citizens of Tiberias, upon some discontent, and as it was thought, at
the instigation of one Clitus, fell into Rebellion; of which Josephus having
certain intelligence, he caused all the Gates of Terachaea to be shut, lest any
man going thence should disclose his intentions, or any coming from Tiberias,
should move that City also to Rebellion; and then privily sent out a command to
assemble all the Ships and other Vessels that were upon the Sea or Lake, even
to the number of 230 Ships; all which he caused to be manned only with four men
apiece, and of a sudden sailed toward Tiberias. But when he came within view
of the City, so that the Citizens from the Wall might discern the Ships, he
lest the Body of the Navy a good way remote from Tiberias, and took only one
Ship, manned with seven men, and went close to the City of Tiberias, as it
seemed, to have had a parley with the Citizens: but they seeing such a multitude
of Ships, and the bold resolution of Josephus, supposing that they had been
sufficiently manned, and contained a great Army, were greatly afraid, insomuch
that they cast away their Arms, and came out of the City with humble Petitions
to Josephus, entreating him to spare the City, and to take pity on the
Inhabitants. Notwithstanding he utterly refused to show them any mercy, unless
they would deliver unto him the Ruler of the City, which they did, so he
settled the Affairs of that Town, and took the Ruler thereof with him to
Terachaea, where he committed him to Prison.

But after, it being certainly found out that one Clitus was the principal
Author of this Rebellion, he sent Leuyn one of his Guard, with command to
apprehend him, and cut off both his Hands: of which punishment Clytus being
certainly informed, with tears and prayers humbly besought this Leuyn that he
would spare one of his hands, and he would willingly lose the other; which with
much ado was granted him, upon condition that he would cut off his own Hand: so
he took his Sword and cut off his left Hand; which being done, Josephus
returned the Captives to Tiberias, and received the Inhabitants again into
favor, and ever after retained it in obedience.

Vespasian also invaded this City at such time as he undertook his Expedition
against Jerusalem, as it appears in Josephus lib. de bello Iud. cap. 16. but
the Inhabitants fearing his greatness, willingly submitted themselves to his
power, and opened him the Gates, going forth of the City to me^t him with great
humility, giving him and his whole Army entertainment into the City, receiving
him with Music and Songs, and with great Acclamations and shouts; calling him
their Savior and Protector: which kind of Courtesies the Emperor took very
lovingly, and in token of thankfulness for this kindness, he commanded his
Soldiers (after they had broken down a great part of the Wall upon the South
side) that they should abstain from all manner of Rapin and Violence; so that
he continued there peaceably, and went away peaceably.

This City to this day (as Borchardus the Monk says) is a fair Town, situated
to the Longitude, upon the shore of the said Sea, there being upon the South
side many wholesome Baths and Springs; and there are to be seen also many great
ruins of decayed Buildings. The Land also round about is very pleasant and
fertile, abounding with Palm Trees, Vines, Olives, and Figs. This City in
ancient time was situated in the Tribe of Issa^har.

Of Tyrus or Zor.
THIS was the chief City of Phoenicia, distant from Jerusalem 100 miles toward
the North. It was first built by the Citizens of Zidon, (because of a Sedition
that happened in that City) 240 years before the Temple of Solomon, as Josephus
says, just in the place where at this day the ruins of ancient Tire are to be
seen. But after it began to grow famous (which was about such time as Troy was
destroyed) King Angenor removed it to a Rock which stood in the heart of the
Mediterranean Sea, compassed about therewith like an Island, Ezekiel. 26. and
bestowed great cost in fortifying and building it. It stood round, compassed
with strong Walls, beautified with goodly Buildings, and fairly situated for
the entertainment of Ships; for which purpose, on every side there were many
sa^e Havens and Harbors made. It was but a small Town, almost three miles
about, and two miles wide: yet the great Mart Town in those Parts, for
Merchants resorted thither from all the three Parts of the World ( Europe,
Asia, and Africa) as well for the uttering as buying commodities; and was made
so much the more famous, because of the situation and strength: It stood
distant from the Land of Phoenicia almost two miles; upon which Continent they
had obtained a portion of Land for the maintenance of the City, containing
19000 paces in compass. The Citizens also being greatly enriched, because of
their traffic, built up many fair Cities and Towns in more remote parts, which
was added to their jurisdiction, as Leptis, Vtica, and Carthage, situated in
Africa. They also built Cades, which at this day is called Caliz, as Pliny
says, lib. 5. cap. 19. being situated in a very fair Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, not far from Hercules Pillars; insomuch as the Citizens of
this Town having thus enlarged their command, and increased their substance; in
every place they called themselves Princes, and took upon them to wear Scarlet
and Purple, which colors in that place above all other colors, were most
artificially died: And because of the rarity of them, transported thence into
many Countries more remote. But because of their extreme arrogance and pride,
it was twice conquered and ruinated: First by Nabuchadonozer Emperor of
Babylon; and then by Alexander the Great, as it appears in Quint. Curtius,
lib. in the Life of Alexander.

Now the occasion that Alexander made war upon this City, was, because the
Citizens upon a time sending unto him certain Ambassadors with a Crown of Gold,
in token of friendship, and to congratulate his Prosperity (which he accepted
very kindly, and gave them Royal entertainment, as to his Friends) amongst
other things, he told them, that he would come unto their City, and do
sacrifice to their god Hercules (for the Kings of the Macedonians are persuaded
that they proceed from the offspring of that god, and beside he was commanded
by an Oracle so to do.) But the Ambassadors of Tire answered, that the Temple
of Hercules stood without the City in Paaetzton, where ancient Tire stood; so
that the King might easily come thither to do sacrifice; but Alexander hearing
these words, could not contain himself, but in a great anger answered, And do
ye proud Citizens put such trust in the strength and situation of your City,
that you think I am not able to come to it with my Army by Land? You shall well
perceive within this short space, that you are situated upon the Continent,
and that I will enter it and sack it. With these terrible words the Ambassadors
departed, and shortly after Alexander followed them with a great and mighty
Army.

But when it was known that Alexander had undertaken the sacking of this City,
there were many that thought it almost impossible for him to accomplish his
designs; first, because of the inconstancy of the Winds, and the vehemence of
the Water, whereby all such matter as they cast into the Sea to join it to the
Continent, would be driven away by the violence of the Water; again, the City
was compassed about with such exceeding high Walls, and fortified with such
strong Towers, that it was not possible for him to bring any Engines to batter
them, or fasten any scaling Ladders to ascend them, unless it were by Ships.
Twice Alexander attempted, by flinging into the Sea mighty Trees of Libanus,
and heaps of the ruins of ancient Tire, to have made a Bridge to it, or else
join it to the Continent, insomuch as the Tyrians mocked the Macedonians,
saying, What can your King Alexander conquer Neptune the God of the Sea? For
the violence of the Sea was so extreme, that it carried away all things with
it, and oftentimes broke the Ships that were joined together to make a Bridge,
and drowned the Soldiers that besieged and fought against the City. During
this Siege, a Citizen of Myrus dreamt that their Idol Apollo would depart from
them; whereupon they bound the Image of Apollo with a Chain of Gold, unto the
Pillar whereon he stood, that he might not leave them. There happened also a
horrible ostent amongst the Macedonians; for a certain Soldier breaking Bread,
there fell from it some few drops of Blood; at the hearing of which accident,
Alexander was greatly amazed, until he was resolved by one Aristander, a very
skilful Prophet, that if it issued from off the outside of the Bread, it had
betokened a heavy event to the Macedonians; but in regard that it issued from
the inside of the Bread, it foreshewed that he should forthwith conquer the
Town he had so long besieged; and so it happened: for when Alexander had
besieged the City for the space of seven months, with great difficulty he won
it: but before he could win it, he was constrained to use a great multitude of
Ships, and fasten them together with iron bands, upon which placing many
Engines of battery, and other offensive instruments, what with the moving of
the Ships, and the extreme Violence of the battery, they overcame the City.
This exploit Alexander performed when he was 25 years of age, and about 300
years before Christ.

There was one thing that Alexander did during his Siege, that was memorable;
for before any of his Soldiers would attempt to ascend the Walls, he went in
Person, with his Crown upon his head, and Princely Armor, and scaled a high
Tower of the City, where he expressed an extraordinary resolution, and by reason
of his courage did great hurt to the Enemy, who perceiving him to be the King,
resorted to that place in great heaps, and shot at him with all their might;
but he manfully defended himself, and compelled the enemy to fly. In this
assault there were 6000 of the Inhabitants slain; and after he had entered the
Walls and sacked the City, he caused 2000 to be tied to crosses and thrown into
the Sea. From whence may be gathered, that God by this young Prince did
accomplish this great Work, that the Prophecies of the Prophets, Esaias 23.
Jeremy 43. and Ezekiel 25, 26. might be fulfilled.

Afterward Alexander (as Pliny and Strabo observe) caused the Sea to be filled
up, that it might be no more an Island, and joined it to the Continent; upon
which place he caused Tyrus to be rebuilded, and compassed it about with a Wall
five and twenty foot thick, strengthened with twelve Towers; that it might be
sufficiently fortified to oppose the incursion of any Enemy; so that it
continued safe a long time after, and in the time of our Savior Christ was a
fair City, though it never attained to the former dignity and Power that it had
before Alexander conquered it. The ancient City of Tire was distant from this
City about four miles toward the South.

Our Savior Christ being in the borders of Tyrus and Sidon, helped a Woman of
Canaan, whose Daughter had been cruelly tormented with a Devil, Matt. 15. In
the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, there were many Martyrs put to death in
this City: And at this time it is called by the name of El porta del Zur, that
is, the Haven of Zur; as it was in the old Testament called by the name of Zor.
In the year 1100. when the holy Land was in the hands of the Christians, there
was an Archbishop of Tire, under whose Government were the Bishops of
Ptolomais, Sidon, and Beryti, etc. The holy man Origin lies buried in this
City, in the Church of the holy Sepulcher, which is compassed about and
fortified with a mighty strong Wall. There also lies buried the Emperor
Frederick Barbarosso, who died Anno 1160, after he had done many valiant acts,
and sought many great Battles for the Christians against the Turks and
Saracens, being overcome by Saphadinus the Sultans Son, and put to flight, was
drowned in the River of Suro, to the great grief of his Army; but he left
behind him a famous report. Pope Alexander the third, being a great Enemy to
this Emperor, in S. Marys Church in the City of Venice, when this Prince
submitted himself to his Holiness; set his Foot upon his neck, repeating these
Words, Thou shall tread upon the Aspe and upon the Basilisk, etc. Eusebius, in
his Ecclesiastical History says, that there are yet standing in Tire certain
Marble Pillars, and other precious Stones, of wonderful greatness, that it
amazeth such as behold them; near to which there have been many Christians and
Pilgrims put to death by the Saracens. There are also four Wells of wholesome
and pleasant Water standing not far from it. Of which Wells you may read before.

Of Zidon.
THIS also was a City of Phoenicia, situated upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, thirty six miles from Jerusalem towa^d the North, and
sixteen from Tyrus. In times past it was assigned to the Tribe of Ashur, and
lay upon the borders of the Philistines near to Mount Libanus. Being called
Sidon or Zidon, of Zidon the Son of Canaan, who first built it, Genesis 10. and
signifies a Hunter. It was a notable Mart Town, wherein much Satin was made,
which kind of stuff was very precious among the Jews: and it is said that
Joseph of Arimathia wrapped the Body of our Savior in white Satin* for in
Matthew 27. it is called Zadin, which in English is Satin. And as at this day
the finest Glass is made at Venice, so the finest Glass in those times was made
at Sarepta, a City that belonged to the Sidonians: about which there stood many
Mines, of which it is called Sarepta, as you may read before.

This Town in times past was one of the chief Cities of Phoenicia, but because
of the extraordinary Pride of the Citizens, God afflicted them with diverse
punishments, and brought in Ocho King of the Persians, who besieged it, and by
Treason won it, and burnt it to the ground, as Diodorus Siculus, lib. 16.
says. The Citizens whereof were driven to such streights by the Enemy, that
there perished in the fire above forty thousand men. Within a while after,
Darius, the last Emperor of the Persians, rebuilt it, but made it nothing so
beautiful, neither fortified it in like manner as it was before: he ordained
one Strato to be King thereof, a man proud and arrogant. After, about three
hundred and two years before the Nativity of Christ, Alexander being then but
twenty four years of age, having overcome Darius, that mighty Emperor of the
Persians, at Issa a City of Cilicia, in a cruel and sharp War; he sent
Hephestion, one of his Princes, to the Sidonians, with authority to depose
Strato, and to let the Citizens understand that they should choose him for their
King, whom they thought most worthy of that honor, as Quintus Curtius shows,
lib. 4. At this time there was a certain young man among the followers of
Hephestion, in whose behalf he moved the Citizens that he might be their King;
but they refused, saying, it was not their custom to choose any to rule over
them, but such as were of the King's stock and Progeny. Hephestion hearing this
answer, greatly admired their resolution and modesty, especially when they
refused to accept him for their King, whom others had sought to obtain with
Fire and Sword; saying, truly there is more required to rule and govern a
Kingdom, than to get it; but yet name one unto me of Royal descent, whom you
would willingly receive to be your King. So they named unto him one Abdolomius,
who had been known to have been of the Kings stock, by many descents; but
because of his Poverty he was constrained to dwell in the Suburbs of the City
in a Cottage, and had little else but a Garden to live upon. This man howsoever
poor, and because of that, of many contemned; yet he was known to be honest,
and of an upright life, following with all diligence his Vocation, without any
regard of other business; insomuch as he was utterly ignorant of all these
stirs and combustions which had so lately vexed Asia. As he was now in his
Garden, digging and laboring, purging it of Weeds, and planting of Herbs;
Hephestion with the rest of the Citizens went unto him, and brought him the
Robes and Habiliments of a King. The poor Gardner stood amazed to see such a
Company of Gallants come unto him; but Hephestion told him, that the occasion
of their coming was to make a^ exchange with him of those Royal Ornaments which
he had in his hand, for those poor and foul Garments which he wore; therefore
go and wash thy self and return. So he did, where immediately they put upon him
those Royal Robes, and saluted him as their Sovereign. After these things were
finished, quoth Hephestion, Now remember in what a state thou art, no more
Gardener but a King; and therefore take unto thee the mind and resolution of a
King, that so thou may rule and govern this City as a man worthy of that
honor; and remember, that although the Lives and Goods of thy Subjects are at
thy command, yet by them thou wast chosen, neither be forgetful of him that was
the Author of thine Honor.

No sooner was he enthronized in his Kingdom, but Fame (who is more speedy than
a thousand Posts) had dispersed this News through all the neighboring Cities:
some being thereby moved to admiration, and quickened in their Studies; others
stirred up to Indignation and Envy. Those that were mighty, and Friends to
Alexander, contemned and despised his Humility and Poverty; and no sooner were
they come into his presence, but they began to accuse him for his Ignorance;
wherefore Alexander commanded that he should come before him, where, after he
had well viewed the Lineaments and Proportion of his Person, and could not
perceive it any whit repugnant to the fame of his Birth, he demanded of him,
how it was possible that he should endure his Poverty with Patience. To which
he answered, I pray the Gods I may continue the Government of this Kingdom with
the like mind; for these hands were sufficient for me to live by, and as I had
nothing, so I wanted nothing. At which answer Alexander was so well pleased,
that he not only gave him all the Princely Jewels and Ornaments of the first
King called Strato, but also a great part of the Booty which he took from the
Emperor of Persia, and added to his command all the neighboring Countries
round about. This History I have inserted, that thereby we might perceive the
mighty power of God in all his works; that can exalt the poor, contented with
his estate, out of the very dust, and can pull the mighty from their Thrones.
So the evil cark and care in this World to gather riches for the Virtuous to
inherit. But to return to Sidon: This City did so much increase, and grew so
famous in succeeding Ages, that it was the chief Town ( Tyrus only excepted) in
all Phoenicia, joining upon the West to the Mediterranean Sea, extending it
self toward the North and South, lying in a Plain under Antilibanus, which
Mountain lay some two miles off it upon the East. It oftentimes, because of the
Pride of the Inhabitants, felt the wrath and punishing hand of God, as well by
the Invasion of Enemies, as sickness and dearth, according to the Predictions
of the Prophets, Esaias 28. and Ezekiel. 28. until at last in succeeding ages it
was utterly destroyed, the Ruins of which City remain to this day, and make
evident that it was a fair and spacious Town.

There is to be seen yet to this day a City built out of the Ruins of the
former (though nothing so large as it) very strong, and mightily fortified, so
that it seems almost invincible, if it have men wherewith to defend it. Upon
the one side it joyneth to the Sea, and upon the other side of it there
stands two mighty strong Castles, one of them situated toward the North,
upon a very strong Rock, as it were in the heart of the Sea, the which was
built by certain Pilgrims that came out of Germany to visit the holy City of
Jerusalem. The other of them was situated upon a Hill toward the South of the
City, as well fortified, and no less difficult to be conquered. These two
Castles, with the whole City in times past were in the hands of the Knights
Templers. The Land round about it is very pleasant and fertile, abounding with
all kind of good things necessary for the maintenance of life and delight.
There is also found great abundance of Grapes, which are very delicious and
pleasant to the taste, whereof the Wine Canamella is made. But because the
Turks and Saracens are prohibited by the strict Law of the Alcoran from
drinking of Wine, therefore they suffer no Vineyards to be planted, neither the
Inhabitants to dress those Vines that grow naturally. Before the East Gate of
the ancient City which now lies destroyed, there is built a Chapel, in which
place they say the Woman of Canaan entreated our Saviou^ Christ to cast a Devil
out of her Daughter, Mat. 15. The Mountain Antilibanus begins close by the
River Eleutherius, and extends it self beyond Tripolis: and in some places it
joyneth so close to the Sea, that for the streightness of the ways those that
travel that way can scarce pass. In this City was the fairest Purple in all
those parts: nay, as some Authors affirm, the like was not to be found in the
World, etc.

Of Cana Syro-Phoenicia.
THIS Town, which was called Cana the Great, was situated upon the borders of
Tyrus and Sidon, 112 miles from Jerusalem Northward, situated in the Tribe of
Ashur, four miles from Sidon toward the South, and three from Sare^ta toward
the East. In this Town the Syro^hoenician dwelt, that besought our Savior
Christ to heal her Daughter that was possessed of a Devil, Mat. 15. Mar. 7. It
was called Cana Syro-Phoenicia, to put a diff^rence between it and another
Cana, situated in Galilee the lower; in which City our Savior Christ turned
Water into Wine. You may read more of this Town before.

Of Traconitis.
THIS City was so called from the stony hardness of the Mountains of Gilead,
which compass it in upon the East side: in which Province the Tribe of Gad and
the half Tribe of Manasses inhabited. It was in ancient times called Basan; in
which Og the mighty Giant had a great Command: but Moses overcame him, and gave
the Land to the Tribe of Gad, and the half Tribe of M^n^sses. In Christ's time,
the Tetrarch and Governor of it was Philip, who was Son to Herod the Great,
and Brother to Herod An^ipas Tetrarch in Galilee and Petraea; which Herod took
to Wise Herodia, whom his Brother Philip had formerly married, the said Philip
being at that time alive: but because John Baptist reprehended him for that
fact, therefore at her request he was beheaded in the Castle of Machera.

Itura was another Province belonging to the Tetrarchy of Philip, joining upon
the West to the River of Jordan, and called Galilee of the Gentiles, of which
you may read before.

Of Decapolis.
THIS Country is so called of ten Cities that were situated in it. It stood
beyond Jordan and the Sea of Galilee, as may be gathered out of Mark cap. 7.
and Mat. 15. So that it is manifest that that Country which in times past was
called Gilead, was afterward known and called by the name of Decapolis, because
of the ^en Cities which stood there; as Chorazin which Christ cursed, Mat. 11.
Gamala, where Agrippa King of the Jews was hurt in his right arm, Ios. de Bell.
Iud. lib. 4. cap. 1. Iuliades, built by Herod Antipas in honor of the Empress
Iulia; Gadara, where our Savior Christ cast out the Legion of Devils,
suffering them to enter into the Herd of Swine, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Astoroth, the
chief City of that Country in the time of Og King of Basan, Ios. cap. 12. Here
also that holy man Job sometimes had his dwelling; Iabes in Gilead, where Saul
King of Israel lies buried, 1 Samuel 31. Mizpah, where Ieptha offered his
Daughter for a Sacrifice to the Lord, Judge. 11. Ramoth in Gilead, where King
Ahab was slain with a Dart, 1 Reg. 22. and Abel of the Vines, where Baalam's
Ass spoke, Number. 22. These are those ten Cities whereof this Country is called
Decapolis; being situated in the Land of Gilead beyond Jordan, where our
Savior healed the Man that was born blind and deaf, Mark 7. This Opinion
exactly agrees with that of the Holy Scripture. Yet I know there are some (as
Plin. lib. 5. cap. 18. and others) who differ from this in the description of
this Country, but they er^ from the truth.

Of Magdala.
THIS was a City situated upon the West side of the Galilean Sea, fifty two
miles from Jerusalem Northward; in which Country Mary (who of this Town was
called Magdalen) was born. At this time this City is called by the name of
Castle Magdala; in which place they show the House of Mary Magdalen. Upon the
West and North-side of the City, there lies a great and spacious Plain,
preserved only for Pasture, which Mark cap. 8. calls Dalmanutha, that is, Drawn
dry, or a poor and naked Habitation, being derived of Dalal, He has made dry;
and Maon, a House or dwelling place. It may be a notable figure of the
Christian Church, which in this World may rightly be said to have a poor
Habitation, but yet is a right Magdala, that is, a strong and impregnable
Tower, against which the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail, Mat. 16.
Upon the Borders of Magdala and Dalmanutha, the Pharisees and Sadducees
tempting our blessed Savior Christ, demanded of him a sign from Heaven, Mat.
15. 16. Mar. 8. This City belonged to the Tribe of Issachar.

Of Thabor.
MOunt Thabor was a round and high Hill, upon which our blessed Savior Christ
was transfigured; situated upon the borders of the Tribes of Issachar and
Zebulon, fifty two miles from the City of Jerusalem toward the North, and
extends it self toward the South to the River Kison. Here Deborah and Barak
discomfited the Host of Sisera King of the Canaanites, and put them to flight,
Judge. 4. Of this Mountain you may read, Psalm. 89. Hos. 4. Ier. 45. There was
also a Town called after this Name, situated at the foot of this Mountain,
where Ziba and Zalmana, Kings of the Midianites, put to death the Brothers of
Gideon, Judges 8. It was a very fruitful and pleasant place. Concerning the
signification of the name you may read before. Egesippus says, That this
Mountain is almost four miles in height, and that upon the top thereof there is
a round Plain almost three miles over, in which there grows great plenty of
Trees of an admirable Pleasantness and Sweetness; amongst which Trees there are
many Birds which sing very pleasantly, to the great delight of all such as hear
them: and the Air on the top of it is very pure and pleasant.

It is the received Opinion, That upon the top of this Mountain our Savior
Christ, in the presence of Peter, James, and John, was transfigured, and he
spoke with the holy Prophets Moses and Elias, Mat. 17. Luke 9. which place at
this day is compassed about with a great Wall, within which is a fair and
pleasant Orchard, watered with many clear and goodly Springs, but there is no
man that dwells in it, (notwithstanding there are many Towns and Inhabitants at
the foot of the Mountain) neither do they think any man worthy to dwell in it,
they hold it in such estimation, and reverence it as the Hill of God. There are
to be seen in it diverse great Ruins of Palaces, Towers, and Princely Edifices;
in which at this day there harbor many Lions and other wild Beasts. It is very
difficult to ascend up to the top of it it is so exceeding high: It is one of
the principal hills in the Holy Land, not only because that Christ on it was
transfigured, but because it is very fruitful, and plentifully abounds with
Vines and other profitable Plants and Herbs. The Air thereof is wholesome and
good, and the Dew upon it rising thick and sweet, with indifferent Rain; the
Trees high and fair, green both Winter and Summer. At the foot of the Mountain,
toward the South near to Endo^, in the way that leads from Syria into
Egypt, is showed the place where (as it is said) Melchisedeck met with
Abraham, when he returned from the Battle of the four Kings, Genesis 14. At the
foot of the Mountain lying toward the West, just against Nazareth, there is a
Chapel built, in the place where they say our Savior Christ descending from
this Mountain, spoke to his Disciples, saying, Tell none of this Vision, Mat.
17. Upon the East side of it runs the Brook Kison, where Barak and Deborah
overcame the Army of Sisera, Judge. 4.

There is also another Hill in the upper part of Galilee, 92 miles from
Jerusalem Northward, which Hill is also called Thabor, and is three miles
distant from Caesarea Philippi Eastward: but that was not the place of Christ's
Transfiguration.

The Travels of Christ in the fourth year of his Ministry, being the four and
thirtieth of his age.
IN the Month of January Christ the Son of God wintered in Bethabara, 16 miles
from Jerusalem North-eastward, where John sometimes baptized, Ioh. 10. And many
came unto him, saying, John showed us no ^gns, but whatsoever he preached of
this Christ are true. And many believed on him. Now as Christ went into the
Desert to preach, his Disciples came unto him, saying, Lord teach us to pray,
as John taught his Disciples to pray. Whereupon he prescribed to his Disciples
a Form of Prayer, which is called the Lords Prayer, Luke 11. At this time there
came unto him a great multitude, and thronged about him, where he made that
long Sermon which is described Luke 12. and 13. Upon the seventeenth Day of
January, it being then the Sabbath, he cured a certain Woman which had been
diseased 18 years, Luke 13. And when there came unto him certain Pharisees,
saying, thou art the Son of God, wherefore get the out of this Country, for
Herod seeks to kill thee: Jesus answered them, saying, Go and tell that crafty
Fox, behold, I cast out Devils to day, and tomorrow, and the third Day I shall
be pe^fected. Presently he departed out of Petraea (where Herod kept his Court
in the Castle of Macharuntes) and went into Galilee beyond Jordan, 28 miles,
Luke 13. Upon the last Day of January, being the Sabbath, our Lord and Savior
Christ healed (in the house of a certain Prince of the Pharisees) a man sick of
the Dropsy, and recited the Parable of the great Supper, Luke 14.

In the Month of February, he went through all Galilee, which was 80 miles
long, and 24 broad; in which visitation there followed him a great company. And
when there came unto him Publicans and Sinners, he began to speak of
Repentance, but the Ph^risees and Scribes murmured at him, and opposed his
Parables, of the lost sheep, of the Woman that had lost her Groat, and of the
prodigal Son, Luke 15. And a little after, he recited unto his Disciples the
Parable of the unjust Steward, and of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. About the
latter end of February (as by the circumstance of the History and Times may
appear) he made that Sermon of the Power of Faith and good Works, etc. Luke 17.
And going out of Galilee through the midst of Samaria, he healed the ten
Lepers, Luke 17. He recited the Parable of the unjust Judge, and that of the
Publican and Pharisee, Luke 18.

In the Month of March he finished this general Visitation. Which Journey were
so many and diverse, that his Disciples could not describe them.
Notwithstanding, in this Month he went into the Borders of Iudaea and Petraea,
beyond Jordan, and came to Bethabara, where John sometimes baptized, and there
followed him a great company, and he healed them, Mat. 19. Mark 10. There the
Pharisees moved the disputation of the Divorce, and Christ lovingly embraced
the little Children, Mark 20. In this Month of March Lazarus the Brother of
Martha and Mary, who dwelt at Bethania, fell sick of a deadly disease, and they
sent messengers to Christ, who at this time was at Bethabara, to give him to
understand of his Sickness, John 11. this message came unto our Savior Christ
to Bethabara upon the twentieth day of March, being the last day of the twelfth
Month Adar, Anno Mundi 4000. and about such time as the seventy Weeks, spoken
of by Daniel were fully ended: at the end of which Prophecy it behoved Christ,
that he might fulfill the Prophecies of the Old Testament, to suffer, and by
his Resurrection and Ascension to enter into the Glory of God, and to be
partaker of his eternal Kingdom.

Although our Savior had received this message of the Sickness of Lazarus, he
stayed at Bethabara. Two days after, and as it may be thought, about the
twenty second day of March, which was the second day of the first Month Abib,
Lazarus died. But Lazarus being dead and buried, then our Savior went from
Bethabara toward Jericho, John 14. Luke 8. and in the way a man came to him
and said, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal Life? Christ
said unto him, Go and sell all that thou have, and give it unto the Poor, and
thou shall find Treasure in Heaven, and then come and follow me. But because he
was very rich he refused, and went his way. After, he recited the Parable of
the Laborers in the Vineyard, making mention of Predestination. Also in this
Journey he reprehended the Sons of Zebedeus for their Pride and Arrogance, and
fore-telleth his Disciples of his Death and Passion, and in the way healed the
blind man that sat begging, and so entered into Jericho, where he rested all
night in the house of Zacheus, Mat. 20. Zacheus signifies Clean.

Upon the twenty fourth of March, Christ went from Jericho to Bethania, which
was twelve miles. Here he healed Bartimeus the Son of Timeus, Mark 10. ( Timeus
signifies Unclean, of Tame, He is defiled) And going a little further, he
healed other two, res^oring them to sight, M^t. 19. Upon the twenty fifth of
March (being Tuesday) our Savior Christ came to Bethania, where, by the power
of his Word he raised Lazarus to life, after he had been buried four days,
John 11. Laz^rus and Eleazer have both one signification, that is, God is my
Help.

Upon the twenty sixth day of March, the Feast of the Passover of the Jews
drawing near, he went from Bethania to the City of Ephraim near to the Desert,
that he might avoid the Traps and Deceits of the Jews, who went about to take
him, John 11. being ten miles.

Upon the twenty seventh day of March he returned back again from Ephraim to
Bethania, (being ten miles) coming thither about the evening, six days before
the Passover, at which time Martha ministered to him, and Mary anointed his
feet, whereat Judas grutched, John 12. Upon the Sabbath day, being the twenty
eighth of March, he rested in Bethania at the House of Martha. Now as he was at
Supper with Lazarus, many of the Jews understanding that he was there, resorted
thither, not only to see him, but Lazarus also whom he had raised from the
dead, John. 12.

Upon the twenty ninth of March, Christ sitting on an Ass went to Jerusalem.
Now when the multitude heard that he was come unto Jerusalem, they went out to
meet him, some laying their Garments in the way, others strowing the boughs of
Trees where he should go; and those that went before cried, saying, Hosanna to
the Son of David, blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord At this
time our Savior Christ wept over Jerusalem, and cast out all those that bought
and sold in the Temple, Mat. 21. John cap. 17. About the evening he went out of
the City again to Bethania, almost two miles, and there rested all night, Mat.
21. So this days journey was almost four miles. In the evening of this day the
Jews chose their Paschal Lamb, according to the Law, Exodus 12.

Upon the thirtieth day of March he went from Bethania to Jerusalem, betimes in
the morning; in which Country he cursed the Fig Tree that wanted Fruit, and
after entering into the City, he cast out of the Temple the Money Changers and
Merchants, Mark 11. About the evening (as may be gathered by circumstance of
time) he returned back again to Bethania. This days Journey was four miles.

Upon the last day of March in the morning, Christ went back again from
Bethania to Jerusalem; and by the way as he went, his Disciples beheld the
Fig Tree that he had cursed, and lo it was dried up, Mark 11. After, when he
was in the Temple, there came certain Pharisees unto him and disputed with him;
at which time he recited the Parable of the Marriage of the Kings Daughter.
Also certain Scribes and Pharisees came unto him asking him whether it was
lawful to pay Tribute unto Caesar, Mat. 21. 22. He also sharply rebuked the
Scribes and Pharisees, and recited the Simile of the Hen and her Chickens, Mat.
23. After that, he went to the Mount of Olives, almost a mile. And then his
Disciples looking upon the goodly building of the Temple, from thence he took
occasion to preach of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the consummation of the
World; so he stayed all that night in the Mount of Olives, Mat. 24.

Upon the first day of April, being Wednesday, our Savior Christ rising before
day, taught again in the Temple; and after, as he was going to Bethania, he
said to his Disciples, Know ye that within the se two days is the Feast of the
Passover, and the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of Sinners, and
crucified. At the same time the Chief Priests assembled themselves together,
and took counsel how they might do to take him by deceit, Mat. 26. The same day
as our Savior Christ was in the House of Simon the Leper, (whom he had healed
of that Sickness) there came a Woman and brought a box of precious Ointment and
poured it upon his head, at which the Disciples murmured, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
Luke 21.

The fourth Passover of the Ministry of Christ.
Upon Thursday being the second day of April, the days of the Feast of the
Passover being now at hand, Christ with his Disciples prepared for the eating
of the Paschal Lamb; which was the fourth Passover of our Savior, and when
about the evening of this day it was necessary for them to keep the Paschal
Lamb, and to prepare the Passover according to God's Law; Christ sent Peter and
John to make ready the Supper, and he with the rest of his Disciples about
evening went from Bethania toward Jerusalem, just at the beginning of the
fourteenth day of the first Month Abib or Nisan, which began about the evening
of this day. Here he celebrated his last Supper among his Disciples, between
six and seven of the Clock in the evening; at which time he celebrated the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, concerning the true receiving of his Body and
Blood: of which you may read, Mat. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. Afterward,
about the eighth hour, he washed his Dicsiples feet, and then leaning upon the
Table, he pointed out Judas that should betray him, John cap. 13. From the
ninth hour to the tenth hour, about the second Watch of the night, Judas that
Traitor went from his Disciples, John. 13. In the mean time Christ made that
long Sermon recited only by John, 14, 15, 16. and made that effectual Prayer,
John 17. About the tenth hour (after they had sung a Psalm) Christ went over
the Brook Cedron, to the Garden of Gethsamene, being somewhat more than half a
mile. There, between the hours of eleven and twelve, he sweat Water and Blood,
and prayed earnestly. About twelve of the Clock, it being then midnight. Christ
was betrayed by Judas, who about three days before had sold him for thirty
Silverlings, which was about 3 l. 15 s.

From Gethsa^ene the Jews brought him bound to Jerusalem, being more than half
a mile: and about one of the Clock in the morning carried him to the house of
Annas who was one of the Chief Priests. About two of the Clock led him from
thence to Cai^has, Chief Priest. From three a Clock till four (which was about
Cocks-crowing) Peter denied Christ. At the same time Cai^has and all the
Priests of Jerusalem would have condemned the Lord of Glory, the Son of God. At
the same time also the Servants and Officers of the Priests beat him and mocked
him. About five of the Clock in the morning, Christ was condemned by the whole
consent of the Syn^drion of the Jews, Luke 22. All these things Christ suffered
between Thursday and Friday. And whereas the Jews according to the commandment
of God begin their day in the evening, therefore that night wherein our Savior
Christ suffered all these things belonged unto the fourteenth day of the Month
Abib. So that just at the same time as the Feast of the Paschal Lamb was
celebrated amongst the Jews, Christ, the true Lamb of God* was made a living
Sacrifice on the Cross for the Sins of man. Thus, as we have observed the hours
of the night, so likewise let us observe the hours of the day.

Friday being the third day of April (which as I have said began the evening
before) was the fourteenth day of the first Month Abib or Nisan, among the
Jews. At six a Clock in the morning, about Sunrising of the same day, our
Savior Jesus Christ was brought unto Pilat, and Judas Iscariot hanged himself,
because he had betrayed the Innocent Blood. About seven of the Clock in the
same morning our Savior Christ was carried to Herod Antipas, that cruel
Tyrant, who the year before had put John Baptist to death: here he was
disdainfully handled. At eight of the Clock our Savior Christ returned to
Pilate, who propounded unto the Jews (because they were to have a Capital
Offender delivered unto them at the Feast of the Passover) whether they would
have Jesus their King, or Barrabbas, who had been a Murderer, let loose unto
them; but they condemned Jesus, and chose Barrabbas, which name signifies, The
Son of the multitude, or a Seditious man. About nine of the Clock in the
morning (which the Jews commonly called the third hour of the day, because it
succeeded the morning, and continued till Noon) our Savior Christ was Whipped
and crowned with Thorns. About ten of the Clock Pontius Pilate, in the place
called Gabbatha, publicly condemned Christ to be crucified, and washed his
hands in token of Innocence. Pontius signifies Cruel and Inhumane; Pilate, a
man armed with a Roman Dart, Mart. lib. 10. John 19. Between ten and eleven,
our Savior Christ carrying his Cross, was brought to the place called
Golgotha. About eleven of the Clock, the third hour of the morning being not
yet fully finished) our Savior Christ was fastened upon the Cross, Mark 13. He
therefore hung four hours upon the Cross, that is, from about eleven of the
Clock, till about three in the Afternoon. And he spoke before that supernatural
Eclipse of the Sun three memorable Sayings: First, Father* forgive them, for
they know not what they do, Luke 19. Secondly, he said to his Mother, Woman,
behold thy Son: And to John, being converted, behold thy Mother. Thirdly, to
the Thief, Verily, I say unto thee, this da^ thou shall be with me in Paradise
About twelve of the Clock (in that Meridian which the Jews call the sixth hour,
that is the sixth hour from the rising of the Sun) that supernatural Eclipse of
the Sun happened, of which you may read in Dionysius the Areopagite, and
Eusebius. About three of the Clock in the Afternoon, which the Jews call the
ninth hour, (the Sun now beginning to receive its light) our Savior Christ
spoke these four sayings, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.
I thirst, Ioh. 19. When he had taken the Sponge, he said, It is finished, Ioh.
19. And after, crying out with a loud Voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit, and so died. At which time there were many wonderful
Miracles wrought, as you may read, Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luke. 23. Ioh. 19. About
four of the Clock in the Afternoon, our blessed Savior was pierced through
with a Lance, and there issued out of his side Blood and Water, Ioh. 19. About
five of the Clock, which the Jews call the eleventh hour of the day, our
Savior Christ was buried by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. About the sixth
hour, there fell an Eclipse of the Moon, which was natural and not miraculous,
neither is it observed by any of the Evangelists.

Upon the fifteenth day of the first Month, which answers to the 4th of
April, (being justly called the great and holy Sabbath of the Jews, for that
Christ this day rested in the Sepulcher) the Priests and Pharisees being partly
joyful, because, as they thought, the disturber of the common Peace, and one
that opposed their Authority was dead; and partly careful how they might
prevent his Resurrection, went to Pilate, and obtained of him a Band of
Soldiers to watch the Sepulcher, and to put his Seal upon the Stone.

Upon the fifth day of A^ril, early in the morning, our Savior Christ, having
overcome Death and the Devil, by his Divine Power raised himself up from the
dead, according as he had foretold his Disciples, and appeared to Mary
Magdalen, John 20. and to other Women that touched his Feet, Mat. 28. About
Noon he appeared to Simon Peter, Luke 24. ^1 Cor. 15. In the Afternoon he
traveled with two of his Disciples almost eight miles to the Castle of E^aus,
Luke 24. One of these Disciples was Cleophas the Brother of Joseph, who brought
up our Savior Christ. The other, as may be gathered by the circumstance of the
story, was Luke, because he has set it down so exactly.

In the evening of the same day, he returned invisibly from Emaus to Jerusalem,
eight miles, where, when the doors were all shut, and his Disciples were
assembled together for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst of
them, and said, Peace be u^o you. And he showed himself to all his Disciples
except Thomas. Mark calls this the first day of the Sabbath, that is of the
Week, Mark 16. Luke 24. Ioh. 20. for the Sabbath of the Jews (as Joseph.,
witnesses) is not only taken for a day of rest, but also for the whole Week:
from whence is that saying in the Gospel, Iejunio bis in Sabbato, i. I fast
twice in the Week, Luke 18.

Upon the 12 day of April, and eight days after his Resurrection, he appeared
again to his Disciples, Thomas being then present, and the doors shut; that he
might make evident that his Omnipotence was not tied to any secondary causes,
or hindered by the property of any natural Bodies, which, according to S.
Austin, Ser. 160. was so much the more wonderful, because he appeared unto them
substantially and effectually, not as Phantasma or Shadow, which vanishes
away, and is without any corporeal substance.

In the same month of April our Savior Christ appeared again to Peter, Thomas,
Nathaniel, the Sons of Zebedeus, and other two Disciples, as they were fishing
upon the shore of Tiberias, which stood 56 miles from Jerusalem Northward,
between Bethsaida and Capernaum, Ioh. 21. The day of this Apparition is not set
down.

From the Sea of Tiberias near to Ca^ernaum and Bethsaida, to mount Thabor
situated in Galile^, is reckoned 10 miles; there, about the end of April our
Savior Christ appeared to above 500 Brethren at once, where many worshipped
him, and others doubted, Mat. 28. 1 Cor. 15. In the month of May our Savior
Christ appeared to James the Son of Alpheus, for he had been seen before of
James the Son of Zebedeus: both which were after crowned with martyrdom in the
City Jerusalem, the Son of Zebedeus upon the 25 day of July, ten years after
the Resurrection; and the Son of Alpheus upon the Feast day of the Passover was
thrown from a Pinnacle of the Temple, 29 years after the Resurrection of our
Savior.

Upon the 40 day after his Resurrection, he returned fifty six miles to
Jerusalem, where his Disciples were assembled together: and upon the fourteenth
day of May, in the sight of all the Apostles, with great triumph and joy he
ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of his Father in Divine
Majesty and Glory, Mar. and Luke. ult. Act. 1. Psalm. 28. Ephesians. 1. 1. Pet. 3.
Heb. 1. So these Travels of our Savior Christ were 319 miles. But if you
reckon his Travels from the time of his infancy to the day of his Ascension,
they make 3093 miles; besides his general Visitations and Journeys hither and
thither, which were so many, that as John witnesses, cap. vlt. they could not
be described.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Jericho.
THIS City stood very pleasantly in the Tribe of Benjamin, ten miles from
Jerusalem North-eastward. Ioshuah overcame this Town by sounding of Trumpets,
Ios. 6. Heb. 11. It was rebuilt by Hiel, and was compassed about with a new
wall by Herod, that mighty King of the Jews, who put the Innocent Children to
death, and called it after his Mothers Name Cyprus, Ios. de Bell. Iud. lib. 1.
cap. 16. And although this City was taken and utterly overthrown the second
time by the Romans, at such time as Vespasian and his Son Titus wasted and
destroyed Jerusalem and all the Land of Iudaea; yet afterward it was
re-edified, and in St. Ieroms time, which was 400 years after Christ, it was a
fair City. There was shown the House of Zaccheus, and the Sycomore-tree that he
went up to see Christ, Luke 19. But by reason of the often destructions and
devastations that has fallen upon it, there is not to be seen at this day
above eight Houses in the Town, and all the Monuments and Relics of the holy
Places are utterly destroyed, the House of Zaccheus and the Sicomore-tree are
no more to be seen in that Place: only the Place is to be seen where our
Savior restored the blind man to sight, when he cried after him, Lord, thou
Son of David, have mercy upon me, Luke chap. 18. Also though the Country
throughout be very fruitful and pleasant, yet it is nothing so fertile and
pleasant, as it was when the Children of Israel did dwell there. For the Roses
of Jericho are no more to be found there, but rather in a Village about sixteen
miles from Jordan toward the East. And although they stand so far distant off,
yet they retain their ancient name. Between Jerusalem and Jericho there is a
Desert or Wilderness, which by the Inhabitants of the holy Land is called
Quarentena, where the man of which Christ speaks fell among Thieves, Luke.
10. There is in the same place at this day great thieving, and many Robberies
committed, as Brittenbacchus says. In this Place also is to be seen the River
Chereth, where the Ravens fed Eliah, 1 Reg. 17. Near to Jericho also is found
the River, the Water whereof Elizeus made sweet by casting in Salt, whereas
before it was bitter; and it remains very pleasant and sweet to this day, 2
Reg. 2.

Of Ephraim.
THIS City is so called from the pleasantness and fruitfulness of the Soil,
being derived from Parah, to fructify. It lies 8 miles from Jerusalem
North-eastward, just in the way as you go from thence to Jericho in the
Wilderness of Quarentena, close by the River Chereth in the Tribe of Benjamin.
Here our Savior Christ after he had raised Lazarus from Death to Life, hid
himself with his Disciples, because the Jews sought to take away his Life by
deceit. The Passover following he was made a sacrifice for the Sin of man, Ioh.
11.

Of Bethania.
THIS City was a type of the Church, which is always subject to the Cross, and
exposed to every calamity; and therefore is called Bethania, that is, The House
of Sorrow and Affliction: being derived of Both, a House; and Oni, Affliction.
According to the prophecy of our Savior, who foretold of the Afflictions and
Tribulations that should fall upon his Church, You shall mourn, but you shall
be comforted, and your grief shall be turned into joy. It was distant from
Jerusalem almost two miles toward the South-East. Borchardus the Monk
observes, that close by a Well, about a stones cast out of this Town, there is
showed the place where Martha met our Savior Christ when he came to Bethania,
and a little after called her Sister to meet him, Ioh. cap. 11. There is also
shown in this Town the House of Simon the Leper, where a certain Woman having
an Alablaster box of precious Ointment, poured it on our Saviors head, not
without the great indignation of his Disciples, Mat. 26. There is also to be
seen the house of Martha, to which our Savior did oftentimes resort, Luke 10.
John 11. and 12. and in that place there is at this day a Church built in
honor of those two Sisters, which were the Sisters of Lazarus. There is also
seen the Sepulcher out of which Lazarus was raised from death to life, John 11.
which stands close by the said Church, and over it is built a Chapel of
Marble, very decent and comely. The Saracens hold this Chapel in great
estimation. You cannot see the City of Jerusalem from Bethania because of the
Mount of Olives, but as soon as you ascend a little Hill in the way as you go
thence to Jerusalem, you may discern Mount Sion and a part of the City: then
when you are descended from that Hill, the City is again hidden. After that,
upon the left side of the Mount of Olives, some stones cast from Bethpage, you
do leave a small Village standing under the Mountain of Offense, where Solomon
in times past committed Idolatry. From this Village the Ass and the Colt was
brought unto Christ. Not far from thence, upon the South side as you go upon
the Mount of Olives, you come unto the place where Christ mounted upon the Ass,
as we read, Mat. 21. And a little after you may see the whole City of
Jerusalem, with Solomon's Temple, and the Church of the holy Sepulcher, with
many other holy places. Then as you descend from the top of the Mount of
Olives, you may see the place where the multitude cried, Hosanna, Blessed be he
that comes in the name of the Lord. And in this descent also our Savior
Christ wept over Jerusalem, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thee under my Wings as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but thou
would not.

Of Bethpage.
BEthpage stands upon the right hand of the way toward the East, as you go
from Bethania to Jerusalem, and, as St. Ierom says, was sometimes a Habitation
of the Priests, which at their appointed times went up to Jerusalem to minister
to the Lord. It was so called because of the multitude of Figs that grow there:
for Pagim signifies a Fig, Cant. 2. Bethpage is a notable type of the Church,
for that ought likewise to be fruitful, and to bring forth sweet Figs, that is,
good Works, and many other comfortable Virtues, that so men in their
afflictions might be comforted. As it is thought, the Fig Tree that our Savior
Christ cursed because it wanted Fruit, stood not far from Bethpage, Mat. 21.
Mark 11. Wherefore let us take heed that we be not like fruitless Fig Trees,
covered only (like our Forefathers Adam and Eve) with Leaves, and bearing no
fruit, Genesis 3. lest so God's Curse fall upon us, and we be thrust out of
Eternal Happiness, Mat. 3.

Of the Castle from whence the Ass and the Colt were brought upon which our
Savior Christ rode to Jerusalem.
THIS Castle (as Adamus Risnerus says) was a certain Hold compassed about with
strong Walls, and within beautified with a fair Palace supported with goodly
Columns: it stood not far from the Mount of Olives, just in the dividing of the
way as you go from Bethania to Jerusalem; for there goes one way to the
Fountain-Gate, and another to the Valley of Gehinnon. In the Hebrew Text it is
called Tirah, as you may read in Matthew, which signifies not only a Castle,
but a firm and sure building, with good decorum and order: for Tor signifies a
circular order. It is credible, that this Hold is a resting place, and that the
Ass and the Colt were tied in the way, for this cause; that if by chance any
Travelers were weary (by reason of the tediousness of their Journey) they
might hire them for certain hours to carry them over the Mount of Olives, and
so return them back again. The Allegorical meaning of this Ass and the Colt,
according to the opinion of many learned men, signifies the People of the Jews,
who were burdened with Moses's Laws: and the Asses Colt signifies the rest of
the Gentiles, which were not charged with the burden of Moses's Law, but tied
only to the Law of Nature. So we also like Travelers and Strangers in this
miserable World, are tied to the Afflictions and Calamities thereof, standing
in two ways, expecting the death of the Body, and liberty of the Soul; then our
Savior Christ comes in Peace and loses this Body of death, (as the Apostle
says, Romans 7.) and brings us to that Heavenly Jerusalem, eternal Joy,
according to that of St. Paul, in the first of the Philippians, I desire to be
loosed and to be with our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the Mount of Olives.
ABout half a mile and a Furlong from Jerusalem toward the East, stood the
Mount of Olives, very fruitful and pleasant, bringing forth Olives, Palms,
Figs, Gossumtine, and many other notable Fruits, but principally, Palms and
Olives, of which the Mountain takes the Name. It is said in Pliny, lib. 16.
cap. 19. that these Olive and Palm trees do never lose their Leaves, and are
green both Winter and Summer. St. Austin calls it, The Mountain of Unction,
because of the Fertility and pleasantness of it: also The Mountain of Health,
because it brings forth Oils and many other Plants necessary for Physic:
also, The Mountain of Light; first, because it lies upon the East, so that the
Sun shines in the morning very pleasantly upon it, and in the evening when it
sets, the Beams thereof reflecting upon the Temple of Jerusalem casts a
beautiful light to this Mount: secondly, because it brings forth Oil, which
is the nourishment and life of light: thirdly, because it was beautified with
the gracious presence of our blessed Lord and Savior Christ, which is the
Day Star and Light of the Church, rising up on high to inlighten all those
which shall be called unto eternal happiness. For which cause it typically
represents the Church, which is the light of the World, wherein are found
many Christians that bring forth pleasant Fruit, (good Works) relieving the
necessity of such as are in want, comforting the afflicted, and patiently
supporting the Calamity and Misery of this World, that so they might
triumphantly rejoice with Christ in that heavenly City of Jerusalem.

What things Zacharias has spoken of this Mount in his last Chapter, is to be
understood of the preaching of the Gospel, and propagation of the Church
through all the World. St. Jerome says in his Epitaph upon St. Paul, That upon
this Hill the Jews commonly burnt the red Cow, with the Ashes whereof the
People of God being sprinkled, they were purified and sanctified: of which you
may read, Number. 19. Heb. 6.

Hellen the Empress, Mother to that godly Emperor Constantine the Great, about
the year of our Lord 332, caused a fair and beautiful Church to be built upon
this Mount, just in the place where our blessed Lord and Savior Christ
ascended up into Heaven. It was built round, all of white polished Marble: upon
the top thereof there is no Roof, but a Window, even as Christ should ascend
through it, as Eusebius says, in the Life of the Emperor Constantine the
Great, lib. 3. cap. 40. The same St. Jerome affirms, in his Book Delocis
Hebraicis. He also says, That the Inhabitants of the Holy Land take upon them
to show in this Church, the Impression of the Feet of our Savior Christ, which
happened as they say, just at such time as he ascended up into Heaven: out of
which Travelers and Pilgrims take Sand to carry with them as an holy Relick,
though indeed it is verily to be thought, that they were feet made in stone by
ancient Monks, thereby to get Money from such as resorted thither upon
Devotion; for look how often Pilgrims take thence the Sand, they are presently
filled again: from whence may be gathered, that there is no Sand naturally
there. Every man therefore ought to embrace a nearer way to Salvation, than to
follow those Monkish Fables; and to seek Christ in the Holy Scripture, not upon
the Mount of Olives, or amongst Sand: for since the Grave could not contain
him, the Mount of Olives cannot hold him, who now sits at the right Hand of
his Father, in Power and eternal Glory: but rather, if we be desirous to see
the Footsteps of Christ, let us seek them in the Church, which is dispersed
through the World; wherein we are sufficiently taught how we should follow him.

The Palm is a famous Tree which brings forth Dates; and is so called because
upon the top the boughs are thick and round, extending out like fingers; from
whence it is called Dactilus, that is, a finger.

Of Gethsamene.
THIS was a Village situated at the foot of the Mountain of Olives, in a
pleasant and fruitful place. Near unto this Village, as Saint Augustine
observes, there were many pleasant Gardens, which gave forth very sweet and
delectable savours; unto which Place Christ and his Disciples did oftentimes
resort, as the Evangelist Luke, cap 22. observes. It was so called from the
pressing forth of Oil; for Gath or Geth, signifies a Press, and Schaemen Oil.
In this place the heart of our Savior Christ was so pressed with affliction
that he sweat drops of Blood: By which Blood the Sins of our Souls are washed
away, and we that are wounded are made whole, as with a most precious Balsom,
Isa. 53.

Hellen the Empress, in an Orchard close by this Town, set up a fair and
beautiful Church, over the Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary; which she called by
the name of the Mother of God, Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 30. It is said, that this
Sepulcher remains to this day in this Church, made of white polished Marble,
standing about eight and forty steps under ground, being something wider than
the Sepulcher of Christ: in it there is two doors, one to go in, another to go
out. But whether this be the right Sepulcher of the blessed Virgin, it
concerns us not, since it appertains not to our Salvation, neither is
mentioned in the holy Scriptures: but if any Man be desirous to be further
satisfied in it let him read Nice^horus, who makes mention of that and her
Ascension, both, in my Opinion, of like Credit; because, I suppose, that Saint
Luke (who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, and lived in those times) would not
have omitted so memorable an Action. But to return to the Garden of Gethsamene.
About some fifty paces toward the East of this Sepulcher of the blessed
Virgin, close by the foot of the Mount of Olives, stands a certain Chapel,
just in the place where sometimes the Town of Gethsamene stood. Not far from
this Chapel is shown a certain hollow place under a Rock, where, the
Inhabitants say our Savior sweat drops of Blood. They also show a certain
stone whereon the Angels stood which comforted our Savior. Descending thence
about a stones cast, they show unto Pilgrims a place close by the Cave in the
Mount of Olives, where Peter, James, and John sat when our Savior was in his
Agony. They also show the place where Peter cut off Malchus Ear. There is to be
seen a memorable Place where Judas betrayed our Savior with a kiss, when he
delivered him to the Jews. Not far off is to be seen the Place where the Jews
fell backward when our Savior asked them, Whom seek ye? Besides many other
things (if Borchardus may be credited) as the Impression of his hair and head
upon a stone; and of his finger, as if it had been in Wax, upon a Rock: and in
the place where he prayed, of his Hands and Knees, which are so firm in stone
that they cannot be defaced with any Instrument. But there have been many in
this place since these times, which have seen none of these things: from whence
may be gathered, that they have been idle delusions used by ancient Monks to
get money from Pilgrims and Strangers; and I have here remembered them, that
others knowing these, may beware of the like Fallacies and Deceits purposely
invented for Lucre's sake.

This Garden of Gethsamene is credibly thought to have been planted in former
times by the Kings, David and Solomon; but increased and enlarged by other
succeeding Princes, that there they might recreate themselves, and receive some
content by the Fruits of the Earth. But on the contrary, that great King, the
anointed of the Lord, our blessed Savior, in this place of Pleasure, this
Paradise of the Jews, was constrained to undergo that almost unsupportable
Passion, to make us partakers of that heavenly Paradise and place of Pleasure.

Not far from hence is to be seen the place where Judas hanged himself: and a
little from that, the Field of Akeldama, which was bought with the thirty
Silverlings for which Judas betrayed Christ. This Field (by the appointment of
the Empress of Hellen) was compassed about with four Walls in the manner of a
Tower, upon the top whereof there are seven distinct doors, like Windows, by
which the dead Bodies of Christians are let down into it, it is fifty foot
wide, and seventy two long. It stands not far from the Valley of Hinnon
toward the East, and upon the South Side of Mount Sion in Jerusalem, etc.

Of Kidron or Cedron.
THIS Brook was so called because of the blackness of the Water, being derived
of Kadar, to wax black. The Mountain whence it first rises, stands not far
from Jerusalem toward the South; from whence it runeth through the Valley of
Jehosaphat (which Valley being very fat and fertile, changes the color of the
Water, and makes it look black) and so through Jerusalem; then passing toward
the East, over a cliff of Mount Olivet, it falls into the Lake Asphaltites.
When there falls any store of Rain the Channel is very full, but in Summer it
is oftentimes dry with the extremity of Heat. Over this Brook David passed when
he was persecuted by his Son Absolon, 2 Samuel 16. and our Savior Christ when
hedrank of the River in the Way, that is, when he suffered upon the Cross for
the Sin of Man, according to that Saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. save me, O
God, because the Waters are entered even into my Soul.

Of Mount Calvary.
THIS Mountain, according to the common Opinion, was so called of dead Men's
Skulls, or the Skulls of such who were put to death for some capital Offense.
It stood upon the West Side of Jerusalem as you go out of the ancient Gate, and
is a part of Mount Gihon. At this day it stands within the City of Jerusalem
together with the Sepulcher of our Savior: and upon it is built a fair Church,
which is joined unto the Church of the holy Sepulcher, being as it were a Quire
unto it: But it stands somewhat lower. It is built all of Marble, and the
inside is all polished and wrought very curiously. It is also paved with the
same Stone. Within it is seen a piece of the Pillar of Stone, to which they say
Christ was tied when he was whipped: in which Stone are to be seen certain red
specks, as if they had been drops of Blood; and these also (they say) were the
Blood of Christ when he was scourged; besides many other things, of which you
may read at the beginning of this Treatise in the description of Jerusalem as
it is at this day.

The Description of the holy Sepulcher.
THE Sepulcher of Christ stood upon the West side of Jerusalem, close by Mount
Golgatha, in the Garden of Joseph of Arimathea: for it was the custom of the
Jews to build their Tombs or Sepulchers in their Orchards and Gardens; and
beautify and adorn them with Lillies, Roses, and other Flowers, on purpose to
put them in mind of their Mortality, according to that of David, Psalm. 103. The
days of Man are like Grass, as a Flower of the Field so flourishes he: for the
Wind goes over it and is gone, and the Place thereof shall know it no more.
And for this cause the Jews, but especially the Kings, would be buried in their
Gardens: so Joseph, a good and just Man, following this custom, had hewed him
out of a Rock a new Monument, in which there had been no Man laid; that so when
he walked in the Garden to take the Air, he might be put in mind of his
Mortality. In this Monument our Savior Christ was buried: and from this Place,
upon the third Day early in the Morning, he rose; to the terror and
astonishment of such as watched the Sepulcher. From whence may be gathered,
that as our first Parents, Adam and Eve, trespassed against God, and lost
Felicity in a Garden; so Christ the Son of God in a Garden made satisfaction
for that Sin; restored us again to Grace, and make us capable of heavenly
felicity. This Sepulcher (as it is described by S. John, when he went with S.
Peter to see if that notable Miracle of the Resurrection were true) was like a
little Chapel, the door thereof being upon the outside, and was but one Room
without any division, so that a Man might see all that was within it: for he
says, Joh. 20. That he did not go in, but looked in, and saw the linen
Clothes where they lay wrapped up: from whence may be concluded, that that
Sepulcher which is now extant (howsoever perhaps it may stand in the same
place) is not the same Sepulcher wherein our Savior Christ was buried; for it
is described to be four square, to be open at the top, to have within it two
Vaults (an inward and an outward) and that you descend to it by Stairs, as you
may read at the beginning of this Treatise; which description does not agree
with that of St. John's. Again St. John says, that they rolled a great Stone
to the door of the Sepulcher, did not lay it upon the top of it. Also Eusebius
and Nicephorus affirm, that the Pagans and other heathen People filled up the
Sepulcher of Christ with Earth, and built up in the place the Temple of Venus,
and in it put her Image, where she was worshipped a long time after, until
such time as that godly Emperess Hellen caused that Temple to be abolished, and
the Sepulcher cleansed and purified. Afterward, at her instigation,
Constantine the Great (who was her Son) built up in the very same place a fair
and goodly Church in the memory of our Savior, and bestowed great cost both in
the workmanship, and in beautifying it with Gold and Silver. This Temple (as it
was before it was destroyed by the Saracens) is said to be built all of white
polished Marble, and beautified with Stones of diverse colors, gilt with Gold
and Silver, covered on the out side with Lead to withstand the storms and
showers of Rain that happened; but the inside was gilt all with splendent and
refulgent Gold, which cast a wonderful luster upon the Beholders. Upon either
side of it were two walking Galleries, one above, which was close; and another
below, which was open, extending themselves the length of the Sanctuary; all
the Roof and Vault being covered over with Gold and artificial Work, the one
being supported with Pillars of Marble, the other with Posts of Wood plaited
with Silver. There were also three Gates toward the East, very fitly and
fairly disposed, by which the multitude that resorted thither go in and out:
within these there stood an Arch, representing, after a sort, the Hemisphere of
the Heavens, extended to the top of the Sanctuary like a Circle, girded about
with twelve Pillars of equal bigness, representing the twelve Apostles; and
upon the top of this Arch were placed Cups of Silver, beautifully burnished.
All which the said Emperor dedicated to God for a Monument.

There were many other memorable things that did belong to this Temple, which
were admirable to look on, all which, as you came up the high street from the
market place, were presented to your view; a stately sight, the like whereof
those parts did not afford. This Temple was built by the Emperor Constantine,
Anno Dom. 333. Venerable Bede, who was a Dr. of Divinity, and lived in England
700 years after Christ, described the holy Sepulcher after this manner: This
Sepulcher over head was something round, and so high, that a man could scarce
touch it with his hand; standing in that Rock which extends it self to Mount
Calvary into the Garden of Joseph of Arimathea: representing in form a little
Chapel: the entrance thereinto was toward the East. And further he adds,
that they which went into this Vail, found on the right hand toward the North,
a stone Tomb which resembled a Coffin, situated in the pavement, joining to
the Wall; which stone Coffin was of a mixed color, that is, white and red,
being seven Foot long, and three handfuls high. This description, Venerable Bede received from certain Monks, that went upon devotion to Jerusalem to visit
this Sepulcher: but since, it has been diverse times destroyed and polluted by
the Turks and other Heathen People. From whence may be gathered, that the
Sepulcher which is now standing and showed unto Pilgrims, is some device of the
Monks to get Money of Strangers, and procure a kind of Devotion in the hearts
of Ignorant People; wherefore as the Angel said, Mark 16. Let us not seek
Christ any longer among the dead, or in the Grave, but in his holy Church,
where the lively pourtraiture of his Divine Presence is set forth unto us: that
so we may be made partakers with him hereafter in that place of eternal Glory.
Concerning the residue of this description you may see it before.

Of Emmaus.
THIS City or Castle of Emmaus, is distant from Jerusalem almost eight miles
toward the North-West. It signifies the Mother of Fortitude; being derived of
Em, a Mother; and Vtz, which the Hebrews call Fortitude. It stood where three
several ways were, that so it might serve for a direction to Passengers. From
whence Melancton says, that it was a notable type of the Church, which is our
true Mother, showing us the way unto eternal Life. And although it be but
little, and the number in it few, yet it is strong. As the Castle, though it
were small, yet it is almost invincible; and for that cause called, The Mother
of Strength, as the Church is called, The Mother of the Righteous, against
which the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail.

In the time of Judas Macchabe^s (though it was then a small City) it was
numbered amongst the greatest Cities of Judah, because of the situation and
strength of it. To this place our Savior traveled from Jerusalem the same day
that he arose from the Dead, Luke 24.

In the time of the Romans Wars in Iudaea, this City was wonderfully defaced
and ruined by the Soldiers of Tiberius Maximus (who was Chief Captain in this
Country, in the absence of Titus Vesp^sian,) but yet not utterly abolished; for
about a hundred and fifty years after, Heliogabolus Emperor of Rome caused it
to be rebuilded, and called by the name of Nicopolis, that is, The City of
Victory. Not far from Emmaus there was an Inn, or a place to which Strangers
might resort, and there three ways met; two went of either side the Town, and
one through it: in this place the two Disciples constrained our blessed Savior
to stay with them, because it was then about Sunset. Near unto this Inn,
Nicephorus and Zozemenus say (in their Ecclesiastical History) there was a
Spring or Well of that admirable Virtue, that if either Man or Beast that was
infirm or sick did drink of the Water thereof, they were immediately restored
to their former Health. The reason that these Authors have for it (because they
are impertinent) I will omit.

But to return to the City of Emmaus, as it is now called Nicopolis, being
situated eight miles from Jerusalem toward the North-East, in the way as you
go thence to Ioppa: the Country round about it being very fertile and
pleasant, by reason of the Rivers and Springs wherewith it is watered, as Pliny
says, l. 5. c. 14. and much altered from that which it was in times past. But
because you may read more of this City in Pliny, as it is at this day, and in
Nicephorus and Eusebius, I leave to speak further of it.

Of Simon of Cyrene.
THIS Simon, which carried the Cross of our Savior Christ, was born in Kir, a
City in Africa, situated sixteen miles from Jerusalem toward the West, Mat.
27. Luke 23. In which City Tiglath Phulasser, Emperor of the Assyrians,
planted many of the Inhabitants of Damascus, after he had conquered that City,
2 Reg. 16. This City and the Country round about it, by reason of these new
Inhabitants, by little and little changed the name: and whereas in former times
it was called Kir, in the time of our Savior it was commonly called Cyrene,
and this Man (of that Country) Simon of Cyrene. At this day it is a strong and
beautiful City situated between Mareotides and Zeugitania: at first built by
Battus, whom Callimachus the Poet claims to be his Progenitor. This Battus
was a mighty King in Africa, but was one that had a great impediment in his
Speech, insomuch that many think this word (...), to have been originally used
by him, and by none other. Afterward (as is said) Tiglath Phulasser having
obtained the Jurisdiction of this City, planted the People of Da^ascus in it:
and they obtaining some Power there, continued till a long time after Christ,
and embraced the Religion of the Jews, built up Synagogues, and dispersed that
Law in many parts of those Quarters. There were some of this Country that
opposed that holy Martyr Stephen, and were consenting to his death. There were
many learned men in it, as Eratosthenes the Mathematician, Callimacus the Poet
(both which were had in great estimation among the Egyptians) Carneades also
the Academian, Cronus Appolonus, and Hegesias the Philosopher (of whom Cicero
speaks in the fifth Book of his Tusculans) and Eratosthenes the Historian,
who was Son of Agaclis. Salust says, that this City in his time was so mighty
that it maintained War against the Carthaginians for their Bounds and Limits of
their Fields and Grounds, a long time; and Justin lib. 39. that they maintained
War against two Nations, the Phoenes and the Egyptians: in which Wars they gave
Aprius, the King of the Egyptians, such a mighty overthrow, that there were
very few of his Army that returned into his Country with him, as Horodot.
affirms, lib. 4. there were also many Great Princes that ruled in this City:
of which, because you may read in diverse other Authors more at large, I omit to
speak of them.

Of Joseph of Arimathea, who buried Christ.
THIS Joseph, which caused our Savior Christ to be buried in his Garden, was a
rich man, upright and just in all his Actions, a Senator of Jerusalem, and one
that expected the Kingdom of God; born at Arimathea, a City of the Jews, Luc.
23. This City was sometime called Ramathaim Sophim, and sometime Ramah, because
it was situated in a high place, and in times past was a fair City standing 16
miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west, the description whereof you may
read before. At this day it is called Ramalea; being nothing so fair as it was,
but like a Country Town, the Houses being carelessly dispersed here and there,
lying without Walls or Bulwarks to defend it; notwithstanding, the ancient
ruins of the former City is to be seen even at this day. There is also a great
Inn or resting place for Strangers, having within it many Rooms for the receipt
of Passengers, and a Well of very sweet Water. This House was first purchased
at the charge of Philip Duke of Burgundy, and by him committed to the
protection of the Monks of Mount Sion, by whom it is at this day made an
Hospital, wherein Pilgrims, Travelers, and Strangers, are entertained, and
find much relief. In an inward Orchard belonging to this Hospital, there is a
fair plat of Ground that brings forth great abundance of Aloes, of which
there is often mention in the holy Scriptures, but more especially in Psalm 48.
Thy Garments smell of Aloes and Cassia, when thou come out of thy Ivory
Palaces, where they have made thee glad.

Nicodemus, a Prince of the Jews, together with Joseph of Arimathea, brought
with them an hundred pound of Aloes mixed with Myrrh, to embalm the Body of our
Savior Christ, when they had begged it of Pilate, before they buried it, Ioh.
19. Myrrh is a kind of Gum that issues out of a Tree that grows in the East
Countries, but principally in Arabia. The Tree out of which it issues is
commonly two Yards and a half high, with some Pricks upon it, the Bark whereof
being cut, there issues out of it drops like Tears, which congealeth into a
Gum, and is called Myrrh: The principal Virtue that it has, is to keep the
Bodies of the dead incorruptable, see Pli. li. 12. ca. 15. and 16. In Arabia
Foelix there is such abundance of sweet Myrrh, Frankincense, and other
odoriferous Gums, that such as Sail in the red Sea may easily smell the savor
of them. There is also found in the Holy Land Myrrh and Aloes. Aloes is the
juice of a certain bitter Herb, which by some is called Everliving: it kills
the Worms, and preserves from Putrefaction; it is also good for the Sight.
There is to be gathered in India, Arabia, and the Holy Land, a certain Herb of
an extraordinary sweet smell, with Leaves broad, fat and juycy, which being
pressed yields more Aloes than Honey; from whence this metaphorical Proverb
is used, Quod plus molestiae quam voluptatis gignit, that is, more troublesome
than profitable. You may read also in Plautus, that the Life of Man tastes
more of Aloes than Honey; and Iuvenal speaking of an evil Wife, says, she has
more of Aloes than Honey. So Euripides, Every sweet has his sour. So also the
Holy Cross seems to have more of Aloes than Honey, notwithstanding it
preserves us from eternal Corruption, and kills the venomous Worms of
Conscience, cleanses us from our Sins, and freeth us from the fear of the
Devil and eternal Death, that so we might be recreated, and by the Faith of our
Savior be raised up at the last day, and partake with him in his everlasting
Kingdom: according to that of Johannes Taulerus, Where the Cross, there the
Light; where Temptation, there Prayer and Regeneration, etc.

The Travels of Peter.
IN the thirty fifth year after the Nativity of Christ, about the Month of
January, and a little before the Conversion of the Apostle Paul; Peter and John
were sent from Jerusalem to Samaria, being thirty two miles, that the
Samaritans might receive that admirable gift of the Holy Ghost, and there they
disputed with Simon Magus, Acts 8.

From Samaria they returned back again to Jerusalem, which was thirty two
miles. In this Jonrney they went to diverse Towns of the Samaritans, teaching
and preaching unto them the Doctrine of the Gospel, Acts 8.

In the sixth year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went to Lidda, which
was distant from Jerusalem twenty miles toward the North-East; where he cured
Aeneas, who had lain sick eight years of the Palsy upon his Bed, Acts. 9.

From thence he went to Ioppa, which was three miles: here he raised Tabitha
from Death, Acts 9.

In the seventh year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went from Ioppa
and came to Caesarea Strato, which was six and thirty miles: where he preached
the Gospel to Cornelius the Centurion, and baptized him and his whole Family,
Acts. 10. Clemens Recogn. lib. 9.

From Caesarea he returned to Jerusalem, being thirty two miles; where being
accused for going to the Gentiles, he excused himself, Acts 11.

In the eleventh year after the Resurrection of Christ, he was cast into
Prison, and set at liberty by an Angel of God, Acts 12. So he went secretly
from Jerusalem (as it was thought) into the Desert, or to some other unknown
place: upon the second day of August in the same year, Herod Agrippa King of
the Jews was struck by an Angel of God at Caesarea, and he was devoured of
Worms, Acts 12. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 4.

After, Herod Agrippa being dead and buried, Peter returned to Jerusalem, where
he was in Council with the rest of the Apostles, about sixteen years after the
Resurrection of Christ, and fourteen after the Conversion of Paul, Gal. 2. Acts
15. See also Bid upon the Acts of the Apostles.

In the seventeenth year after the Resurrection of Christ, Peter went from
Jerusalem and came to Antiochia in Syria, which Journey was 280 miles: there
Paul resisted him, Gal. 2.

From Antiochia he went to Babylon in Egypt, where he wrote his first Epistle:
this Journey was 520 miles. So all his Travels which are mentioned in the
Scripture were 955 miles.

Allegations of the Author to prove that Peter was never at Rome.
BUT that Peter was twenty five years seven Months and five days Bishop and
Chief Priest of Rome, cannot be proved by the testimony of the Scripture, and
is utterly repugnant to the supputation and true account of the times. First,
Because it is manifest by that which has been said, that he continued at
Jerusalem and in Iudaea during the time that Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius
were Emperors of Rome. And shortly after the Martyrdom of Stephen, he and John
were sent into Samaria, that the Samaritans might also receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 8. Paul also in the third year after his Conversion, came to
Jerusalem, and there spoke with Peter, and remained with him fifteen days, Acts
9. Gal. 1. Fourteen days after the Conversion of Paul, Peter was at the
Apostolical Council held in Jerusalem; and there, with James and John gave the
right hand of Fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that they should go and preach
the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and that he and the rest would go to the Jews and
those that were circumcised, Gal. 2. In the time of Claudius Caesar, Peter was
committed to Prison by Herod Agri^pa in Jerusalem, and miraculously delivered
by the Angel of God, Acts 10. In the ninth year of Claudius Caesar, Peter was
at Antiochia in Syria, where Paul resisted him to his face, Gal. 2. All these
things manifestly prove that the Apostle Peter was not at Rome at such time as
any of these three, viz. Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius were Emperors; but
either in Jerusalem, or else at Antiochia in Syria.

Secondly, it may exactly be made evident out of the holy Scriptures, that
Peter was not at Rome in the time of Nero. For, in the second year of Nero,
Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, and sent it from Corinth by the hand of
Phebe: in which Epistle, he saluted all his Friends which he had in that City,
by name, as by the conclusion of the Epistle more plainly appears; but there
is no mention of the Apostle Peter, who (if at that time Bishop of that place)
surely should not have been omited. Also, in the fifth year of Nero, Paul being
then in Prison at Rome, wrote his Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians,
Philip^ians, Colossians, and to Philemon; and in the conclusion of these
Epistles he expressly names all his Friends that he had in Rome, yet makes no
mention of Peter. And when he was the second time in Prison under Nero, in the
last year of the Reign of this Emperor, he wrote from Rome his second Epistle
to Timothy, being a little before his death: at the end of which Epistle he
plainly shows, that he had no Companion there but Luke, 2 Timothy 4. From whence
it is manifest, that Peter, during all the Pilgrimage and Life of Paul, was
never at Rome: how then can it possibly be, that Peter should be Bishop of Rome
for the space of almost twenty six years? Truly there are many learned men, and
they also of great Judgment, which hold this Opinion false, and utterly
repugnant to Holy Scripture, neither can be proved by any good Authors or
Histories. But if Peter were ever at Rome, he came thither after the last
Imprisonment of Paul, and a few years before his Martyrdom. Because (as
Onuphrius says, in Comment. fast. lib. 2. also Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 22. and
Tertul. Cont. Marcion.) Peter and Paul in the thirty fifth year after the
Resurrection of Christ, and upon the third day of the Calends of July (C.
Fonteius Ca^itonius and C. Julius Rufus being then Cousuls of Rome) were
crowned with the Wreath of Martyrdom, and with their Blood sealed the Truth of
the Gospel. But there are others of Opinion, that Peter never came at Rome, but
that he was crucified at Jerusalem by King Agrippa's Command; others say at
Babylon. But because it is a thing doubtful, and not greatly material, I leave
it to the Reader's consideration

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled. Of Samaria.
BEcause I have before briefly entreated of the Beginning and Foundation of
this City, I shall not need here again to repeat it. I will now therefore show
the end of it, which was principally caused by the obstinancy of the
Inhabitants: who refusing the Doctrine and Prophecy of Elias and Elizeus,
embraced and followed strange Gods, and offered Incense unto Idols; whereby the
wrath of God was kindled against them, insomuch, that he left this goodly City
as a Prey to the Gentiles and Foreign Nations, that carried the People thereof
into Captivity; where, for a long time, they remained in great misery.

After the first desolation, because the Country round about this City was very
fertile and pleasant, abounding with Springs, Rivers, Vines, Olive Gardens,
Mountains, fruitful Valleys, fair Cities, and strong Castles and Towns. Herod
Ascalonites (that great King of the Jews, who put to death the innocent
Children) re-edified it, set up many goodly buildings, beautified with Marble
Pillars and pleasant Walks: And also in the circuit of the Kings House, and
under the buildings of the Nobility in the common Marketplace, the Houses and
Vaults were supported with Marble Pillars, according to the manner of the Jews.
The Palace (called the Kin^s House) stood in the midst of the City, upon the
top of the Mountain: and round about it there were diverse other buildings set
up, but much lower, even about the descent of the Mountain; yet situated, that
the Inhabitants might see out of their Houses the Country round about. Then
close to the Palace, in the upper part of the City, he caused a Temple to be
built in honor of Augustus. Thus having finished the inside, he compassed it
about with a mighty Wall, and upon that placed many Turrets: and then to
flatter Augustus, called it by the name of Sebasten, which among the Grecians
signifies Augustum and venerabile Principem: now although this City was very
glorious and spacious in those times (for it was three miles about) yet at this
day it is utterly ruined and destroyed, insomuch, that there is not a House
standing, two Churches only excepted, which were built in honor of St. John
Baptist: and the chief of these, which was the Cathedral Church, the Saracens
have converted to their use, so that at this day Mahomet is worshipped in it.
In this stood the Sepulcher of St. John Baptist, cut out in Marble, like the
Sepulcher of Christ, where (as Hierom says) he lies buried between Elisha and
Obediah the Prophets. This Church stands upon the side of the Mountain, in the
descent.

The Saracens do principally reverence St. John. Baptist next after Christ, and
they affirm the Virgin Mary to have conceived by the holy Spirit, and not by
the Seed of Man: That St. John was the greatest Prophet (except Christ) that
ever was. They also believe Christ to be the Son of God, but not to be equal
with God. Yet they prefer Mahomet before both, because they hold him a
Messenger sent from God, not unto all Men, but only unto the Saracens and
Turks, and their Subjects.

The other Church, which stood in Samaria, was upon the top of the Mountain
which sometimes the Kings Palace stood. In this Church, in times past, there
dwelt certain Grecian Monks, which were Christians, and entertained Christian
Pilgrims with great Humanity, and furnished them with many Necessaries.

But the City of Samaria it self has been so often overthrown, and brought to
such extreme misery, that almost all the Ground where it stood is at this time
converted into an Olive Garden. So that as that wicked King Ahab turned the
Vineyard of Naboth, which stood close by his House, into an Olive Garden; so
God in his singular Justice has turned the Palace of that King, and the whole
City wherein he dwelt, which was the strength of his Kingdom, into an Olive
Garden. There are not so many ruins found through all the Land of Iudaea
(though there have been many worthy Cities destroyed) as are in this place at
this day. The situation of this City was very beautiful; for a man might have
seen from it to the Sea of Ioppae and Antipatris, also to Caesarea Palestina,
and thorough all the Mountain of Ephraim, to Ramatha Sophim, and so to Mount
Carmel and the City of Ptolomais.

Of Lidda.
THIS City was situated not far from Ioppa, upon the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, 20 miles from Jerusalem North-w^^^ward. In this City Peter
healed Aeneas, who had been sick eight years of the Palsy. At this day there
is nothing to be seen but the Church of St. George, who was beheaded by the
Emperor Dioclesian, for professing the Christian Faith. The Grecians call this
Town Diospolis, i. An holy Town. And the Turks account St. George for a valiant
Knight and holy man.

Of Caesarea Strato.
THIS City was situated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, some 32 miles
from Jerusalem Northward: in ancient time it was called Strato, being first
built by Strato King of Sidon. But time having decayed a great part of it,
Herod Ascalonita repaired it, and made it a goodly thing, calling it Caesarea,
after the name of Augustus Caesar. And that Ships might lie at Anchor there
without danger, he caused to be built a fair Haven to oppose the violence of
the Sea. This Haven was so wonderfully co^trived and set up at such a great
charge, that it was admirable to look upon; for he laid the foundation of it
twenty yards under Water, burying in the deep Stones of an extraordinary
greatness, some fifty foot long, eight foot thick, and ten foot broad, and many
of them more. The Haven it self was beautified with fair Buildings and goodly
Walls, supported with Marble Pillars and mounted up aloft, so that you might
see the Ships as they were upon the Sea, and made way to his Harbor. The
entrance into it was upon the North: at the mouth thereof there stood three
mighty Colosses upon Marble Pillars. He also placed upon the Wall of the City
toward the Haven mighty Towers; the chiefest and fairest of which he dedicated
to Drusus Augustus his Son in law, and called it by the Name of the Drusian
Tower. The buildings that joined to this Haven were all of white polished
Marble, and the Streets of the City were directly toward it. Also the
Marketplace where they bought and sold was not far from it. Upon a little
Hill, close by this Port, he caused a Church to be built in honor of Augustus
Caesar. This Temple was a very magnificent and stately building, and in it he
caused the Statue of Augustus (curiously wrought and cast just in the figure of
Jupiter* Olympius) to be erected, and worshipped it as his God. There are many
other stately and sumptuous buildings that were set up by this King. But
amongst the rest, he bestowed great cost upon the Marketplace, the Theater and
the Amphitheatre, which he wonderfully beautified, and instituted certain Games
to be there used once every fifth year in Honor of Augustus, as Joseph de
Bell. Iud. li. 1. witnesses. After the death of this King, Herod Agrippa was
made King of the Jews. This Prince, some ten years after the Resurrection of
Christ, caused James the Son of Zebedeus, upon the 25 day of July to be put to
death in Jerusalem; and when he perceived it was acceptable unto the Jews, in
the following year, about the the Feast of the Passover he caused Peter to be
cast into Prison; who by the Prayers of the Church was miraculously delivered,
as you may read Acts 12. A little after, that is, about the month of August,
this King was struck by the Angel of the Lord, and died miserably: for when he
came to Caesarea Strato, he caused the public Shows to be solemnly practiced,
and in honor of Claudius Caesar set forth very sumptuous Interludes and Plays;
to which Feast and Shows all the Nobility and Gentry of that Country round
about resorted. Where the next day, very early in the Morning, having put on a
rich and goodly Garment, made all of Cloth of Gold, he went into the Theater;
and there, according to his usual custom, sat in a princely Seat, and made an
Oration to the Inhabitants of Tire. Now when the Sun was up and shone upon his
Garments, the Rays ther^of cast such a reflection upon the beholders, that it
dazzled their Eyes, insomuch that they could scarce see. Wherefore those that
were his Flatterers, hearing his gracious Speech, cried with a loud Voice, O
Agrip^a! be propitious unto us; for although heretofore we feared thee as a
Man, yet now we well perceive thou art of a more Noble and Divine Nature. But
when the King (taking delight in these speeches) would not restrain the impious
clamor of these flatterers, a little after he lifted up his head, and upon the
top of a Pillar he saw an Owl sitting^over him. Presently he was troubled in
his mind, and within a while after he was struck with an extreme pain in his
Bowels, insomuch, that with a loud Voice he cried unto his Friends, I, whom but
now was called your God, am but a Man; and him that you imagined to be
immortal, must presently die. These Words being ended, they carried him sick
into his Palace, and it was given out that he was dead.

No sooner came this News to the Ears of the Vulgar, but they with their Wives
and Children put on sackcloth, and fell upon the Ground with earnest
Supplications to God to be merciful unto him. But the King looking out of his
Window, and seeing them lie thus prostrate upon the Earth, wailing and weeping,
he could not abstain from Tears. At length, after he had been cruelly tormented
by the space of four days, upon the fifth died, being the second of August, the
Worms having consumed his Guts, and eaten through his Body. Thus God greviously
punished him, who had so much afflicted the Members of the Church of Christ:
but toward other Men, as well Strangers as Gentiles, he was mild and
courteous. He reigned in the whole, almost seven years; for he held the
Tetrarchy of Philip three years under Caligula, and other four years he held
the whole Kingdom of the Jews. He died in the eleventh year after the
Resurrection, and in the third of Claudius Caesar, being then about 54 years of
age, Acts. 22. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19.

Pliny says, that this Town of Caesarea Strato was sometime called Apollonia,
but after obtained the name of Caesarea Palestina. Saint Ierom says, in his
Epitaph upon Paul, that in his time (which was 400 years after Christ) there
was to be seen in this place the House of Cornelius the Centurian, whom Peter
baptized, Act. 10. (This Cornelius is thought by some to have been of the
Family of Lentuli in Rome, for they were also called Cornelii, as appears in
Salust in the conspiracy of Cataline: and it may be, that this Cornelius was
that Lentulus which wrote to Tiberius Caesar that excellent Epistle, concerning
the figure, proportion, and person of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) Also
the House of Philip the Deacon, and the Chambers of his four Daughters, who
were Prophetesses. When Paul came unto this Town, Agabus the Prophet came unto
him, who bound his Hands and Feet with the Girdle of Paul, saying, The Man that
owes this Girdle shall be thus bound by the Jews at Jerusalem, and they shall
deliver him into the Hands of the Gentiles. Here he made a notable Sermon
before Festus Agrippa, Junior, and his Sister Bernice, Act. 16.

This Town flourished for a long time after the Destruction of Jerusalem, and
it was situated in a fair and profitable place, fortified toward the West
with the Mediterranean Sea, and toward the East it was compassed about with a
Lake, in which were great abundance of Crocodiles, though the Water was very
sweet, and of a great depth. Many Godly and Religious Men were here crowned
with the Wreath of Martyrdom, for professing the Gospel of Christ, as Eusebius,
Bishop of this Town and of Pamphilius, well observes in his Eccles. Hist. But
the Lord did so sharply revenge the death of these men, that at this day it is
utterly destroyed, and there is not a house left, though in times past it had
been a Bishop's See. There was also another Town built by Philip the Tetrarch,
called Caesarea Philippi, whereof you may read before.

Of Ioppa.
COncerning this Town I have already showed many things in the Travels of
Jonas, but omitted some, specified by Brittenbach and Dr. Ranwolfe, who have
described the holy Land as it was in the year of our Lord 1575. which Authors
affirm, that there is seen a great Chain of Iron fastened to a certain Rock, to
the which Ships that lay in that Harbor were sometimes tied. Also the Chain
wherewith Andromda was fast bound to a stone, when she should have been
devoured of the Sea Monster. Also they say that there is a Chapel at this day
built up in the place where sometime the house of Simon the Tanner stood, who
gave entertainment to Peter, standing by a Rock close by the Sea side, and
dedicated to St. Peter. But for the rest of the Town (although formerly it has
been a goodly City) it is utterly destroyed, nothing standing but a part of the
Wall, and two Castles upon the Haven to defend such as come thither with Ships,
from the Injuries and Incursions of the Pagans and Saracens.

Of Babylon in Egypt.
BAbylon signifies Confusion, as you may read before. There were two Cities of
this name; the one was in Chaldaea, and the other in Egypt. That in Chaldaea
was situated upon the River Euphrates; and this upon the River Nilus, being
244 miles from Jerusalem toward the South-West, and called in the Arabian
Tongue Alcair or Cair, whether you please, which also signifies Confusion.
Concerning both which Cities you may read more at large in their former
description. From this Town it is credibly thought (and not from that Town
which stood in Chaldaea) Peter wrote his first Epistle, as the circumstances of
the History do evidently declare: for that Babylon which stood in Chaldaea was
in the time of Peter utterly destroyed; but then this Babylon was had in great
estimation. About this time also Mark, who was the Disciple of Peter, was the
first Bishop of Alexandria, as you may read in the end of this Epistle.
Wherefore that Opinion which some would have to pass for truth, that Peter
wrote his first Epistle from Rome, calling it allegorically Babylon, is utterly
to be condemned, since there is none who can certainly prove that conjecture,
neither is it grounded upon any firm foundation; for although Babylon in the
Revelation of S. John (because it was a secret Prophecy) was allegorically
used; yet in a plain and manifested history such kind of Allegories are not
allowed. From whence may be concluded, that S. Peter wrote his first Epistle
from this Babylon, not from Rome.

The Travels of Saint John, with the Annotation of the Times wherein he lived.
JOHN the Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, was born in the
tenth year after the Nativity of our Savior, and was made his Disciple when he
was 21 years of Age. He saw the Miracle of Christ when he changed the Water
into Wine, John cap 2. In the year following, viz. in the 22 year of his Age,
he was taken into the number of the twelve Apostles, Luke 6. Mar. 3. After
that, in the three and twentieth year of his age, he saw the transfiguration of
Christ in mount Thabor: and when he was four and twenty years of age, he stood
under the Cross of our Savior Christ; and the same year, a little after
Christ's Ascension, he, with the rest of the Apostles, received the Gift of the
holy Ghost, being then the Feast of Pentecost, which fell about the four and
twentieth day of May: in the same year he was cast into Prison with Peter, for
healing the lame Man. Acts 3. 4. Thus much of his Youth.

About the middle of the first year after our Savior Christ's Ascension ( John
being then 25 years old) was sent with Peter from the City of Jerusalem to
Samaria, 32 miles.

From Samaria he returned back again to Jerusalem 32 miles; and as he returned,
preached the Gospel of Christ in diverse Towns of the Samaritans, Acts 8.

Mary the Mother of our Lord being now 59 years of age, died in the twelfth
year after the Resurrection of Christ, and was buried by John the Evangelist in
the Garden of Gethsemene, John being then 35 years old. Four years after her
death, he was present at the Apostolical Council in Jerusalem. Now James, his
Brother, who was called the Elder, was beheaded two years before; for this
Council was celebrated in the presence of James, the younger, Peter, John, Paul
and Barnabas, etc. about sixteen years after the Resurrection of Christ, and
fourteen after the Conversion of Paul, Gal. 2.

Before the Destruction of Jerusalem, which happened about the 61 year of his
age, and 38 after Christ's Ascension, John went from Jerusalem, and came to
Ephesus, 544 miles, where, after the death of the Apostle Paul, he governed the
Churches of Asia minor.

In the 86 year of his age, being cast into a Vessel of boiling Oil, and coming
out unhurt; by the command of Domitian the Emperor he was banished into the
Isle of Pathmos, distant from Ephesus 40 miles. There he wrote his Revelation
to the seven Churches in Asia minor; whereof you may read, Apoc. 1.

From Pathmos he returned to Jerusalem, which was forty miles, being then 88
years of age, and there he raised Drusana from Death to Life. After this, he
governed the Churches in Asia four years, that is, from the Government of Nero
the Emperor, unto the fourth year of the Government of Trajan the Emperor,
and called the young Man to repentance which was of the Society of Thieves: at
length he died at Ephesus, when he was 91 years old, An. Dom. 100. as St. Ierom
and Nicephorus li. 2. ca. 32. observe. So all his Travels were 688 miles.

The Testimony of the Fathers concerning John.
THE Testimonies of the holy Fathers that are yet extant concerning John, are
these: In Eusebius. ^i. 3. c. 1. 18. 20. 3. you may read the History concerning
the Conversion of the young Man from the company of Thieves. Irenaeus
witnesses the same, li. 2. ca. 23. In Irenaeus, also, li. 3. ca. 23. you may
read the History of Cerinthus, and how that John lived until the time of Trajan
the Emperor. Also li. 3. ca. 11. he says, that the Gospel of St. John was
written because of the Blasphemy of Cerinthus.

The Description of the Towns and places to which John traveled.
Of Ephesus.
THIS was the Metropolitan City of Ionia, situated in Asia Minor, 544 miles
from Jerusalem North-westward. It was built (says Strabo) by Androclus the Son
of Codrus King of Athens, in the time of David King of Israel; and because of
the beautiful situation and fer^ility of the Soil called Ephesus: in future
Ages growing into such credit and estimation, that it was mightily increased
and became one of the most famous Mart Towns in all Asia; but it stood somewhat
low, so that the Sea brake in upon it and drowned it, and many of the
Inhabitants perished. Nevertheless Lysimachus King of Thrace built it up again
in the same place where now it stands, and called it Arsinoes, after his Wives
name. But he being dead, it was again called by the ancient name Ephesus. There
were many worthy Men that lived in it, as Heraclitus, Scotinus and Hermadorus,
who, for his excellent understanding and singular honesty, was banished.
Hipponachus also the Poet, Perrhasius and Apelles the Painters, Alexander the
Orator and Theodotio a Jew, who interpreted the Bible. It was in ancient times
inhabited by the Amazons, whose Queen kept her court there, and wonderfully
increased and adorned it with fair and beautiful Buildings. Here also that
notable Temple dedicated to Diana, which as Strab. says, li. 14. Plin. li. 36.
c. 14. was 220 years a building. It stood upon Morish Ground to avoid the
danger of Earthquakes. There were in it 127 Pillars, erected by so many Kings;
among which there were 36 that were curiously sicled, and artificially carved
and engraven: It was 425 foot long, and 120 broad. There were so many Gifts and
Gratuities sent from all the Cities and Kings round about, toward the building
of this Temple, that the Riches and Treasure thereof was wonderful; insomuch
that when it was finished, it was accounted one of the stateliest Buildings the
World could afford, and numbered amongst the Wonders of the World. This Temple
thus built at such an extraordinary charge that it was almost unvaluable, was
set on fire by one Herostratus a wicked and perverse Fellow, (in the same
Olympiad and Day that Alexander the Great was born) who having nothing in him
that might make him famous in after-ages, burnt this goodly Building, that so
(though not for his good, but for his evil) he might get a name. But the
Ephesians were so incensed because of this Mischief, that they procured
Proclamation to be made through all the Kingdoms round about, that his name
should not be once mentioned: which perhaps for a time was observed, but in
future ages they could not prevent it, but that he was both spoken of and
written of. Notwithstanding, afterward the Inhabitants of this City became so
exceeding wealthy, that they soon after rebuilt this Temple of Diana, and made
it much fairer than it was before; all the Citizens contributing with willing
hands to the charge of the building: insomuch that the Women brought all their
Silver, Gold, and other precious Ornaments, and communicated them toward this
great Work.

Also in after times those fair Pillars before spoken of, were again erected;
toward the rebuilding whereof they received so many and wonderful Gifts, from
all the neighboring Kings, Cities, and Countries, that this Temple might (as
it was thought) compare with all the World beside for Riches and Treasure. It
was standing in St. Paul's time, who came thither about twelve years after the
Resurrection of our Savior, and continued there three years; in which time he
so faithfully, and diligently preached the Gospel, that he converted most of
the Citizens from their Idolatry and Worship of Diana, to the reverend
Knowledge and Confession of our blessed Savior. For which cause, Demetrius the
Silver Smith (who made a great gain by Idolatry) stirred up a great tumult; so
that the Gentiles running up and down the City for two hours space, cried out
with a loud voice, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19. Here also Paul
fought with Beasts, 1 Cor. 15. And to this City Paul wrote his Epistle, and
sent it from Rome, 996 miles. He made Timothy also a Bishop of this City, to
whom he wrote two Epistles; the first was sent him from Laodicea to Phrygia,
being 280 miles: the second from Rome, as I said. By these Epistles Timothy was
greatly comforted, and taught them to his Disciples and Auditors, that so they
might constantly continue and persevere in the Christian Faith and Religion to
the end. To conclude, John the Evangelist came also to Ephesus, and wrote his
Gospel against the Heretic Cerinthus, who denied Christ to be the true God;
for which cause God grievously punished him, so that he died as he was bathing
himself in a Bath, Irenaeus, lib. 5. ca. 3. Eusebius. li. 3. c. 22. This was the
first Church to which John wrote his Revelation; and there, when he returned
out of Pathmos, he raised his Host Drusana from death to life. So when he had
governed the Churches in Asia thirty years, after the death of Paul he died,
when he was ninety one years old, and was honorably buried at Ephesus, not far
from the City. There was also another John that lived in Ephesus, to whom (as
many think) the Epistles of John the Evangelist were dedicated, as Ierom
shows in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. The Sepulcher of this man
is showed, not far from the Sepulcher of St. John the Evangelist, as Eusebius.
witnesses, lib. 3. cap. 31. At this day this City is named Figlo ho Epheso.
See Gesner.

Of Pathmos.
THIS is an Isle of the Aegean Sea, situated betwixt Asia minor and Grecia,
2080 miles from Jerusalem North-Westward. Pli. l. 4. c. 12. says, that it was
thirty miles in compass. Into this Isle the Evangelist was banished by Domitian
Nero, where he wrote his Revelation. It was one of the Cyclad Islands, which
were fifty three in number that lay round about the Island Delus, as Stra. li.
10. Geog. observes. It stood forty miles from Ephesus South-Westward, and as
Petr. Apianus says, was sometimes called Posidius, but now, Palmosa.

Of Smyrna.
THIS is the second City to which John dedicated his Revelation. It was
situated in Ionia in Asia minor, 540 miles from Jerusalem North-Westward. This
was a very fair City, beautified with many goodly buildings, and of good
account in Grecia. It was at first but a Colony, transplanted from another City
in that Country; But Theseus that great Prince being then King thereof, that he
might add some grace to that which he had begun, he called it after his Wives
name Smyrna, signifying Myrrh. Herodot. says that Homer was born here (but not
Blind) and called by the name of Melisigines: but after the Gumaenians called
him (of his Blindness) Homer. Strab. li. 14. Geogr. says, that the Inhabitants
take upon them to show his Picture standing there, and also a Temple built in
his Honor. During his Life he was a man of small or no Reputation, or rather
contemned than honored, as Herod. says. But after his death, his Works
beginning to grow famous, the Cities of Greece contended who should Patronize
him. The Colophonians claim a part in him, because he was in that Town, and
there made some of his Odysses. They of Chios say he belonged to them, because
he lived there a long time, and taught School. But for ought that can be found
by Authors, the Smyrnians have most interest in him. Nevertheless I leave him
to them that please to Patronize him, since it is not certainly found where he
lived. He lived about 900 years before Christ.

Eusebius says, Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 14. that in aftertimes this City
grew very famous, and was so much enlarged that it became a Bishops See,
whereof Polycar^us, a very godly and Religious man, was Bishop. He governed the
Church in that place at such time as John the Evangelist wrote his Revelation,
and by him, cap. 2. is called the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. This man,
after he had faithfully preached the Gospel for the space of 86 years, was by
the Inhabitants thereof condemned to death for the profession of Christ, Anno
170. But the town of Smyrna, because of the unthankfulness and cruelty of the
Inhabitants, was grievously punished; for within ten years it was cast down by
an Earthquake, since which time, it was hardly rebuilt again. The River
Pactolus, which begins in Lydia, runs by this Town of Smyrna. But the
Inhabitants, because of the golden Veins that are found therein, call it
Crysorrhoas, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29. A little after that, there was such an
extreme Plague happened in Rome, that they were constrained to carry out the
dead Bodies in Carts. Thus God turns the Air and the Earth to the confusion
of those that persecute his Church.

Of Pergamus.
THIS was another of the Towns whereto John wrote his Revelation. It was a
famous City, and Metropolitan of Mysia, situated in Asia minor, 228 miles from
Jerusalem North-westward. It stood upon a high Rock close by the River Caicus,
from whence it was called Pergamus. For in ancient times all famous and notable
places were called amongst the Graecians Pergama, as Suidas and Servius
observe. Strabo lib. 13. says, that in the time of Lysimachus the Son of
Agathocles (who was one of the Successors of Alexander the Great) it was but a
Castle; in which place, because of the strength of it, he usually kept all his
Treasure, and those things that were of account, and committed the custody of
it unto one named Philetaerus, an Eunuch of Tyanus. But this man being accused
to Lysimacus, that he would have forced his Wife Arsinoes, for fear of some
future punishment because of that Offense, moved the Inhabitants of that Hold
to Rebellion. At the same time also there happened many Commotions in Asia,
whereby Lysimachus was constrained to leave this, and make opposition against
Seleucus Nicanor, who had invaded his Dominions; But in this War Lysimachus was
slain. And Philetaerus, having in his possession great Riches, that he might
enjoy what he had, was always observant to him that got the Victory, by which
means he kept himself and his Riches for the space of 20 years in that Castle;
and then died, and left all his Wealth to Eumenes, his brothers Son, who
enlarged his Government, and overcame Antiochus the Son of Seleucus. This Man,
after he had reigned 32 years, died, and Attalus his Son succeeded him in the
Government: who having conquered Galatia, made a league with the Romans, and by
them was first called by the name of a King. After him succeeded his Son
Eumenes, the second of that name, who aided the Romans against Antiochus
magnus, King of Syria; for which service the Romans gave him all the Dominions
that Antiochus had on this side the Alps. This man was the first that enlarged
the Castle of Pergamus, and made it a goodly City, planting round about it a
thick Wood or Grove, and called it Nicephorus. And after he had reigned 49
years, he died, and left his Kingdom to his Son Attalus, called Philometor.
This Attalus, after he had done many notable exploits, died without issue, when
he had reigned five years, and left his Kingdom to the Romans, who turned it
into a Province.

There lived in this Town many learned Men, as Galen the Physician, who was
famous in the time of Trajan the Emperor, and (as the Fame went) lived 140
years. Of that Town also was Apollodorus the Rhetorician, who was Schoolmaster
to Augustus Caesar, of which man the Apollodorean Sect took Name, and Dionysius
Atticus his Scholar. Here Antipas was crowned with the Wreath of Martyrdom.

To the Bishop of this Town John wrote his Revelation, and in the second
Chapter thereof sharply reprehendeth him, because he bore with the Sect of the
Nicholaitans; which, although it lasted not long, yet it was very dangerous.
Eusebius says, That Nicholaus, one of the seven Deacons for the Poor at
Antiochia, of whom you may read, Act. 6. was the first Author of this Sect: yet
Clem. Alexand. clears him of it, laying that Offense rather on certain idle
Persons, that misconstruing his Words, being given over to vile Affections,
covered their Evils under his Name, calling themselves Nicholaites, though
indeed he had no hand in it, but lived and died honestly.

The Opinion that this Sect held (as Eusebius. says, li. 3. ca. 23. and Irenaeus,
lib. 1. chap. 27.) was, That Women were to be common; That it was lawful to eat
Meat offered to Idols; That Fornication and Adultery was no Sin: beside many
other wicked and perverse Opinions concerning the Deity, which would be too
tedious to recite in this place. You may read more of it in Eusebius and
Tertullian.

Of Thyatira.
THIS was the fourth Church to which John wrote his Revelation: it was
situated close by the River Caicus, upon the Borders of Mysia and Lydia, 600
miles from Jerusalem North-eastward. It was a very fair City in Asia minor, yet
subject to the Lydians. In this Country Lidda was born, that dwelt at Philippa,
and gave entertainment to Paul and Sylas, Act. 16. Philippa was distant from
this Town 400 miles. It was at first called (according to the Testimony of
Stephen) Pelopea and Semiramis. But after, Seleucus Nicanor, King of Syria,
(making War upon Lysimachus King of Thrace) coming to this Town, had News that
his Wife had bore him a Daughter; in honor whereof he would needs have the
Town called Thugateira, which in Greek signifies a Daughter; but Thyatira,
Divine Reverence.

Of Sardis.
TO this City also St. John wrote his Revelation. It was a famous and Princely
Seat, situated in Asia not far from the Mountain Tmolus, where Croesus King of
the Lydians kept his Court, being 536 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west. It was so called (without doubt) of Sardus the Son of Hercules,
which makes Sardis in the plural number. Of this Town were those two Diodories
which were Orators. The Younger of them did write Histories and Poems, and was
one of Strabo's great Friends. Close by this Town is found a precious Stone,
which after the Towns Name is called Sardis: it is of a fleshly Color, and
therefore is commonly called Carnalia; of which you may read more in Pliny,
lib. 37. cap. 4.

Of Philadelphia.
SAINT John also wrote his Revelation to this City. It was situated in My^^a;
a Country in Asia Minor; being 450 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west.
This City is so often troubled with Earthquakes, that the Inhabitants are many
times constrained to dwell in the open Fields. Upon the East side thereof lies
a dry and barren Country, which seems to be burnt and scorched with heat,
being 60 miles long, and 48 miles broad; where there grows no Trees, but there
are found great plenty of Grapes, which being pressed yield very pleasant Wine,
and may compare with the best of those Parts. The Superficies of the Earth
seems like Ashes, mountainy, stony, and black: many conjecture the cause
thereof to be by reason of the great Thunders and Lightning that they have
there; but there are some which give other reasons for it. It was called
Philadelphia of Attolus Philodelphius who first built it.

Of Laodicea.
THIS was the seventh and last City that John directed his Revelation to. It
stood close by the River Lycus in Caria, a Country in Asia the less, five
hundred and twenty miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west; and is likewise
oftentimes troubled with Earthquakes, as Sardis, Magnesia, and Philadelphia
are. The reason of these often Earthquakes is thought to be, because there are
Vaults and hallow Caves under the Earth, into which the Air (in the time of
heat) having free entrance, then closes up again, so that it can find no
passage out; it striveth with continual motion to make way through the Earth,
by which means the Earth trembles and shakes: and look how much the deeper
these Vaults are under the Earth, so much the more violent are the
Earthquakes; by which means, Cities are oftentimes utterly overthrown and
ruined, sometimes the Earth sinketh, and Ponds and Rivers are swallowed up.

It was at first called Diospolis, that is, the City of Jupiter; then Rhoas;
and lastly, it obtained the name of Laodicea. And although at the beginning it
was but a small Town, yet by reason of the fertility of the Soil, and pleasant
situation, it of a sudden became a fair City, beautified with many fair and
goodly Houses, wherein there dwelt many wealthy Citizens, so that for their
Nobility and Worthiness it was accounted the most famous Town in all Asia. Here
Hiero dwelt who divided his Inheritance among the Citizens, and over and above
he gave them two thousand Talents of Gold, besides many other Gifts and
Gratuities, to adorn and beautify the City. After him there lived Zeno the
Orator, and Polemon his Son; who for his noble Acts was first by Antonio, and
then by Augustus Caesar, honored with the Dignity of a King, as Strabo
witnesses, lib. 12.

This Laodicea, Colossis, and Hierapolis, where the Apostle Philip was
crucified, were sunk by an Earthquake, about the tenth year of Nero, and a
little before the Martyrdom of Paul. There were three Cities called after this
Name; that is, this which stood in Caria (to which Paul never came; as
appears in the second Chapter to the Colossians;) a second stood in Phrigia,
where Paul wrote his Epistle to Timothy; and a third in Syria, near to
Antiochia, Seleucia, and Apamea.

The Travels of Philip.
THEN a little after the Martyrdom of Stephen, which happened in the Month of
January, thirty and five Years after the Nativity of Christ) Philip, which was
one of the seven Deacons with Stephen, Act. 6. went from Jerusalem to Samaria,
which was thirty and two miles: and in many Cities of the Samaritans preached
the Gospel, and did many Miracles; at which time he converted Simon Magus, Act.
8.

From Samaria he went to Bethzur, which was situated forty and four miles
toward the South: here Philip baptized the Ethiopian who was Queen Candaces
Eunuch. And suddenly he was taken out of sight by the Spirit of the Lord, and
went to Azotus, which was 16 miles.

From thence preaching in all the Cities as he went, he came to Caesarea
Strat^, which was 44 miles. So all his Travels were 136 miles.

Concerning the Towns and Places mentioned in his Travels, you may read of them
in several places mentioned before.

The Travels of the Ethiopian which was Eunuch to Queen Candaces, who kept her
Court in Saba.
FROM Saba or Meroe in Aethiopia, this Eunuch came to Jerusalem, which was
about 964 miles, Act. 4.

From Jerusalem he came to the Town of Bethzur, which was 12 miles: here he was
baptized by Philip in the Month of January, the next Year after the
Resurrection of Christ.

From thence he returned to Saba in Aethiopia, which was 952 miles. So all his
Travels were 1928 miles.

Of Saba.
THIS City is before mentioned: and at this time when the Eunuch came to
Jerusalem, Candaces governed it and a great part of Aethiopia, Tiberius Caesar
being then Emperor of Rome. She was a very warlike Woman, but blind of one
Eye, as Strabo says, lib. 6. and Pliny, lib. 6. cap. 29. In whose time the
City Saba was called Meroe, and the Queens, for many Successions, Candaces;
because of the worthiness of those Queens which had been of that Name. This
Woman was very well beloved of her Subjects, and was very gracious toward
them, as Suidas says. To this Queen the Eunuch which Philip baptized was chief
Steward; and no doubt spread the Christian Faith in many places of those parts.

An Introduction to the Travels of Saint Paul.
NOW before I enter upon the Travels of the Apostle Paul, I thought it fit to
make a Collection of all the Countries, Islands, and Cities, wherein he taught:
so that they which are skillful in Geometry or Cosmography, might discern their
Longitudes, Latitudes, and several distances, according to the Degrees and
Scruples hereafter following. Towns in Italy.
Long. Latit. Rome 36.40 41.40 Puteoli 39.50 41.00 Naples 39.10 41.00 Capua
40.00 41.00 Brundusia 42.20 39.40 ^egium 39.50 38.15 Towns in Graecia.
Constantinople 56.00 43.05 Neapolis 51.15 41.40 Philippi 50.45 41.45
Amphipolis 50.00 41.30 Apollonia Mygdoniae 49.30 40.30 Thessalonica 49.50 39.50
Athens 52.45 37.15 Corinthus 51.15 36.55 Cenchera 51.20 37.00 Cities in Syria.
Antiochia 69.30 35.30 Seleucia 69.25 35.40 Sydon 67.15 33.30 Tyrus 67.00 33.20
Ptolomais 66.50 32.58 Caesarea Stratonis 66.16 23.25 Joppa 66.40 32.06
Jerusalem 66.00 31.55 Damascus 60.55 30.00 Cities in Asia minor.
Thrasia 67.40 36.50 Attalia 62.15 36.30 Perga 62.15 36.56 A^tiochia Pisidiae
62.30 39.00 Laodicea Phrigiae 63.40 39.40 Lystra 64.00 39.00 Iconium 64.30
38.45 Derbe 64.20 38.15 Calcedon 56.05 43.05 Nicea 57.00 41.40 Cities in Asia.
Ilium 55.30 41.00 Troada 55.25 40.40 Assus 56.00 40.15 Pergamus 57.25 39.45
Philadelphia 59.00 38.50 Sardis 58.20 38.15 Ephesus 57.40 37.40 Thyatira Smyrna
58.25 38.25 Myletus 58.00 37.90 Halica^^assus 57.50 36.10 G^ydus 57.10 35.30
^atara 60.30 36.00 Mira 61.00 36.40 Hycropolis 60.00 38.15 Cities in Egypt.
Alexandria 60.30 31.00 Memphis Alcayre 61.50 29.50 Hermopolis magna 61.40
28.55 Islands.
Ciciliae civitatis Siracusa 39.30 37.15 Malta 38.45 34.50 Corsica 45.40 38.15
Creta 45.00 34.45 Clauda 52.20 34.00 Salamis 50.00 37.00 E^bea 43.40 38.15
Andros 55.00 37.12 Samathrocua 52.30 41.15 Mithilena 55.40 39.20 Chius 59.20
38.25 Trogylion 57.15 37.40 Pathmos 57.00 37.35 Cous 57.00 36.25 Rhodus 58.30
35.40 Raphus cypri 64.10 35.05 Salamais cypri 66.20 35.10

The Travels of the Holy Apostle St. Paul, with an exact annotation of the
Times.
PAVL was born at Tarsus in Cicilia, about the tenth year of the Nativity of
our Savior; and was near about the age of St. John the Evangelist, as the
circumstances of Histories do declare. After he grew to some Bigness, he was
sent by his Parents from thence to Jerusalem, being 304 miles; where he had not
been long brought up with Gamaliel (which signifies, The Recompense of God)
Act. 22. but he became the Disciple of Simon the Just, Luke 2. Act. 5.

This Paul was of the Tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 2. 2 Cor. 11. and being yet but
a young Man, he was one of those that kept the Garments of the holy Martyr St.
Stephen, who was stoned about the end of the four and thirtieth Year after the
Nativity of Christ, Act. 1. at which time also St. John the Evangelist was but
four and twenty years of Age. If therefore you would observe the Age of the
Apostle Paul in this following discourse of his Travels, deduct ten from the
Years after the Nativity of our Savior Christ, and the Remainder is his Age.
At his Circumcision he was called Saul, that is, a mortal Man: but when he was
made the Apostle of the Gentiles, he was called Paul; of which Name there was a
noble Family in Rome, so called because of the lowness of their Stature, and
smallness of their Body; as Carolus Sigonius observes.

In the ^ Year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul was an Inquisitor for private
Heresy, and a cruel Persecutor of the Gospel. The next Year he went from
Jerusalem to Damascus in Syria, which was 160 miles; in which Journey (about
the 25 day of January) he was converted; and upon the 28 day of January was
baptized by Ananias. So he stayed some few days in Damascus, and taught the
Gospel of Christ, Act. 9. and 22.

In the same Year that he was converted, the Jews, and those that were Enemies
to the Gospel, went about by deceit to take his Life; wherefore he went from
Damascus to Arabia Petraea, which was 160 miles; here he continued teaching the
Gospel by the space of three Years, that is, from the beginning of the 35 to
the end of the 37 year after the Nativity of Christ, Act. 9.

In the 38 Year after the Nativity of Christ he returned from Arabia Petraea
and came to Damascus; which was 160 miles; and there he diligently taught the
Gospel of Christ.

But when in the same Year Araeta King of Arabia went about to put him secretly
to death, he was let down in a Basket over the Wall, and so went from Damascus
to Jerusalem, which was 160 miles: and when he came thither he brought Barnabas
to the Apostles, and showed them his Conversion, and remained with Peter
fifteen days preaching the Gospel. At this time he saw James the Son of Alpheus
and Brother of our Lord, Acts 9. 2 Cor. 11. Galat. 1.

But when his Adversaries that were at Jerusalem went about secretly to put him
to death, he went from Jerusalem and was brought by the Brethren to Caesarea
Strato, which was 32 miles, Act. 9.

About the 38 Year after the Nativity of Christ he went thence into Syria to
Tarsus, a City of Cilicia, which was 272 miles; here he continued some Years
teaching the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1. 2. Cor. 11.

In the 41 Year after the Nativity of Christ, and about the seventh Year of his
Ministry, he was brought by Barnabas from Tarsus to Antiochia in Syria, which
was 120 miles. At this time, and in this Town, all those that believed in
Christ began to be called Christians, whereas before they were called Disciples
and Brothers, Acts 11. These things happened in the eighth year after the
Resurrection of Christ; about this time also Matthew wrote his Gospel, and
Agabus prophesied of the universal Dearth that should happen under Claudius,
Act. 11.

In the 42 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then at Antiochia. and
about 32 years of age, was wrapped up into the third Heaven, 14 years before he
wrote his second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.

In the 43 year after the Nativity of Christ, the Famine whereof Agabus
prophesied, being now begun, he went with the gifts of the Church from
Antiochia to Jerusalem, which was 280 miles: this year James the Elder was
beheaded at the Command of Agrippa, Act. 11. and 12.

In the 44 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul and Barn^bas with Peter,
were delivered out of Prison by the Angel of the Lord. Now having distributed
the Gifts of the Church, he returned in the Company of John Mark, from
Jerusalem to Antiochia, which was 280 miles. So these Travels were 1928 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Tarsus or Tharsus.
THIS was the Metropolis of Cilicia, situated upon the River of Cydnus, which
beginning at Mount Taurus, runs thence through this Town into the Mediterranean
Sea. It was first built by Perseus King of the Persians, (whom the Poets feign
to be the Son of Jupiter and Danae) and called Tharsus, of the Hyacinth stone
which as it seems, is found thereabous. It was distant from Jerusalem 304
miles toward the North; in ancient time a goodly City; but through the Injury
of the Time, and Invasion of the Enemy, much impaired, and lay almost ruined,
till (as Strabo says, li. 14.) it was repaired by Sardanapalus, that
effeminate King of the Assyrians; of whom Tully remembers this Epitaph, lib.
5. Tuscula: Haec habeo quae aedi, quaeque exatura libido.
Hausit, at illa jacent multa and praeclara relicta.
What things I eat or spend in Sport and Play,
Those I enjoy; the rest I cast away.
From his time, until the Reign of Darius, the last King of the Persians, it
continued in great Prosperity, and was become a mavelous stately City, the
Inhabitants thereof being grown very wealthy: but then Alexander the Great
making War upon that Prince, amongst others, brought his Army against this
City: but the Citizens hearing of his notable Exploits, durst not abide his
coming: therefore they fired the City, lest he should make a Prey of their
Riches, and fled: which when Alexander perceived, he gave order to Parmenio,
with all possible speed to quench the Fire, and save the City. In the mean time
the King (being pressed with an extraordinary Thirst, by reason of the extreme
Heat that was in that Country, the Dust, and his long Journey) put off his
royal Garments, and cast himself into the River Cydnus, which being a cold
Water coming out of the North, struck the heat presently inward, and so
benumbed his Sinews, that had it not been for the present help of his
Soldiers, and the extraordinary diligence and care of Philip his Physician, he
had died immediately; notwithstanding, by the great Providence of God, and the
carefulness of his Physician, he recovered his dangerous Sickness beyond the
expectation of Man; and after overcame Darius in a sharp and cruel War, near to
a place called Issa, as you may read before, See Plutarch in vita Alexand. and
Quintus Curtius. From that time forward this City grew to be very famous, and
daily increased in Stateliness and fair Buildings. And to add more dignity to
it, there was a famous Academy, in which were many learned and rare
Philosophers; insomuch, that they of Tharsus exceeded the Philosophers of
Athens and Alexandria for Learning and Knowledge, though indeed for number of
Scholars and common Resort they exceeded Tharsus.

Saint Paul was born and brought up in this Town, and here learned the
Knowledge of the Tongues, Philosophy, and other good Arts. He also perused the
Writings of Aratus, Epimenides, Menander, and other learned Men, whose Sayings
are here and there dispersed through his Epistles. From thence he was sent to
Jerusalem, where he lived and was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, who was
Provost of that Academy; and after, was converted to be an Apostle of Christ
Jesus, as appears Acts 22. This Town at this day is subject to the Empire of
the Turks, and called by the Name of Terassa; being neither so famous nor so
fair a City, as in the time when the Roman Empire flourished; for then, because
of the extraordinary Virtue of the Citizens, it was endowed with the Liberty
and Freedom of Rome.

Of Damascus.
THis was a metropolitan Town in Syria, distant from Jerusalem 160 miles
toward the North-east; being an ancient and fair City, and, before such time
as Antiochia was built, the head of all that Kingdom. It was situated in a
fair and fruitful place, close by the Mountain Libanus, which brings forth
Frankincense, Ceders, Cypress, and many odoriferous and sweet smelling Flowers.
There were many Kings that kept their Court in it, as Hadad, Benhadad the
First, Benhadad the Second, Hasael, and others, who grievously opposed the
Kings of Israel in many sharp and cruel Wars, as you may read before. The Land
round about it abounds with white and red Roses, Pomgranates, Almonds, Figs,
and other sweet and pleasant Fruits. In that place the Alablaster stone is
found, very fair and clear. The Air, pleasant and healthful. The River called
Chrysorrus runs close by it, in which there is found golden Veins which
yielded perfect Gold. The Houses without are not very curious, but within all
of polished Marble and Alablaster, guilt with resplendent Gold so artificially,
that it dazleth the Beholders Eyes.

There was a certain Florentine who revolted from the Christian Faith, and
obtained to be chief Governor of this Town; in which he erected a strong and
beautiful Castle, which stood for the Defense of it. No man can sufficiently
express the Beauty and Glory of this City: there is great Traffic, and much
resort of People to it, but especially of Turks, Saracens, Mamalucks, and other
kinds of Pagan People, who are preferred before the Christians in that
Government: and although there are many Christians in that place, yet they are
constrained to endure great Injury by those Barbarians, because they are hated
even unto the Death: and if any of them chance to die, they are buried in that
place where Paul was converted. The Inhabitants show the place where St. Paul
was let down over the Wall in a Basket; also the House of Ananias who cured the
Blindness of Paul, besides many other things that are memorable in that City,
of which you may read in Sebestian Munster, Sebastian Frankus, Plin. lib. 5.
and many other Authors.

Of Arabia.
MAny things are already spoken concerning this Country, as the division of the
place; one called Petraea, the other Deserta, and the third Foelix. Arabia
Petraea is so called from the metropolitan City thereof, called Petra, which is
situated forty miles from Jerusalem toward the South, and bordereth upon
Egypt and India. It is also called Arabia Nabathea, as you may read before.
Paran and Sur are a part of it, compassing toward the East the Land of Iudaea,
and so extends to Damascus. This Country is very full of Rocks and Stones,
the chief City Petra being situated upon a Rock, of which it takes the Name.
Here stands the Mountains Horeb and Sinai; here the Children of Israel
traveled when they went out of Egypt; here is the Sardonix Stone found; and
the People of this Country in times past were great Prophets and Astrologians;
here also St. Paul taught the Gospel a little after his Conversion, Gal. 1. at
which time Aretas was King thereof, whose Sister was married to Herod the
Tetrarch of Galilee and Petraea; but he cast her off, and married Herodias his
Brother Philips Wife, upon which there began a bloody War between Aretas and
Herod, and a sharp Battle was fought near to Gamala a City beyond Jordan. And
although the two Kings were not at this Battle, yet by the Treason and Flight
of the Soldiers out of Tracones, (who without all question would have revenged
the Contempt done unto their Lord Philip) the Arabian Army carried away a
notable Victory, as Josephus witnesses, lib. antiq. 18. cap. 4. Aretas
signifies, An excellent Man; which was a common Name to the Kings of Arabia.
It is to be thought, that Damascus and all the Country round about was under
the Jurisdiction of this King; and that he ordained a Lieutenant or General in
those Parts, who would have taken Paul and put him to death, Acts 9. 2 Col. 12.

The other part of Arabia is called by Ptolomy, Deserta,; but Strabo calls it,
Scenilis, because the Inhabitants thereof are without Buildings or Tents, and
live like Vagrants up and down the Woods. This is compassed in upon the South
with certain Mountains of Arabia Foelix; toward the North, it borders upon
Mesopotamia; and toward the West, upon Petraea.

The third is called Arabia Foelix, because of the Fertility thereof; for they
have there every year two Harvests, as they have in India, as Strabo observes.
See Plin. lib. 6. cap. 28.

Of Antiochia.
YOU may read of this Town before. It is said, that Luke the Evangelist was
born here. This Man was by Profession a Physician, Col. 4. and an inseparable
Companion to Paul in all his Travels: he was of the number of the seventy
Disciples, as Epiphanius observes. Tertullian says in his fourth Book against
Marcion, that Luke received his Gospel from the mouth of Paul: he lived till he
was 84 years old, and then died, and lies buried at Constantinople, as St.
Ierom says; for his Bones were removed out of Achaia thither.

The second Travels of the Apostle Paul, in the Company of Barnabas.
IN the eleventh year after the Nativity of Christ, and in the four and
fortieth year of Paul, he and Barnabas was sent by the Holy Spirit from
Antiochia in Syria to Seleucia, which was four and twenty miles.

From Seleucia they sailed to Salamais in Cyprus, which was 94 miles, Act. 13.

From thence they went to Paphos, which is in the same Isle where Sergius
Paulur was converted, and Elymas the Magician, who professing himself to be the
Messiah and Son of God, was struck with Blindness, Act. 13. This Journey was
100 miles.

They loosing from Paphos, went by Sea and Land (the same year) to Pergamus a
City of Pamphilia, situated in Asia minor, which was 148 miles.

In the 45 year after the Nativity of Christ, they went from Pergamus to
Antiochia in Pisidia, which was 132 miles.

From thence they went to Iconia, which was 96 miles; here they stayed some
time and converted many, Act. 13. and 14.

In the 46 year after the Nativity of Christ, there being a great Tumult raised
in that Country, lest the Inhabitants should have stoned them, they fled thence
to Lystra a City of Lycaonia, where Paul healed the lame man, which was twenty
eight miles. The Inhabitants seeing this Miracle, worshipped them for Gods, and
called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because he wrought the Miracle.
But not long after, certain Jews coming from Antiochia and Iconia, arrived in
Listra, by whose persuasion the People stoned Paul; and supposing him to be
dead, carried him out of the City: but when his Disciples came unto him, he
rose up and went into the Town, Act. 14.

The next day they went to Derbe, a City of Lyaconia, which was 48 miles.

From thence they returned back again to Lystra in the same year; which was 28
miles.

From Iconia they came to Atiochia in Pisidia, which was 16 miles: In this City
they comforted the Disciples, exhorting them that they should persevere in
their Faith, For through many Afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. They also elected Elders in the Churches, so with Fasting and Prayers
they commended them to the Lord in whom they believed.

In the 47 year after Christ, they went from Antiochia thorough all Pi^idia and
came to Pergamus a City in Pamphilia, which was 132 miles: here they preached
the Word of the Lord, Act. 14.

From Pergamus, in the following year, they went down to the City of Attalia,
which was 26 miles.

In the 48 year after the Nativity of Christ, they loosed thence and went to
Antiochia in Syria; which was 340 miles, here they assembled the Church and
showed what wonderful things the Lord had wrought by them, and how he had
opened the door of Faith unto the Gentiles: In this place they stayed a great
space, Acts. 14.

In the year following they went from Antiochia to Jerusalem (which was 280
miles) to the Apostolical Council, which was celebrated in that City, Anno Dom.
49. and as they went they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, and there
declared the Estate of the Church among the Gentiles, Acts. 15.

From Jerusalem they (with S^las and Judas, surnamed Barsabas) went again to
Antiochia in Syria, which was 280 miles: here Paul opposed Peter for preaching
unto the Gentiles, Gal. 2. So these Travels of Paul were 1744 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Cyprus.
BEcause you may read of Seleucia before, I therefore willingly omit it, that I
might speak more fully of Cyprus. This is a fair and spacious Isle, situated
in the Mediterranean Sea in the Gulf of Issa, bordering upon Cilicia and
Syria, distant 160 miles from Jerusalem toward the North, as Strabo says,
lib. 14. It is in compass 428 miles, very fertile, powerful and spacious for an
Island. There inhabited in it in times past nine Kings, and (as Pliny says,
lib. 5. cap. 31.) called Macaria, or one of the happy Islands; the Inhabitants
were given much unto Luxury and Venery; from whence it happened, that Venus was
greatly honored amongst them. It is said that there are many precious Stones
found in it, besides Crystal, Alum, and Cypress Wood, which abounds in that
place, from which it seems the Island was called Cyprus. There are also found
many Simples that are Physical, much Sack comes thence, and many other things
necessary for the Life of Man. Here also stands the Mountain Olympus, whose
top seems to touch the Heavens, from whence it takes the name because there
never lies any Clouds upon it. Lucan. lib 2. There are four Mountains of this
name; the one lies between Macedon and Thessaly; the other in Cyprus, the
third amongst the Mysians, at the foot whereof Hanibal built Prusa; and the
fourth in Aethiopia, upon the East side of Heliopolis.

There are many Cities in this Country, as Macaria, Cyprus or Gyrhea, after
called Paphos, and now Baffa (in which there stands such a famous Temple,
that Venus of that is called Cypriae and Cytherea) Nicosia, and Salamus now
called Famagusta. There have been many and cruel sharp Wars between the
Venetians and Turks concerning this Country, but at this day it is under the
Jurisdiction of the Turks; from whence they fetch great abundance of Pitch and
Rosin for their Ships and Cables.

Of Salamais.
SAlamais, Salamin, or Salamania, was one of the principal Cities of Cyprus,
and was distant from Jerusalem 196 miles toward the North; built by Tucer the
Son of Telamon, and situated in the Eubean Sea just against Athens. The
occasion why this Town was built, happened by reason of a discontent that grew
between Tucer and his Father Telamon: For Tucer returning from Troy (not having
revenged the death of his Mother Ajax) so much incensed his Father, that he
banished him his Country; whereupon Teucer sailed thence to Cyprus, where he
built this City, and because of the extraordinary affection that he bore to the
Country where he was born, called it by the name of Salamena, or Salamais.
Saint Ierom says, that there is a River of extraordinary hot Water that
runs through a great part of this Country; and that it was once overcome by
the Jews, and utterly ruined and destroyed; but after re-peopled and called by
the name of Constantia. This Town at this day is called by the name of
Famagusta, and was taken (with the whole Island of Cyprus), by Mustapha, chief
Captain to Selimus the second Emperor of the Turks, An. Dom. 1570. Solon, that
notable and famous Philosopher was born in this Town. And Paul and Barnabas
sailed out of Syria and lived in this Town, Act. 31.

Of Paphos.
THIS City is situated upon the shore of Cyprus, 212 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North, and seems to take the name from Paphos the Son of
Pigmalion the Artificer. In this Town there stood a notable Temple, built by
that Pigmalion in the honor of Venus; for that (as it seems by the Poets) he
was much given to Women. Here Elimas that wicked Magician, who (as some will
have it) called himself the Son of Jesus; as others, the Son of Jehovah, dwelt,
whom the Lord by the Hand of Paul struck with Blindness. Here also Sergius
Paulu^ the Pro-Consul was converted.

It was in times past a goodly fair City, as the ruins thereof testify to
this day; but now it is destroyed and almost desolate. There (as it is for the
most part through that Island) the Air is impure and unwholsom, and the ruins
of many goodly Churches and Buildings are to be seen; also the Walls of a
strong, and almost impregnable Tower, situated upon a Hill in the middle of
the City; and as may be thought, was sometime the habitat^on of Sergius Paulus.
There is also shown under a certain Church (which in ancient times belonged
unto the Brothers of the Minores) a certain Prison divided into seven Rooms,
where Paul and Barnabas were imprisoned for preaching the Gospel. Here also
under another Church is found a Spring of very wholesome Water, which is a
present remedy for the Ague and Fever. Here also is excellent Wine.

Of Perga.
PERGA was a City of Pamphilia, from whence Diana is called Pergea, because
there was a notable Temple in that Town which was dedicated to her. It is
situated in Asia the less, near to Cheractus, as Ptolomais says, but as
Strabo says, close by Cestria a fair and goodly River 356 miles from Jerusalem
toward the North. The Country wherein this stands is full of Mountains,
extending from the Mountain Taurus (which begins in this place, abounding
with Vines, Olives, and other Fruits) unto the Sea. There are many fair and
fruitful Pastures in it, and many goodly and beautiful Cities; as Aspendius,
Phaselis, and this Perga, besides many others, needless to be named. There was
usually every year a great Feast kept here in honor of Diana; but Paul and
Barnabas coming to this Town, converted most of the Inhabitants to the
Knowledge of God and of his Son Christ Jesus, Acts 13.

Of Antiochia in Pisidia.
THIS was the chief City in Pisidia, situated in Asia Minor, 460 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. St. Paul converted a great multitude in this Town
to the Faith of Christ.

Of Iconium.
IConium was one of the Metropolitan Cities of Lycaonia, as Pliny says, lib.
5. cap. 27. situated not far from the bowing of Mount Taurus in Asia the less,
as Strabo says, lib. 12. 420 miles from Jerusalem toward the North. In this
City Paul and Barnabas continued a long time, and did many Miracles, by which
means a great multitude of the Inhabitants were converted to the Christian
Faith, Act. 13. 14. It is to this day a fair City, and under the Government of
the Turks, who won it from the Princes of Caramanian. About 400 years before,
there was a great Battle ^ought close by this Town, between the Saracens and
the Army of the Emperor of Conradus the third, in which the Christians lost
the day.

Of Lystra.
THIS is a City in Lycaonia situated in Asia the less, 436 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North. In this Town Timothy was born, Act. 16. 2 Timothy 3.
In this City Paul healed the Cripple, and was stoned, Act. 14. 2 Cor. 11.

Of Darbe.
THIS also was a City in Lycaonia situated in Asia the Less, 388 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North, where Paul and Barnabas preached the Gospel, Act.
14.

Of Attalia.
ATtalia was a Haven Town of Pamphilia, built by Attalus Philadephus King of
Pergamus, after whose name it was so called, as Strato observes, lib. 14.
being distant from Jerusalem 332 miles toward the North. Paul and Barnabas
sailed out of Syria into this Town. At this day it is called Catalia.

The third Travels of Paul, in the company of Sylas.
IN the fifth year after the Ascension of Christ, Paul took unto him Sylas, and
going through Syria and Cilicia, came to Darbe, which is 400 miles, and there
established the Churches, Act. 15. 16.

From Darbe they went to Lystra, forty eight miles, where Paul circumcised
Timothy, Act. 16.

In the one and fiftieth year after Christ, they went from Lystra, and so
traveled through Galatia, Phrygia, and being hindered by the Spirit that they
could not preach in Bythinia, they went thorough Mysia, and so came to Troas;
where, by a Vision that Paul saw in the night, he was admonished to go into
Macedonia, Act. 16. So this Journey between Lycia and Troas, was 483 miles.

Loosing from Troas, they sailed with a direct course to Samothracia 116 miles.

From thence they sailed to Neapolis, ninety two miles.

From thence they went to Philippos in Macedonia, twenty four miles; Act. 16.
here Lydda, the Seller of Purple was converted, and Paul dispossessed of a
Devil: and then he and Scylas being scourged were cast into Prison; Paul being
then about forty one years of age, Act. 16.

From Philippos they went to Amphipolis, about 36 miles, Act. 17.

From thence they went to Apollonia, forty four miles.

From Apollonia they went to Thessalonica, where the Jews stirred up a Tumult:
eighty miles.

Wherefore they went thence by night, and came to Berrhaea sixty miles: here
also the Jews stirred up a Tumult, Act. 17. These things happened in the Summer
Season, An. Dom. 51.

From Berrhaea Paul was brought by the Brethren to the Sea, where entering into
a Ship he went to Athens which was 294 miles; where he converted Dionysius the
Areopagite. From this Town he wrote both his Epistles to the Thessalonians, as
the Subscription witnesses, and sent them to Thessalonica. These were the
first Epistles that Paul wrote.

Afterward he went from Athens and came to Corinthia, seventy four miles: he
came thither about the beginning of August, An. Dom. 51. and continued there a
whole Year and six Months, preaching the Gospel, and making Tents with Aquila
the Jew, who was of that Trade, Act. 19.

From Corinthia, about the Spring, An. Dom. 53. he went to Cenchraea with
Aquila and Priscilla, 304 miles. There, for Devotions sake, he polled his Head.

From Cenchraea, he sailed in the company of Aquila and Priseilla to Ephesus,
about 304 miles. Here he left them, Act. 18.

From Ephesus he sailed to Caesarea Strato in Iudaea, being 280 miles.

From Caesarea he went to Jerusalem, 32 miles, and saluted the Church.

From the City of Jerusalem Paul went to Antiochia in Syria 280 miles. So all
these Travels were 2154.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Cilicia.
BEcause you may read of Syria before, I will omit it, and proceed to speak of
Cilicia. This was a Country in Asia the less, so called (as some would have it)
from Cilix the Kings Son of Phoenicia; compassed in upon the East with the
Mountain Amanus; upon the North with the Mountain Taurus; upon the West by
Pamphilia; and upon the South by the Mediterranean Sea. At this day it is
called Caramania, and is distant from Jerusalem 304 miles toward the North, in
times past it was divided into two parts, that is, into Cilicia the higher and
the lower: Cilicia the higher abounds with Mountains, the lower is a plain
Champian Country very fertile and pleasant. The principal Cities thereof are
Tarsus, where the Apostle Paul was born, and where the River Cydnus runs
through the midst of it; Issus, where Alexander overcame Darius, last Emperor
of the Persians; Anazarba, where Dioscorides, that excellent Physician was
born, who was of great estimation with Antonius and Cleopatra. There are six
Books yet extant of his profitable and necessary Labors in that Science.

From hence may be gathered, that the Situation is strong and pleasant; in
regard it is fortified on every side with Mountains, but principally with the
Mountain Taurus (famous for the fertility of it, and the passage of Alexander
with his Army, who at the time he conquered Darius, went through the straight
passages thereof, being both dangerous and difficult) and watered with many
Rivers that take their beginning from that Mountain, and so passes Southward
through all Cilicia, falling then into the Mediterranean Sea.

Of Galatia.
GALATIA, or Gallo-Graecia, is a Country of Asia Minor, distant from Jerusalem
400 miles; having upon the have Cappadocia, upon the South Pamphilia, upon the
West Byth^ia, and on the North the Euxine Sea. The Cities of this Country were
anciently Sinopis, where King Mithridates kept his Court and Diogenes the
Cynick was born; Amisus, also Pessinus, where the Mother of the Gods was had in
great honor, and was fetched thence by the Romans. This was a famous Mart Town
as ( Livy says li 29.) Laodicea, Tavius, and Ancyra, where there was held a
notable Synod: and in this large and spacious Country also stood Antiochia
Pisidia; for the Galatians dwelt in all Paphlagonia, a part of Licaonia,
Pisidia and Isauria; in which Countries the Apostle Paul taught the Gospel of
Christ.

These Inhabitants (which in those days were called Galatians) are said to be
a People of France, who joining themselves to the Cy^brians, Danes and Germans,
under the conduct of Brennus their Captain, invaded Italy; in which Enterprise
they were so fortunate that they conquered a great part of it, wherein they
planted Colonies: and because of their nearness to their own Country, in
process of time grew mighty; and from that beginning, the Country where they
inhabited was called Cice-alpine-Gallia; taking that name partly of the Place,
partly of the People. After, Brennus and his Army making use of their Fortunes,
sorraged all Italy and came to Rome, which they won and sacked, all but the
Capitol, and that also was in great danger, until such time as Camillus (a
valiant Roman Captain) taking advantage of the Enemies Security (who now took
more care how to satisfy their Covetousness than to defend what they had got)
of a sudden set upon them; by which unexpected Invasion they were put to a
mavelous straight, and the Besieged greatly encouraged; so that they also
issuing out of the Capitol, made such a Slaughter, that they forced Brennus and
his Army to retire, and to restore all the Pillage that he had got, and also
forsake the Country. This Misfortune they bore patiently, considering their
former Prosperity, and in hope of better Success, ^ailed thence into Grecia:
where, after they had attempted many noble Exploits, and failing in some, they
determined a Voyage for Delphos, because there was great store of Treasure, and
the Inhabitants (as they supposed) weak to oppose their Army. In this
Expedition they used much Pillage and robbing upon the Seas; and through many
dangers came at length to this Isle, landed their Men, won the City, fired a
great part of it, and put many of the Inhabitants to the Sword: with this
Victory, most of his Army which were more Religious than the rest, would have
willingly left the Country; but Brennus, who before-times had been used to
Sacrilege, and those that were as covetous as himself, thought it Baseness
through an Opinion of Holiness to leave so great a Booty behind them as was
contained in the Temple of A^ollo, (for that place of all the Temples of the
World in those times was notorious for Riches and Treasure) the many and great
Gratuities and Offerings of most Princes, which were both magnificent and rich,
being hoarded up in the secret Caves of this Oracle) wherefore they attempted
the Assault, but with bad Success, for the Devil raised such a Tempest, with
Thundering, Lightning, and other strange and uncouth Accidents, that Brennus in
this Distemperature of the Air, was Some say he killed himself with his own
Dagger.
slain, many of his Ships were set on fire, and the greatest part of his Army
lost, being either spoiled with Lightning, slain by the Inhabitants, or
dispersed with Fear: such Event had this sacrilegious Attempt. Those that
remained, after they had gathered themselves into a Body, went thence into Asia
the less, and planted themselves in this Country; where the Inhabitants, in
process of time called them Gall^-Graecians, adding their original name to that
of the Country wherein they lived: and after, for beauties sake, they were
called Galatians, See Live. lib. 5. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 6. says, That the
Inhabitants of Galatia were so called of this People, in the time that Gideon
judged Israel, and that Cyrus was Emperor of Persia; both may be true,
considering the mutability and change of States in those times.

Some think they were first called Galatians by Attalus King of Pergamus, (who
gave them a great overthrow close by the River Halym) because they originally
were of Gallia, and continued sometime in Graecia, and after came into Asia; so
he joining these two names into one, called them Gallo-Gracian or Gallatians.
This History is diversely reported by diverse Authors; but all conclude that they
rested and inhabited in Asia, where their Posterity continued to this day.

In times past it was a very Warlike and Generous Nation, and in their
Expedition performed many noble Exploits, attaining to Eminence only by their
Sword; for which cause, many Princes near them were beholding unto them for
their Aid: but withal, cruel and barbarous, insomuch as they oftentimes eat
their Captives, or offered them to their Gods; and thus they continued for the
space of 300 years, till Paul coming into that Country, preached the Gospel
amongst them, and converted them from this Barbarism to the Christian Faith: he
sent an Epistle to this People from Rome, being 1200 miles. They in those times
held all Paphlagonia, a part of Phrygia, Cappadocia, and of all the
neighboring Countries thereabouts, which after their names was called
Gallo-Graecia or Galatia: such a mighty Nation was this grown in a short time,
at first being a People shut out of their own Country for want of a place to
inhabit in, as you may read more at large in the fifth Book of Livie, whose
Authority I have princippally followed herein.

Of Phrygia.
PHryga is as much as to say, a dry and sandy Country, situated in Asia the
less, between Galatia and Mysia, 600 miles from Jerusalem North-westward. It is
divided into two parts, the greater and the less: in the greater Phrygia stood
Smyrna; in the less Dardania, so called of Dardanus who first built it: in
which Town there reigned many wealthy and mighty Princes as Ericthoin^, Tros,
of whom it was called Troy, Ilus of whom it was called Ilion, Laomedon who was
the Father of Priamus the last King thereof; for in his time it was destroyed
by the Grecians. Of which Desolation I will not speak because it is commonly
known.

It lay wast so long (although it had been a fair and goodly City, the like not
in the World) that the place where it stood was become like a plain Field, only
here and there some heaps of old Ruins, to show that there had been a City in
that place. And as Virgil said, Iam seges est ubi Troja fuit, Corn now grows
where Troy stood.

A long time after there were a certain People that called themselves Trojans,
who rebuilt it, but not in the same place, and in it erected a goodly Temple in
honor of the Goddess Pallas to the which Temple, Alexander the Great (after he
had conquered Darius King of Persia close by the River Granicus, which took
beg^nning in a Mountain not far from Troy) went, and with singular Gladness and
great Solemnity, offered many rich and goodly Presents, enlarged the Town, and
greatly adorned. But after he had ended the Persian War, and conquered almost
all the known World, he sent very kind and loving Letters to these new Trojans,
promising not only to enlarge the Town, and indow it with many Privileges and
Revenues but also to build up a fair and sumptuous Temple there, as Strabo lib.
15. says: all which was done for the love he bore to Homers Iliads.

Wherefore look what Alexander had promised, Lysimacus (one of his chief
Princes, and King of Thrace) after his death performed; for he returned to
Troy, enlarged the City, beautified it with goodly Buildings, set up a stately
Temple, and then compassed it about with strong Walls. After this sort it
continued a long time, until Fimbria a Questor of the Romans (when he had
slain Vallerius Flaccus the Consul, with whom he was sent, against Mithridates
King of Pontus) besieged it and within ten days space won it; making his
Vaunts, that he conquered that City in ten days, which Agamemnon could scarce
do in ten years; to which one of the Inhabitants of the City answered, that
then Troy had a Hector, but now it had none. But for this he cruelly wasted the
City. This destruction happened in the 84 year before Christ: thus it lay
desolate till Augustus Caesar's time, who caused it again to be re-edified and
beautified with many fair and goodly Buildings, because the Romans, and
especially those noble Families of the Iulii and Caesar's do derive their
Progeny from the Trojans: for which cause, Augustus used such diligence in the
rebuilding of this City, and bestowed such infinite cost, that he much exceeded
Alexander, and made it a fair and goodly City. At this day it is called Ilium.
But in the place of old Troy there is little to be seen, only a small Town, as
Strabo says. It is distant from Jerusalem 760 miles, North-westward.

Of Bythinia.
THIS Country is opposite to Constantinople, situated in Asia minor, distant
from Jerusalem North-westward, and so called of Bythinus the Son of Jupiter and
Thrax. It was sometime called Pontus, Bebrycia, and Mygdonia, as Stephanus
says. In this Country the Apostle Paul could not preach the Gospel of Christ
when he went into Macedonia and Graecia, because he was hindered by the Spirit,
Act. 16. The principal Cities thereof were Calcidon, Heraclea, Nicea,
Nicodemia, Apamea, Flaviopolis, Libissa (where Hannibal lies buried) and
Prusa, now called Brysa, where in times past the Enperours of Turkey kept their
Courts, and were buried. The Mother and Metropolis of all these Cities was
Nicea, or rather Nicaea, being distant from Jerusalem 720 miles toward the
North-west; at the first called Antigonia, of Antigonus the Son of Philip King
of Asia, who built it after the death of Alexander the Great. But Lysimacus
called it Nicaea, after his Wifes name, and at this day it is called Nissa. The
compass thereof is two miles, being four square, situated (as Strabo says,
lib. 12.) in a fair and pleasant place, lying close by the Pool of Ascania, and
has in it four Gates standing in a direct line; all which Gates might easily
have been seen from a certain Stone which stood in the middle of the
Marketplace.

In this City the most Christian Emperor Constantine the Great celebrated a
Council, Anno Dom. 325. at which time there were present 320 Bishops, who
condemned the Arrian Heresy, and instituted the Nicene Creed. But after that,
viz. Anno Dom. 326. the Arrians endeavoring to hold a second Council in this
City, to confirm their Opinions, and to dissolve that which went before, the
Lord hindered them with an Earthquake, by which almost half the City was thrown
down. Not long after, there happened another Earthquake which utterly
destroyed it: Notwithstanding it was rebuilt again, and in it a second Council
held, wherein the Nicene Creed was condemned.

There were many Cities of this name; that before spoken of, another in Thrace,
a third in France, not far from the River Varus, a fourth (as Stephans says)
is amongst the Lorrenses in Graecia, a fifth in Illeria, a sixth in India, a
seventh in Corsica, and the eighth in Leuctris of Boetia.

Of Mysia.
THIS is a Country of Asia the less, bordering upon Hellespont and Troada;
being divided into two parts, that is, the greater and the less. That part that
bordereth upon Troada, is distant from Jerusalem 800 miles North-westward: but
that which is called Mysia the less, and bordering upon Lydia, is 1028 miles
from Jerusalem North-westward. In this Country stood Pergam, to which John
wrote his Revelation; Scepsis where one Neleus kept the Books of Aristotle till
Apollonius time; also Antandrus, Adramitium, Tranoiapolis, and A^ollonia, which
stood close by the River Thyndaeus.

The Inhabitants were Men of a base condition, and contemned of the World,
insomuch as they became a Proverb, as often as a Man would denote a thing of no
estimation, they would say Vi^imum esse myliorum, that is, It is worse than the
Mysians, as it appears in Cicero's oration for Flaccus Yet notwithstanding,
Paul and John the Evangelist preached the Doctrine and Light of the Gospel to
this poor and despised People, so that the Mysians, which were a contemptable
and abominable Nation before all the World, were not so before God, for they
were converted at the preaching of John and Paul. From whence he says, Not
many Wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble; but God has
chosen the foolish things of this World, that they might confute and overthrow
the Wise, etc. 1. Cor. 1.

Intimes past they were a great People, though of small estimation, for they
had under their jurisdiction, Lydia, Caria, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis,
Philadelphia, and Laodicea; to many of which John wrote his Revelation. Also
(as Herodotus says, lib. 7.) the Mysians and Teucrians, before the Trojan War,
past into Europe, and there won and held Thracia, Macedonia, and all the Land
of the Adriatic Sea etc.

Of Troas.
THIS City Troas, where Paul raised Eutichus (which signifies Happy or
Fortunate) from death to life, Act. 10. stood upon the Sea of Hellespont in
Asia the less, 720 miles from Jerusalem North-westward. Antigonus King of Asia
called it Troas, because it was in the Country where Troy was. But after the
death of Alexander he called it after his own name Antigonia: and the better to
honor it, kept his Court there. But Lysimachus King of Thrace having got this
City into his Jurisdiction, bestowed great cost upon it, and set up many fair
and goodly Buildings, then called it after Alexander's name, Alexandria, and so
it began to be called Alexandria Troas, Plin. lib. 5. Strabo lib. 13. Ier. de
locis Hebraicis: Now it was called Alexandria Troas, to put a difference
between it and diverse other Cities of that name, for there was an Alexandria in
Egypt, another in India, and many others elsewhere; but only this in the
Country where Troy stood. It was situated in a high and spacious Mountain,
about a mile and a half from the Shore of Propontus toward the East, between
which and Troas is twenty eight miles.

It is a thing worthy Observation, to consider by what diverse names the Sea
that lies between Europe and Asia the less is called, for between
Constantinople and Calcidonia, close by the Euxine Sea it is called Thrascius
Bosphorus, in which place it is not above half a mile broad: here Xerxes, when
he invaded Graecia, built up a Bridge for his Army to pass over. There is also
another straight and narrow place in this Sea, which is called by the name of
Cimmeriu Bosphorius These two Bosphori are so called (as some Authors hold)
because a Bull when he loweth may be heard from the one side to the other: but
Pliny seems to derive the name from Io, that fair Maid which Jupiter turned
into a Cow, who swam over this Sea, and of her was called Bosphorus, lib. 6.
cap. 1. It is also called Pro^ontus, because it lies just before the Euxine
Sea; and Hellespont from Hell the Daughter of Athamantis King of Thebes who
was drowned therein; then running thence it falls into a Gulf of the
Mediterranean Ocean, and there it is called the Aegean Sea, of Aegeus King of
Athens, who drowned himself therein for the supposed loss of his Son Theseus.
In this Sea were situate the Isles of Pathmos, Mytelene, Samothrace, Chius,
Lesbus, and many other Isles, as you may read in the Travels of St. Paul.

Of Samothracia, or Samothrace.
SAmothracia is an Isle of the Aegean Sea, situated between Troades and
Thracia, eight hundred and eighty miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west,
close to that part of Thracia where Hebrus falls into the Sea; sometimes
called Dardani^ of Dardanus King of Troy, who when he had slain his Brother
Iacius, and taken from him the Palladiam, he came first into Samothracia, and
then into Asia, where he first laid the Foundation of the City called Troy, and
of that Kingdom. And although this Isle at that time was called Dardania, yet
because of the nearness that it had to Thrace, and the altitude of the Rock
whereon it stood, it soon changed the name: and then especially, when the
People called Samos came thither to inhabit, who after their own name called it
Samothracia. It stood upon such a lofty place, that from thence all the
Countries round about might easily be seen. Arsinoe Queen of Thrace was
banished by Ptolomeus her Brother, into this Island, who after put to death all
her Children, and usurped upon the Kingdom of Thrace: A cruel part in a
Brother. Virg. lib. Aeneid. 3. makes mention of this Island, saying, Terciamque
Samum quae nunc Samothracia fertur
And Samian-Troy, which now adays is Samothracia called.
Strabo also writes of it, li. 13. And in Act. 16. It is said, St. Paul sailed
from Troadis to Samothracia, and so went thence into Thracia and came to the
City of Neapolis.

Of Neapolis.
THIS Neapolis to which Paul went, was a City of Thrace not far from Macedonia,
880 miles from Jerusalem North-westward, called also of some Caurus. There are
many other Cities of this name; one in Judea, where Sichem and Sicha^ stood;
another in Caria, a third in Africa, a fourth in Pannonia; but above all, that
which stands in Campania is most remarkable, being the chief City of the
Neapolitan Kingdom.

Of Philippa.
THIS City in times past was called Crenides, because of the Veins of Gold that
were found close by it. But after, Philip King of Macedon, Father of Alexander
the Great, caused it in the year before Christ 354, to be re-edefied and
enlarged, and then after his own name called it Philippos. It was situated in
Grecia close by the River Stridon, 926 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west, and endowed with many Privileges. In those times the Gold was so
much increased in this place, that the Revenue thereof was worth to this King
more than a thousand Talents, which at 4500 l. the Talent, amounts to forty
five millions of pounds yearly. By the which means King Philip grew so rich,
that he caused his Gold to be coined, and called it after his own name,
Philippian Gold. To this place Paul came, and did many Miracles, taught the
Gospel, and converted many. From hence he wrote his second Epistle to the
Corinthians, and sent it to Corinth; even 292 miles. He also wrote an Epistle
from Rome to the Christians of this Town, and sent it them by the hand of
Epaphroditus, even 628 miles. It was afterward a Colony of the Romans.

Of Amphipolis.
THIS was a City of Macedonia, compassed about with the River Strymon, from
whence it took the name; and was distant from Jerusalem 960 miles toward the
North-west. Here also the Apostle Paul was, Act. 17.

Of Appollonia.
THIS was a City of Mygdonia, situated not far from Thessalonica toward the
West, close by the River Echedorus, 948 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west: being so called from Appollines, which signifies, the Sun: It stood
twenty miles from Thessalonica. There are many other Cities of this name; one
situate in Grecia, close by the Adriatic Sea; another among Islands of
Thrace; a third in Crete, on this side the River Ister; a fourth in Syria; and
a fifth in Africa amongst the Cyrenes.

Of Thessalonia or Thessalonica.
THIS was a City of Macedon, in ancient times called Halia, because it stood
upon the Sea; after called Therma, of the hot Baths that were in it; and
lastly, Thessalonica, of Philip the Son of Amyntas King of the Macedonians, who
gave it that name either of the great Victory that he had against the
Thessalonians, or else after the name of his Daughter called Thessalonica who
was the Mother of Cassandrus. It stood close by the Thermaick Gulf, not far
from the Mouth of the River Echedorus 932 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west. The Apostle Paul taught publicly in this City, and there converted
a great multitude of People, Act. 17. He also wrote two Epistles to the
Inhabitants thereof, and sent them from Athens, being 232 miles distant.

In the time of Theodosius, the first Emperor of Rome, there hapened, by
reason of some Discontent, a grievous Sedition amongst the Thessalonians; in
which stir, some of his Captains and Governors were slain. Wherefore the
Emperor (having intelligence of what had hapened) sent an Army against the
City, with Authority to put to death a certain number of those who had
rebelled: whence it happened that the City was filled with many unjust
slaughters; for the Soldiers respecting more their private profit than the
equity of the cause, spared neither Innocent nor Nocent, Young nor Old; so that
as well the* Inhabitants as Strangers that resorted thither did partake of this
Misery, and suffered like punishment as did they which were the first Authors
of this Rebellion.

But because the Emperor was consenting unto these evils, Ambrose Bishop of
Millain would not suffer him without public repentance to come to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: wherefore in a public Assembly he acknowledged
his offense with great Contrition, Theodor. li. 5. ca. 17. and Soz. li. 7. ca.
14.

This Town was afterward purchased by the Venetians, of Andronicus Palaeologus
Son of Emanuel Emperor of Constantinople; who held it a long time, until
Amurath Emperor of the Turks won it from them, and exercised grievous cruelty
upon the Inhabitants. At this day it is a fair and goodly City, wherein is to
be seen 23 Churches, and is inhabited both by Christians, Jews, and Turks, as
Sebastian Munster says: but the greatest number is Jews, who are partly
Merchants, partly of other Trades; their number in this place (as it is said by
some of their own Nation) is 14000, and they have 80 Synagogues; but they are
constrained to wear yellow wreaths about their heads, the Christians blew, and
the Turks white. There are many Jews also in Constantinople and Adrianople; but
in no place more than in this Town, which is now called Salonica.

Of Berraea.
THIS is a City of Macedon, situated upon the River of Halakmon, 960 miles
from Jerusalem North-westward. In this City the Jews stirred up a great tumult
and sedition against the Apostle Paul, Act. 17. At this day it is called Voria.

Of Athens.
THIS was the most famous City of all Grecia, the Mother of Arts, and a
bountiful nourisher of large and mighty Colonies, in that part of Achaia called
Act or Attica. It was situated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, 720
miles from Jerusalem Westward. It took name from a Divine knowledge; for the
word is derived of (...) and (...). the mind of God. It was first built by
Cecrops, five years before Moses fled out of Egypt into the Land of the
Midianites, and of him called Cecropia. This Cecrops was the first King
thereof, and there succeeded him at least 40, both famous and worthy Princes.
But after it was called Mopsonia, of Mopsus King of Thessaly: and after Ionia,
which name it held for a while: and lastly Athens, dedicated to Pallas (which
goddess the Grecians say was born of the brain of Jupiter) which name it held a
long time after. There lived in this City Solon, Socrates Plato, Aristotle,
Demosthenes, and many other excellent Philosophers.

It was situated upon a fair and strong Rock, beautified with many goodly
Temples and Buildings; but principally that of Minerva was most sumptuous, in
which there hung a great number of Lamps, which gave a continual Light. There
was also the Monastery of the holy Virgins, and the Image of Pallas made all of
white Ivory very curious and costly. There were many Schools, Colleges, and
pleasant Gardens in which Philosophers used to walk, and it abounded with sweet
and delectable Music, and with great resort of Merchants and Scholars. To
conclude, in those times it was the most notable City in the World.

Moreover, there were many profitable Havens for the receipt of Ships, but that
which was called Piraeum exceeded, being capable to receive As some say 400.
forty Ships; beautified with many goodly buildings, in compass two miles,
fortified with seven Walls, and joining to the City (whereof Terence writes,
Eunuch. Act. 3. Scen. 4.) At this day it is called Porto Lini, fortified with
two walls four miles in length, extending to the Hill Munichya, the surname of
Diana (being compassed in the figure of a Chersoness, and so joined to the City
of Athens. In which distance there are two other Havens besides that of
Piraeum. In this Jupiter had a magnificent Temple, and in it were found many
artificial Tables, Pictures, and graven Images, all which are at this day
destroyed and carried away.

It has been three times destroyed; first by Xerxes and Mardonius, which
happened in the year before Christ 479. Then by Lysander, who broke down a
hundred paces of the Wall, and almost utterly destroyed their Ships, and broke
down the Haven of Peraea. It was also ^ore oppressed by the Romans, as they
also brake down their Haven and burnt their Ships, but spared the Town, and
held it in great estimation. But was the third time overthrown and utterly
destroyed by the Turks, who both changed the place and name of the City, after
it had flourished 3113 years. At this day it is divided into three parts, and
called by the name of Sethina, because of the variety of the Inhabitants that
live in it, being very well peopled, and a fair and spacious City, but much
altered from that it was in times past. For although before it was the very
Mother of Eloquence, and glory of A^tica, yet at this day it is so much
altered, that their Language is base, and their Glory is eclipsed. The
uppermost part of the City, where formerly the Temple stood, dedicated to the
unknown God, is now wholly and absolutely in the hands of the Turks, in which
they have built a strong and almost invincible Castle, which has the command
of the rest of the Town. The second and middle part of the Town is all
inhabited by Christians. In the third there stands a fair and goodly Palace,
supported with Marble Pillars, and adorned with goodly Works. In this part of
the City there inhabiteth People of diverse Sects and Conditions. And here also
is the Seat of a Metropolitan, who has under him many Bishops. So that God
does support and maintain his Church even amongst the Enemies thereof; for
there are four Patriarchs in Turk^ to which all the other Christian
Metropolitans and Bishops are subject; viz. the Patriarch of Alexandria,
Constantinople, Antiochia, and Jerusalem.

Paul was the first man that preached the Gospel of Christ in this City, and
converted many Citizens, but especially Dionysius the Areopagite, who dwelt
upon a Promontory without the City, and as it seems, was one of the principal
Judges and Governors of the Town; for after he had taught publicly in the
Town, and had disputed against the Jews and Philosophers concerning Christ,
they supposing him to be a busy Fellow, and one worthy of death, as a
Disturber of the common Peace, brought him before this Dionysius, that so by
his Judgment he might receive condign punishment for his Offense. But St. Paul
so well behaved himself, and preached with such admirable Eloquence and
Learning, that he not only confuted his Enemies, but among others converted
this Dionysius Areopagitus, who was afterward the first Bishop of Athens (as
Eusebius. says, lib. 4. cap. 13.) and went captive with Paul to Rome and from
thence to Paris in France, where he suffered Martyrdom under Dionysius the
Emperor.

Of Corinthia.
COrinthus, a famous City in Grecia is situated in Peloponnesus a pleasant
Country of Achaia, joining to the Continent of Grecia like an Isthmus or
Peninsula, distant from Jerusalem 760 miles toward the West, commonly called
Corantha, built (as Eusebius says, by Sisiphus Son of Aeolus at such time as
Ioshuah governed Israel; who was a mighty Pirate. At first it was but a Castle,
and called after his name, Sisiphyus: but after, because of the strength of the
place, and pleasant situation, it became a fair Town and called by the name of
Corcyra, as Strabo says; then Ephym, of Ephyra, who was a fair and goodly
Nymph, and Queen of that place. Now although even in those times it was held in
great estimation, yet it became much wasted and decayed through the continuance
of time, until it was repaired by King Corinthus, who as some think was the Son
of Marathon; Suidas says, the Son of Pelops; others would have him the Son of
Orestis; and after his name was called Corinth, that is, the Flower of Maids.

It was a fair and goodly City, very commodiously built, for it stood between
the two Seas of Ionium and Aegeum, so that there resorted thither great
multitude of Merchants from all places. Close by the City there stood a steep
Mountain, which was as it were a Bulwark for the defense thereof, being 560
Feet high, and called Acrocorinthus, that is, The Glory and Strength of the
Corinthians. It was also compassed about with strong Walls, and beautified with
many goodly Buildings and Temples, but above the rest, the Temple of Venus was
had in great reputation, which (as Strabo says) stood upon the top of the
Mountain Acrocorinthus, wherein there were above a thousand Maids prostituted
every year. This Temple was had in such great honor, and was so gloriously
built, that above all the places of the World there was resort unto it. Close
by it stood the ancient Castle called Sysyphius, built all of white Marble; and
a little below that, the Fountain of Pyrene, dedicated to the Muses.

There were many mighty Princes that ruled in this City, as Alethes, who was
King thereof at such time as Samuel judged Israel, which was 1103 years before
Christ; he bestowed great cost upon it, set up many fair and goodly Buildings,
and ruled over it thirty and five years, as Eusebius says. After him there
succeeded many Kings, by whose Worthiness and Prowess it was so much enlarged,
and made so famous, that it was little inferior to the City of Rome: for, at
such time as Ambassadors were sent thence to entreat of some Business
concerning the State, the Corinthians did not let to give them many reproachful
Terms, as Strabo says, lib. 8. because of which Insolency, the Romans sent
Lucius Mummus the Consul into Grecia, who besieged Corinth, and within a short
time took it, and burned it down to the Ground, in the year before Christ, 145.
of which you may read more in Florus, and in the second Decad of Livy. It was a
mavelous rich Town, and abounded with Gold, Silver, and costly Brass, also
with Plate, and curious Pictures: so that although Mummus conquered Corinth,
yet Corinth conquered Rome; for the Citizens thereof were so bewitched with the
Riches and Glory of this Town, that they forgot their ancient Severity, and
with violence followed their Vices, as Salust says, lib. 1. So that as before
Corinth abounded with Luxury and diverse other abominable Evils, as Whordom,
Adultery, Fornication, Covetousness, Idolatry, Rapine, and Murder: so Rome in
future Ages became as bad or worse than it.

Thus it continued waste from that time till Julius Caesar was Emperor of
Rome; who having traveled into those parts of the World, and seen the Ruins
of this City, and the profitable Situation for Traffic, caused it to be
re-builded: after which time, it began to grow great and spacious, little
inferior to the former in glory, and no less corrupted with Vices, having
forgot the former misery which it sustained by the hands of the Romans; and so
continued from the year before Christ 44, until the year after Christ 41, at
which time Paul came thither and preached the Gospel, by whose divine Doctrine,
and godly Life and Conversation, they were converted from their evil Courses,
and lived more holily and honestly, as appears by the two Epistles of St.
Paul, wrote from Philippos to the Inhabitants of this Town.

But after, they falling from their Faith, and forsaking their ancient
Integrity, the Lord punished them with a second Desolation; for, at such time
as Amurath, Emperor of the Turks, grew to Eminency, and had conquered
Thessalonica, Beotia, and Attica, he came into this Isthmus, and made all
Peloponnesus tributary to him. Then after him Mahomet the Second (although the
Inhabitants of Corinth had fortified their City with three Walls, and made it
so strong, that it was thought to be almost invincible) besieged it and won it,
An. Dom. 1458. about six years after Constantinople was conquered by the Turks.
But now it is in the command of the Venetians, and that, and all the Country is
called by the name of Morea, as it appears in the Turkish History, lib. 10.

The fourth Peregrination of the Apostle Paul.
IN the Year after the Nativity of Christ, 53. Paul went from Antiochia in
Syria, and came to Galatia and Laodicea in Phrygia, and thence wrote his
Epistle to Timothy, as it appears by the Subscription of that Epistle; which
was 380 miles.

From Laodicea he went to Ephesus, which was 280 miles; and there appointed
Timothy to be a Bishop, and daily disputed in the School of a certain Tyrant,
and did many miracles, as it appears, Acts 19.

From Ephesus he came to Troada, which was 200 miles, where, when he could not
find Titus, he was troubled in Spirit, 2 Cor. 2.

From Troada he failed into Macedonia, and came to Philippos, which was 232
miles: from hence he wrote his Epistles to the Corinthians, and sent them to
Corinth, which was 292 miles.

In the same year also, Paul passing through Grecia, (in every place where he
came, preaching and visiting the Churches, Act. 19.) at length came to
Corinthus, which was 480 miles.

In the fifty seventh year after the Nativity of Christ, when Paul had wintered
among the Corinthians; in the Spring (that he might avoid the deceits of the
Jews, who went about to take away his Life) he went thence and returned to
Philippos, which was 292 miles, where he celebrated the Feast of Pentecost,
Acts 2.

From thence he sailed to Troada, which was 232 miles, where he raised Eutichus
from Death to Life, Acts 20.

From Troada he went to Assa, which was thirty six miles, Acts 20.

From Assa he sailed to Mileten, which was 760 miles, Acts 20.

From Mileten he went to Chius, which was 64 miles, Act. 20.

From Chius he sailed to Samus, which was 60 miles, and continued in the Isle
of Trogylius, which was close by Samus, as Plin. says, lib. 5. cap. 3. and
Strabo, cap. 13.

From Trogylius he sailed by Ephesus, and came to Miletus, which was 160 miles.
From thence he sent Messengers to the Ministers of Ephesus, commanding them to
have a special care to the Flock of Christ, which he had purchased with his
precious Blood; and added, that he was so much the more importunate in that
behalf because they should never see him again: wherefore they embraced Paul
with great Lamentations and Sorrow, Act. 5.

From Myletus he and his Companions went with a direct course to the Island of
Cous, which was 200 miles, Act 21.

From thence the next day they went to Rhodes, which was 84 miles.

From Rhodes they went to Patara, which was 100 miles.

From Patara they sailed to Tyrus, leaving Cyprus upon the left hand; which was
360 miles, where he found certain Disciples, and remained there seven days,
Act. 21.

From Tyrus, Paul and his Companions sailed to Ptolomais, which was 24 miles.

From thence they came to Caesarea Strato, who was 44 miles; there they
remained in the house of Philip the Evangelist, who was one of the seven
Deacons with Stephen, Act. 21.

From thence Paul went to Jerusalem, which was 32 miles, and there, about the
Feast of Pentecost, he was taken by the Jews, imprisoned and scourged, Act. 21.
At this time Paul was about forty seven years of Age. So all these Travels were
3396 miles.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
And first of Assus.
COncerning Laodicea, to which Paul traveled, you may read before* I will
therefore proceed to Assus, which was a Town within the Jurisdiction of Troada,
situated close by the Aegean Sea, 700 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-east, as Strabo says, lib. 13. wonderfully fortified both by Nature and
Art, so that it is a thing almost impossible to be conquered. There is found
close by it the stone called Sarchophagus, in which if any Man's Corpse be
buried, within the space of forty days it is utterly consumed all but the
Teeth, as Pliny says, lib. 36. cap. 17. In this City Cleantes the Stoic was
born, as Chrysippus says.

Of Mitylene.
THE Isle and Town of Mitylene is situated in the Aegean Sea, 624 miles from
Jerusalem toward the North-west. In times past called Lesbus, which obtained
the whole Jurisdiction and Government of Troada. It is in compass 136 miles,
and contains in length, from the North to the South, 56 miles. In it is found
much matter for the making and calking of Ships: there was many goodly Cities
in it, as Mitylene and Pyrrha, which stood upon the West part of it; also the
Metropolitan called Lesbos, Eressus, the Haven of Antissa, and Mithymna. Of
Lesbos in times past this whole Isle was called Lesbus, until the City of
Mitylene grew famous; being so called of Mitylene the Daughter of Macharus, as
Diodorus says, lib. 4. and after that Cities name called Mitylene. There were
many other goodly Cities which stood in this Isle, but they were either
consumed by Earthquakes or drowned by the Sea. The Land thereof was very
pleasant and fruitful, bringing forth grapes, whereof there was a very
excellent and clear Wine made, which they of Constantinople principally liked:
there is also found great store of Cypress, Pines, and plenty of Figs come
thence. Their Horses are very strong, but of a low Stature: it is very
mountainy, and pestred with wild Beasts.

There were many famous men that lived and were born in this Country; as
Pittachus one of the seven Wise Men of Greece, Aliaeus the Poet, and
Alcimenides his Brother, Diophanes the Orator, and Theophanes who wrote the
Acts of Pompey the Great, (as it appears in Tullies Oration for Archia)
Theophrastus also that notable Philosopher, (who at first was called
Tyrtamanus, then Euphrastus, that is, a good Orator) and lastly, Theophrastus,
that is, a divine Orator; this man was an excellent Peripatetick, and Scholar
to Aristotle, whom he succeeded in his School, and had 2000 Scholars.

Vitruvius the Architect makes mention of Mitylen in his first Book, saying,
that it was a very magnificent City, and rarely builded, but very badly
situated; for when the South Wind did blow, the Inhabitants grew sick; when
the West, they coughed, and when the North Wind did blow they were made well.
Notwithstanding, the Apostle Paul and his Companions came to this City, as it
appears, Act. 20. At this day it is under the Jurisdiction of the Turks, and
is called by the Name of Midilly.

Of Chius.
THIS is an Isle situated in the Aegean Sea, distant from Jerusalem 600 miles
toward the North-west, being 112 miles in Compass; the principal City thereof
is called Chios, taking the Name, as some say, from the Mastick Tree, which
sweateth out a certain Gum, of the Syrians called Chian, and by us Mastick:
this Mastick is the best in those parts of the World. Ephorus calls it by the
ancient Name Aetalia; but Cleobulus, Chia; either because of the Nymph called
Chion, or else because of the whiteness of the Soil: there are others that call
it Patyusia; and there are some who derive the name of Chius from the Temple of
Apollo that stands in it, called Chion. There stands in it a fair and goodly
Mountain called Pellenaeum, from whence the Inhabitants dig very excellent
marble. Also in times past the best Malmsey came thence, but in these days it
is brought from Crete.

Of Sat^us.
THIS is an Isle and City situated in the Aegean Sea, upon a high or lofty
piece of Ground, so that from thence the Inhabitants may see into all the
Countries near adjoining, lying upon the Coast of Ephesus and Ionia, 560 miles
from Jerusalem toward the North-west; it was in compass eighty eight miles,
very fertile and pleasant, much exceeding Chius, although it brought forth no
Wine. In times past it was called Artemisia, Parthenea, and Stephane; taking
those names from a Crown or Wreath of sweet smelling Flowers, of which there
were great plenty in this Isle; the Poets feign that Iun^ was both born and
brought up in it; and Varro says, That there was a fair and stately Temple
dedicated unto her, where solemn Service and the Rites of Marriage were yearly
celebrated Pythagoras the Philosopher was born here; and one of the Sybels
(which prophesied of the coming of Christ) lived h^re. St. Paul also came into
this Isle, and converted many, as appears Act. 20.

There is another Isle called Samus, situated upon the Coast of Epirus, not
far from the Gulf of Ambracius, called also Cephalenia, not far from the
Promontory of Actium, where Augustus overcame Antonius; in Honor of which
Victory he built up a City and called it Nicapolis, etc.

Of Trogyllium.
THIS is a Promontory and Town not far from Ephesus, situated in Asia-minor,
at the foot of the Mountain Mycales, four miles and somewhat more from Samus,
where Paul stayed, Act. 20. It is distant from Jerusalem 460 miles toward the
North-West. There are which say, that St. Paul stayed at a certain Isle joining
close to this Promontory, called after that by the name of Trogyllium. See
Strabo, lib. 14.

Of Myletus.
THIS was a famous City, situated upon the Borders of Ionia and Caesaria,
close by the Shore of the Aegean Sea, 104 miles from Jerusalem toward the
North-west. The Poets feign, that Miletus, who was the first builder of this
City, was the Son of Apollo, and called it after his own name Miletus: but
Strabo, lib 12. thinks that it was rather built by Sarpedon the Son of
Jupiter, and Brother to Radamanthus and Minos, and by him was called Myletus,
from another City of the same name, which stood in Crete. The Wool that comes
from this Town is wonderful soft, and singular good for many purposes; but it
was principally used to make Cloth of, which they died into an excellent
Purple and transported into many places. There were a great many famous men
that either lived or were born in this Town; as Thales Milesius, one of the
seven Wisemen of Graece, Anaximander, who was his Scholar, Anaximenes and
Hecataeus the Historian; also Eschenes the Orator, (not he that contended with
Demosthenes, who taking too much Liberty against Pompey was banished) Timotheus
the Musician, and Pittacus the Philosopher, besides many others.

But of all these, Thales Milesius was held in greatest Estimation, because he
was thought to be the first that taught natural Philosophy and the Mathematics
amongst the Grecians. He was the first also that foretold of the Eclipse of the
Sun, about such time as the Battle was fought between Cyaxares Father of
Astyages King of the Medes, and Hallyattes Father of Croesus, King of the
Lidians, which was about the 44 Olympiad. There came unto him a certain Man,
who asked him what was the hardest thing in the World; he answered, Seipsum
nosce, To know himself. Another came to him, and asked him, how he might do to
live justly; he answered, Si quae in alis reprehendimus, ipse non faciamus,
That we do not those things which we reprehend in others. He died about the 58
Olympiad. Meletus at this day is called Melasa.

Of Cous.
THIS is one of the Cyclad Islands, lying in the Aegean Sea, bordering upon
Caria; being so called from the Vaults and Caves that are in it, and distant
from Jerusalem 524 miles. It has a City called after the same Name, wherein
there was a stately Temple built in honor of Juno; and another standing in the
Suburbs thereof, dedicated to Aesculapius: this was a very sumptuous Temple,
and made very rich, because of the many Presents and Gifts that were sent and
dedicated to it. When the Romans had obtained the Command of this Isle,
Octavius, the Father of Augustus Caesar, took out of this Temple a naked Venus,
which was a goodly Image, and carried it with him to Rome in honor of his
Progenitors, who derived their Progeny from her.

It is in compass 56 miles, being so pleasantly situated that it was a
Sea-Mark to Mariners, very fruitful, and bringing forth abundance of Wine and
Silk, by reason of a certain Fish that is found there, from which they got
great Plenty. See Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22.

There were many that lived only by weaving of Silk; and above the rest there
was one Pamphila the Daughter of Plates, that was most excellent in that Art.

There were many famous men that were, either born or lived in that Country, as
Hippocrates that excellent Physician, Apelles that notable Painter, Simus the
Physician, Philetas the Poet and Orator, Nicia the Prince and Tyrant of Cous,
Ariston the Peripatetick, and Theomnestus that notable Politician. At this day
this Isle is within the Turkish Empire, and by them called Stacu; also the
principal City thereof is called by the same Name, and wholly inhabited by the
Turks, two Towns only being inhabited by the Grecians: but there are many that
dwell in strong Castles compassed with round and stately Towers. This Country
is very fertile, abounding with Cattle, and the Mountains thereof are little
inferior to those of Crete.

Of Rhodes.
THE City and Isle of Rhodes (which is so called from the sweet Smell or Roses)
is situated in the Mediterranean Sea, a little from Asia the less, upon the
South; being distant from Jerusalem 140 miles toward the North-west, as Strabo
says, lib. 14. It is in compass 112 miles. It was at first called Ophy, then
Statilia, and after Telchin, of the Inhabitants thereof, who were called
Telchines, a People which, as some say, were Witches; others say, curious
Artificers, and were the first that found out the making of Brass and Iron. At
last it took the name of Rhodes from the principal City that stood in it; for
there were three Cities in it, viz. Lyndus, Camirus, and Ialyssus. In Lyndus,
Cleobulus, one of the seven Wisemen of Greece, and Chares that famous
Statuary, who made the Colossus which stood in this Isle, were born. Ialyssus,
of a Rose that was found in it, was called Rhodes, being situated upon an
exceeding high Promontory, lying toward the East part of that Isle. This
exceeded the other two Cities, both for Ports, Ways, Walls, and other
Ornaments, and the Inhabitants were governed with such excellent Laws, and so
skilful in Navigation, that it might compare with the strongest City of the
World, and for a long time had the Command of the Sea round about, and utterly
abolished all Pirates and Robbers from those parts.

Diodorus Sicul. lib. 6 says, that it was called Rhodes of Rhodia, a fair and
beautiful Maid, who was dearly beloved of Apollo, and therefore this Island was
dedicated to the Sun; for as Solinus says, Though the Heavens be never so
cloudy yet the Sun shines in Rhodes. Pindarus the Poet, (because of the
fertility of the Soil, and the exceeding Opulency of the Inhabitants) says,
that it rained Gold in that Country. In former times it flourished with
Learning and good Arts, insomuch that the Romans for the most part sent their
Children to be brought up at Rhodes. This Isle is very fruitful, and brings
forth many things necessary for the maintenance of Life; but above all, a
certain Red Wine which the Romans did greatly delight in, and valued at a high
Price. In this City lived that notable Painter called Protogines, which Apelles
conquered in that Science, as Pliny says, li. 35. ca. 10.

Demetrius, King of Asia, erected a notable Colossus or Statue of the Sun in
this Isle, which that notable Carver Chares made, being outwardly all of pure
Brass, but within nothing but Stones; it was seventy Cubits high, and so
artificially made, that it was accounted for one of the Wonders of the World.
Afterward it was carried into Egypt by the Egyptians, who won the Town. This
Isle is famous to this day: in times past it was accounted one o^ the Keys of
Christendom, but at this day subject unto the Turk: of which yo^ may read more
in the Turkish History.

Of Patara.
PAtara was a City of Licia, so called of Patarus the Builder thereof; who was
the Son of Apollones, or Lacones, as Strabo and Servius says: it was situated
upon the South Side of Asia the less, close by the shore of the Mediterranean
Sea, 408 miles from Jerusalem toward the North-west. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus
King of Egypt enlarged the City, and called it after his Sisters Name,
Arsinoes Lysiaca, to put a difference between it and other Cities called after
that Name; for there was an Arsinoe in Egypt, and another near Cyrene, where
Apollo in certain months of the Winter Season (by the help of the Devil) gave
answer to them that sought after him. St. Paul was in this Town, Act. 11. There
was also another Town of this Name in Achaia, where St. Andrew was crucified.

The Travels of St. Paul when he was taken Captive and carried Prisoner to Rome.
IN the 57 year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then 47 years of Age,
by the command of Claudius Lysius was taken and scourged by the Jews, and
brought thence to Antipatris by Night (because there were forty Jews which had
sworn his Death) which was twelve miles, Act. 22, 23, 24.

From Antipatris he was brought to Caesarea Strato, which was twenty eight
miles, where he was brought before Foelix, (who was President for the Romans in
those parts) and was captive there for the space of two days, Act. 24, 25, 26.

In the fifty ninth year after the Nativity of Christ, Paul being then 49 years
of Age, or thereabouts, was sent by Portius Festus, President of the Jews, to
Rome; so Paul sailed from Caesarea Strato to Sidon, which was 84 miles, Act. 27.

From thence Paul sailed close by Cyprus, because the Wind was contrary, and
came to the Sea over against Cilicia, (which was very troublesome) and so
passing by Pamphilia they came to Myra, which was 480 miles.

Loosing from Myra they sailed to Gnidum, which was 248 miles, Act. 27.

From Gnidum they sailed toward the South, and came to Crete, and so passed by
the Towns of Salmo, Lasaea, and Assus, and so came to Phoenicia, which was 180
miles.

From Phoenicia they came to the Island of Claudia, which was 108 miles.

From the Island of Claudia they came to Melite, which now is called Malta; in
which place they suffered Shipwreck, and Paul shook off the Viper off his hand
into the Fire, and did many other Miracles, which was 720 miles.

From Malta they sailed in a Ship of Alexandria, to Sir acusus in Sicilia,
being 180 miles: Paul at this time was fifty years of Age, Act, 28.

From Siracusa they sailed to Regium, being 52 miles.

From thence they went to Puteola, being 164 miles.

From Puteola they went to Apiforum, being 12 miles: there certain Christians
of Rome came to meet them, above twenty two miles, and received Paul with great
Friendship.

From Apiforum they led him to Tribatera, being six miles, here he met more
Christians.

From Tribatera he went to Rome, being sixteen miles, where he remained two
years Prisoner, and there wrote his Epistles to the Galathians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and the Hebrews: so all these Travels were
2300 miles.

And in the whole, from his first beginning, until his being Prisoner in Rome,
were 190270 miles.

But being delivered out of Prison, the last ten years of his age he did not
only preach the Gospel in Asia and Creta, where he appointed his Disciple
Timothy to be a Bishop, and in Macedonia, (where being in Neapolis he wrote an
Epistle to Titus, and sent it to him above 300 miles to the Island of Creta)
but also preached the Gospel, and spread the Word of God abroad in the Country
of Spain, Romans 15. which is distant from Jerusalem 2800 miles: and being the
second time imprisoned in Rome, he wrote his second Epistle to Timothy, and
sent it above 996 miles to Ephesus: not long after, he was beheaded in Rome, in
the place called Via Ostensi.

Of the Towns and Places to which he traveled.
Of Antipatris.
THE Town of Antipatris is distant from Jerusalem twelve miles toward the
North-west. In times past it was called Caphar Zalama, that is, a Village of
Peace. There Judas Macchabeus overcame Nicanor, 1 Mac. 7. Afterward, Herod that
lived in the time of our Savior Christ, built this Town much fairer and called
it after the name of his Father, Antipatris. It stood in a very pleasant and
fruitful Soil, having many fair Trees and fresh Waters about it, Ios. lib. 16.
cap. 7. St. Paul was by Night brought Prisoner into this Town, Act. 23.

Of Myra.
THIS was a great Town, as Strabo, li. 14. says, and stood in Asia minor, in
the Province of Lycia, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea, 380 miles from
Jerusalem North-westward. St. Paul was in this Town.

Of Gnidus.
THIS Town lies in Asia minor, upon the Mediterranean Sea, in the Pennis^dia
called Doris, which by a narrow point joyneth unto the Province of Caria, and
is distant from Jerusalem 492 miles. In this Town the Goddess Venus had a great
Temple, wherein her Image was placed, made by that cunning Workman Praxiteles,
of Marble stone; and for that cause Horace calls Venus Queen of Gnido, lib.
1: carm. Od. 30. O Venus Regina Gniide Paphique that is; O Venus Queen of
Gnidus and Paphos etc.

There came many Learned Men out of this Town, as Eudoxus Agatarchides,
Paripateticus; Theopompus, and others.

This Town is yet standing, and (as it is thought) it took the name of the Fish
Gnidus, which is taken there in the Sea; which Fish is of so strange a nature,
that if you take it in your hand it stingeth like a Nettle. At this day this
Town has another name, and is called Cabo Chrio, as Conradus Gesnerus in his
Onomastico writes.

Of Creta.
THE Island of Creta took the name (as Strabo says) from the People called
Curetes that dwelt in this Island: those People used to cut all the hair off
from the fore-parts of their Heads, and therefore they would not endure to
suffer any Man to wear his hair being in the Wards; for which cause, in the
Grecian Tongue they were called Couretes, and in time this name by corruption
of speech was changed, and they called Cretans. This Island stands in the
Mediterranean Sea, between Graecia and Africa, 600 miles from Jerusalem toward
the West. It is a great Island, being 200 miles long, 48 miles broad, and in
compass 588 miles: it is very fruitful of Cypress Trees, Malmsey, Sugar, and
other Spices: the Malmsey takes the name from the Town of Malvesia, in
Peloponnesus, standing upon the point of Malta, right over against Creta or
Candia; and at this day the like Wine is made in Creta, and called by the same
name, from whence it is commonly brought unto us, though in times past it came
out of the Island of Chius.

Among all the Hills that are found in the Island of Creta, the Hill Ida is
most spoken of, because of the height: about it stands diverse Towns and
Villages: it has many Hills and Woods: for the Island is very full of sweet
Cypress Trees, insomuch that there are Woods full of them. Pliny writes, that
upon a time, there was such an Earthquake in this Island, that one of the
Hills removed, out of which there came a Man, being forty Cubits high. In this
Island there are no venomous Beasts, but in times past it was inhabited by
cruel People, of whom St. Paul complains in his first Epistle to Titus, cap.
1. where he reherseth the Saying of Epimenides, which was after this manner,
The People of Creta are always Liars, evil Beasts, and slow Bellies. And to
conclude, they resemble some of the Friars among the Papists; for as they are
idle people and shave their heads, so were the Men of Creta. Titus (Paul's
Disciple) was a Bishop in this Island, and St. Paul wrote an Epistle to them
and to Nicapolis* and sent it them above 320 miles. This Island in times past
was very rich and populous, for in it there was a 100 Towns; the chief of which
were Gnossos, Cortyna, and Zydon, but Gnossos was the most principal and
ancientest, wherein King Minos kept his Court: in it the notable Geographer
Strabo was born.

This Town of Gnossos in times past was called Ceratur, of the River Cerata
which passed by it; but now it and all the Island is called Candia. The
Venetians every three years appointed a new Duke to govern it. In this Island
stood the Towns of Salmona and Lassica (by Pliny called Lasas) and in the
middle between those two Towns was the Haven of Gutfurt, whereof Saint Luke
makes mention in the Acts of the Apostles, cap 27. saying, That Paul
counseled the Sailors that were in the Ship to anchor there, and stay the
Winter season in that Island: but the Captain of the Ship gave more credit to
the Master of the Ship, than to Paul's words, whereby in the end they were in
danger of their lives. The Towns of Salmona and Lassica with the Haven of
Gutfurt, lay Southward in this Island, upon the Coasts of the Mediterranean
Sea: somewhat distant from them stood the Town of Asson, by Pliny called Ausum,
where they hoised out their boat and sailed Northward; and because they had a
fair South Wind, they thought to sail to Phoenicia, a Haven in Creta, but the
wind coming about to the East, drove them back again into the Sea, by which
means they were in danger of their Lives.

This Island was brought under the subjection of the Romans, 66 years before
the birth of Christ, and so for a long time continued, until the Saracens
entered therein, and took it from the Romans, 800 years after the Birth of
Christ. After that, in the year of our Lord 979, the Emperor of Constantinople
drove the Saracens out of the Island, and kept it; but in the end the Venetians
brought it under their Subjection and Seigniory, in the year of our Lord 1202,
and at this day it is called Candia.

Of Clauda.
CLaudea is an Isle not far from Crete, lying toward the Southwest in the
Mediterranean Sea, 288 miles from Jerusalem toward the West: at this day it is
called Porto Cabaso; here the Sailors, the Apostle Paul; and the rest of the
company, haled overboard their Cock-boat, and tied it to their Ship and fell to
towing, lest they should have been sunk into Syr^is, a dangerous Gulf upon
those Seas, Acts 27.

Of Syrtis.
THIS is a Gulf of the Sea lying upon the shore of Africa, in which the Water
is both troublesome and the shore dangerous, because of quick Sands; and in
this there are two places most remarkable, called by the name of Syrtis, from
drawing and attracting Ships unto them, by which they were greatly endangered:
the one was called the greater, and the other the less; the greater lay 1000
miles from Jerusalem toward the West, but the other lay under the Isle of
Mylete toward the South, being distant from Jerusalem 1320 miles toward the
West: in this place it was where Paul and his Companions were in such danger,
mentioned Act. 17.

Of Mylete.
THIS Island was so called from the great abundance of Honey that was found in
it; but at this day it is called Malta, situated in the Mediterranean Sea,
1340 miles from Jerusalem toward the West. It is very pleasant and fruitful,
bringing forth great plenty of Wheat, Rye, Flax, Cumin, Cotton, Figs, Wine,
Roses, Violets, Time, Lavender, and many other sweet and delightful Herbs, from
whence Bees did gather great plenty of Honey. The Sun is very hot in this
Island, insomuch, that by the extreme servor thereof, the Inhabitants lose
their natural complexion and look of a tawny color. In Summer Evenings there
falls great plenty of dews, whereby the Earth is refreshed and the Herbs
increased. There is neither Snow or Frost seen in it; for the Northern Winds
(which with us are the Authors of Cold and Frosts) with them procure Rain,
which greatly refreshes and increases the Fruits of the Earth; so that the
Pastures and Medows become very pleasant and full of Grass: and although it be
but 28 miles long, and 60 miles about, notwithstanding it is very populous; for
in the eight Parishes that stand in this Isle, there is numbered above twenty
thousand Men. The Inhabitants are very honest, religious, and godly; and the
Women fair, chaste, and modest, for they never come abroad but with their faces
covered. The Children that are born in this Country fear not any Snakes;
neither are hurt by any thing that is venomous, insomuch that they will take
Scorpions and eat them without danger, although in all other parts of the World
those kind of creatures are most pernicious. In this Isle also there are bred a
kind of Dogs that are but small, yet very white and shagged, and so loving,
that the Inhabitants of all the neighboring Countries will buy them, though
they be at dear rates.

The chief City thereof (called Malta) is so strongly fortified both by Art and
Nature, that it is almost impossible to be conquered, unless it be either by
Treason or Famine. The Town or Castle whereof is fortified with the Knights of
St. John's Order, who have mightily expressed their Valor and Resolution in
defending this Town from the Turks. About a mile from this, the ruins of a
goodly fair City are to be seen. And upon the East Promontory, a little from
the City of Malta, there yet remain the decays (which are worthy to look upon)
of a goodly Temple, dedicated to Iun^. It seems by what remains, that this
Church has been a fair and goodly thing in times past.

There is also here and there in the Earth found certain brass Moneys, having
upon the one side a superscription written in Greek Letters, and upon the other
the Image of Juno. There stood upon the South side of Malta a Temple dedicated
to Hercules, the ruins of which are yet extant; and in it are found Mountains
worthy of admiration. At such time as the Captain of Massanissa King of the
Numidians had conquered this Island, amongst other precious things that he
found in these Temples, he took thence a great deal of goodly Ivory: but that
religious King did faithfully restore all those things back again, and
dedicated them to the several Temples. Thus we may perceive, that the
Inhabitants of this Island of Malta were wholly given to Idolatry and
Superstition, until such time as Paul, by the Inconstancy and Vehemence of the
Wind, was driven upon it, and converted them from that perverse and profane
Worship to the Christian Religion, at such time as he suffered Shipwreck, and
wintered amongst them, Acts 27. The Inhabitants show upon the North part of
this Isle, the place where the Ship was cast away wherein the Apostle Paul was;
in which place they have built up a Chapel, and dedicated it to Saint Paul.
They show also a Cave, in which they say he lived; and they verily believed
that he expelled all Venom and Poison out of that Island at such time as he
was there.

It was first subject unto the Africans, as may appear by certain Marble
Pillars which are here and there found, in which there are engraven certain
Characters of the Carthaginians, not much unlike to Hebrew Letters. And
although the Inhabitants are Christians, yet their Speech is much like the
Saracens, which differs little or nothing from the ancient Punick. At such
time as Dido built Carthage (which is thought to be 890 years before Christ)
Battus was King of this Isle, and held a Confederacy with Dido: for when
Hyarbas King of the Gelutians made War upon Dido, because he could not obtain
her in Matrimony, she received Aid from this Battus; and when for the love of
Aeneas she had killed her self, Hyarbas, having conquered Carthage, banished
her Sister Anne, who was entertained by this Battus. But Hyarbas taking that
unkindly, made War upon Battus, and conquered the Island of Malta: so it
continued in the Jurisdiction of the Carthaginians a long time after, until the
Carthaginians were conquered by the Romans; and then one Titus Sempronius
(about such times as Hannibal brought his Army before Trebia) won it 217 years
before Christ. And after it continued under the Jurisdiction of the Romans 130
years, and then it was conquered by the Saracens; but they held it not long,
for Roger Norman King of Sicilia got it out of their Power, Anno Dom. 1090. And
so it continued in the hands of the Sicilians till Anno Dom. 1520. And then
Charles the fifth being Emperor, gave it to the Knights of Saint John, upon
condition that they should oppose the Turks Galleys, and defend that part of
Christendom. So the Knights of St. John, together with their Governor, sailed
to Malta, and so fortified it that it is impossible to be taken, unless by
Famine or Treason. There were many famous Bishops that lived in this place, and
very devout Christians. In the time of the Emperor Theodosius there was a
Council held, at which were present 240 Bishops. At this day this Bishopric is
subject to the Archbishop of Palermo; and the chief Government of the Isle is
in the Power of the Knights of St. John, etc.

Of Syracusa.
THIS was a City of the Isle of Sicilia, built by one Archia of Corinth,
standing close by the Sea Shore on the North side of the Isle, 2756 miles from
Jerusalem toward the West. It was a fair and goodly City, in ancient time
called Tetrapolis, because it was divided into three parts: one of which parts
stood in the Isle of Ortygia separated from the Continent with a little
straight Sea, and with that famous Fountain Arthusia. The other part was called
Acradine, and the third Tycha; to which in aftertimes there was built up a
fourth, and called by the name of Neapolis. All this City was compassed in with
three Walls, so strong and so admirably fortified both by Nature and Art, that
it opposed the Carthaginians in equal War. It was called Syracusa, from drawing
or sucking; and in process of time obtained the whole Jurisdiction and
Government of that Isle; which was so well peopled in the time of Dionysius the
Tyrant, that he was able to make and maintain an Army of one hundred thousand
Foot and twelve thousand Horse. There were two Havens in that part which was
called Ortygia, so marvellously fortified with such huge Rocks and other
Munition, that they were wonderful to look upon. There also stood a Castle or
Tower called by the name of Mercia, which was so strong, that when all the rest
of the Town was conquered, yet that maintained War for a long time. In this
Hold the Kings and Tyrants of this Country usually kept their Treasures, and
other things that were material. There were many worthy and famous Princes
ruled in it, but above them all Dionysius the elder exceeded the rest; who when
he saw what abundance of Vessels of Gold and Silver Dionysius the younger had
heaped together, cried out and said, In te Regius affectus non est, qui ex
tanta poculorum vi amicum neminem conciliasti: That is, Verily, the mind of a
King is not in thee, that out of so many Cups could not procure one Friend:
For after he was banished, and constrained to keep a School. Both these
Dionysians were learned Men and great Philosophers. It is thought that this
Island was some time a part of Italy, and joining to the Field of Brutius; but
in time, through the violence of the Sea, separate from the Continent: From
whence it was called Sicilita, and also Trinacris, because there were three
Mountains standing upon three Promontories in three several places of it,
giving the proportion of a Triangle; for there was an Angle toward the South
called Pactinus, another toward the South-west called Lilybaeus, and another
called Pelorus, which lay distant near about two miles from Italy. In times
past it was under the command of the Romans, but now the Spaniards have chief
Government of it. There are many things remaining to this day worthy
observation, but chiefly the Mountain Aetna, which still casts out Fire and
Smoke, etc.

Of Rhegium.
THIS was a Town of Italy, belonging to the Family of the Brutians; at first
built by the Calcidonians and Messenians, upon the utmost bounds of Italy
toward the Sicilian Sea, being distant from that Isle sixty Furlongs, and
called by the name of Rhegium, as some think, from Rumpo, to break; for that
near about the place where that Town stood, the Sea being very Tempestuous,
broke the Isle of Sicilia from the Continent. Others think it was called
Rhegium, because it was so strong and beautiful a City that it might well have
been the Seat of a Prince. Close by this City, in the Sicilian Sea, there
stands a Rock somewhat above the Water, representing in Figure the Proportion
of a Man, and round about it are to be seen other little Rocks like barking
Dogs. In this place the Water is so extreme violent, and runes with so strong a
current, that it is very dangerous for Mariners (especially such as are
ignorant) to sail that way. Wherefore the Poets made this verse, to signify a
man that stood in a Dangerous and Doubtful estate, Decidit in Scyllam cupiens
vitare Charibdim.
Seeking to shun Charibdis curled Waves,
He thrusts himself into stern Scylla's Jaws:
But that Mariners might avoid these dangerous places, upon the North angle of
Sicilia, in the Promontory of Petorus, there is erected a lofty Tower, standing
as a Sea-mark, that so they by that direction might escape these dangerous
places. Not far from Scillari is to be seen another Town, of that Rock called
Scyllacus, but of the Inhabitants it is commonly called Scyglius, or Scyglio;
and Rhegium also at this day is called Rezo and Reggio, of Antimnestus Captain
of Chalcedon: and as Strab. lib. 6. says, is situated in Calabria, 1332 miles
from Jerusalem Westward.

Of Puteoli.
THIS City is in Campania, a Country of Italy not far from Naples, situated on
the Sea Shore 1381 miles from Jerusalem Westward: taking that name from
Fountains or Wells of hot Water, being built by the Salamians, as Eusebius
says, about such time as the Tarquins were banished Rome, 507 years before the
Nativity of Christ. It was anciently called Dicaearchia, because of their
singular Justice and Noble Government. But when the Romans made War upon
Hannibal, they fortified this Town to withstand his Forces, and then called it
Puteoli, which name it retained a long time after. At this day it is called
Puzzoli.

At this City the Apostle Paul and his Companions arrived, when they sailed
into Rome, Act. 27. Between Puteoli and Baia there lies the Lake of Lucrinus,
into which, by the command of Augustus Caesar, a Dolphin was thrown. Now there
was a young Youth called Simon, the Son of a poor man dwelling in Baia, who
usually played among other Youths upon the Banks of this Lake: and seeing the
Dolphin (it being a strange Fish in those parts, and very amiable to look upon)
did take great delight in it, and often times fed it with Bread and other things
as he could get: insomuch, as the Dolphin when it heard the Boy's Voice upon
the Bank of the River, would resort to him, and receive at his hand his
accustomed Food. Thus it continued so, that the Dolphin would suffer the Boy to
handle him, take him by the Gills, play with him, yea, and sometimes to get
upon his Back, then swim with him a great way into the Lake, and bring him back
again, and suffer him to go safe upon the shore. After this manner he continued
for many Years together, and in the end the Youth died. Yet the Dolphin
resorted to his usual place, expecting his accustomed Food from the hands of
this Boy; but missing him, he left the shore, languish'd away, and died.
Concerning the nature of this Fish you may read more at large in Pliny, lib. 9.
cap. 8.

Of Colossa.
THIS City is situated in Phrygia, a Country in Asia minor, near the Rivers of
Lycus and Meander, 520 miles from Jerusalem North-westward, not far from
Laodicea; so called from the mighty Statues and Colosso's that were set up in
it. These Cities, Colossa, Laodicea, and Hierapolis (where the Apostle Philip
was put to death in the tenth year of Nero) a little before Paul's Martyrdom,
were sunk by an Earthquake, which without doubt was a great judgment of God
upon them, because they refused the Grace and Comfort of the Doctrine of the
Gospel offered unto them by the Apostles. The Epistle of Paul, dedicated to the
Colossians, was sent by the hand of Onesymus from Rome unto these Towns, being
1080 miles. For although the Rhodians were called Colossians because of that
famous Colossus that stood there; yet this City wherein Archippus and Philemon
dwelt (to whom Paul directed that Epistle, stood in Phrygia, a Country in Asia
minor, and not in Rhodes.

Of Nicopolis.
NIcopolis is a City of Macedonia, situated close by the River Nessus, not far
from Philippus upon the Borders of Thrace, 920 miles from Jerusalem
North-westward. From hence the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistle to Titus, and
sent it to Crete, 600 miles. There are many other Cities of this Name; one
standing in Epyre, built by Augustus; another between Cilicia and Syria, built
by Alexander, in glory of his Victory against Darius; a fourth in Bythinia; a
fifth in the Holy Land, formerly called Emmaus.

Of Rome.
THis City, if we rightly consider the derivation of the Name in Hebrew, was
not built without the singular Providence of God; being derived of Rom, i. He
has exalted or made high. But the Grecians derive it from Romen, i. Strength
and Power. Now although the Providence of God extends to every Creature, nay,
to the very hairs of a Man's Head, yet where he determines to express his
singular Power, there he works beyond the expectation of man. And who knows
not that the beginning of this City was mean, raised from a confused Company,
destitute both of Civility, Community, and Laws; yet has it been, and for the
most part is, the glory of the World, and the great Commander of the Princes of
the Earth.

It was so called at first by Romulus (as Livy, lib. 1. says) who first built
it, seven hundred fifty and one years before the Nativity of Christ; being
situated upon seven Hills, that is, Capitolinus, Aventinus, Palatinus,
Cealius, Exquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. But after, when the City was
compassed about with Walls, the Hill Ianiculus was enclosed within it. The
Valleys that lay between these Hills were so raised up with Arches, Vaults, and
artificial Mounts, that in process of time they became level with the top of
some of those Hills. It was beautified with fair and sumptuous Buildings; so
that as it was the head of the World for Command and Power, in like manner it
exceeded all the rest of the World for Glory and Riches, but principally for
stately Buildings. There were many goodly Temples, dedicated to Jupiter,
Apollo, Aesculapius, Hercules, Diana, Juno, Minerva, Lucia, Concordia, Fides,
Pietas, Pax, Victoria, Isis, besides many other dedicated to other Gods. But
above all, that was the most sumptuous that was called Pantheon Deorum; at this
day called the Church of Alhallows.

Moreover, here was to be seen the Princely Edifices of Kings, Emperors,
Consuls, Senators, Patricians, and other Romans, who were mighty in Wealth and
Substance, built all of polished Marble, beautified with Gold and Silver;
beside Palaces, Bulwarks, Theaters, triumphant Arches, Statues, and such like;
all which were glorious, and greatly adorned the City. But above all these, the
House of Nero was most worthy of Observation, which to see to, was built all of
burnished Gold very curiously wrought. Here also stood the Monuments of the two
Caesar's, Julius and Augustus; also their Statues, the one made of pure Brass,
the other of white Marble. Besides, there were many fruitful Orchards, Water
Courses, and wholesome Baths, brought thither by Antonius, Nero, Dioclesian, and
Constantine the Great.

Also the Emperor Constantine erected many goodly Churches for the use of the
Christians, and endowed them with great means; and amongst the rest, that which
was dedicated to St. John of Latteran, a fair and goodly Church, and for Riches
and curious Workmanship might compare with the stateliest Temples that ever had
been in the World, most of the Ornaments and Images being made of Gold and
Silver: he also erected the Vatican, which was dedicated to St. Peter; and
another holy House dedicated to St. Paul; in either of which he placed their
several Sepulchers and Monuments, bestowing extraordinary Cost to beautify
them. So many were the Gifts and Gratuities of this Emperor, that they can
scarce be numbered; so that although the Emperor Trajan, and Boniface the
Fourth, Pope of Rome, bestowed great Cost to beautify and adorn the City, yet
were they nothing comparable to that which this Emperor did. These things then
being presented to your view, you might justly say, That Rome in her Prosperity
and Eminency was the Glory of the World; but as all Estates are fickle and
uncertain, still subject to Variety and Change, so was this: first envied of
the World, because of the extreme oppression of her Governors; and after made
desolate by Violence and Force, all her former Glory being eclipsed, and the
greatest part of these goodly Buildings laid level with the Ground. Thus have I
showed you what Rome was when it was in her Prosperity; it rests now to show
what Rome is.

Rome at this day differs as much from the ancient Rome as the Substance from
the Shadow. For, although the Pope has beautified and adorned the West part of
it with many fair and goodly Buildings, and called it by the name of new Rome;
yet it is nothing comparable to the ancient City, as it was when Augustus and
Constantine the Great were Emper^ours thereof, neither does it stand in the
ancient place; for the first City stood upon the East side of Tyber, this upon
the West. The chief part of the other stood upon the Mountains Capitolinus and
Palatinus, upon which were the stately Buildings of Senators, Kings, and
Emperors, but now they lie desolate and waste. The Capitol also, and the
Temple of Jupiter Feretrius (goodly Buildings) beaten to the Ground; only some
Ruins, to show that such things there has been. And what now rests, that
are worthy note, are in the Command and Power of the Pope; which are not many:
the most that can be named, are the Vatican, the Tower of S. Angelo, the Pope's
Palace, his Banqueting House, and the Gardens and Walks about it; which are so
well situated, that they are a grace to all Rome, the rest are but ordinary
and common Buildings. Thus may you see that there is nothing in this World but
has a period, to which, if with much Labor it attaineth, then it commonly
declineth, seldom continues; for who knows not with what labor, what perils
by Sea, what dangers by Land, through how many Foreign Wars and Domestic
Seditions Rome was raised to her greatness? And how suddenly was all this lost?
What the Virtue and Wisdom of grave and resolute Consuls, Captains and
Commanders had with great hazard heaped up, thrusting their Capitol and other
Treasuries full with the Triumphant Spoils of Foreign Nations, was left to be
consumed either by Seditious Soldiers or prodigal Emperors, and the State
left as a Prey to those that were mightiest; so that they were accounted most
honorable, that with most Injury could get to themselves either Countenance to
oversway Authority, or Opulency to purchase Eminency; insomuch that there has
been no action so evil, nor any attempt so pernicious in former times, but may
be matched in the declining of the Roman State: Where more Murders? where more
Corruption? where more Oppression than is mentioned in Histories to be
practiced amongst the Romans? the Lives of Men, the state of Provinces, and the
Crowns of Kings sold for Money, but now her time is finished, and her Ruins are
left for succeeding Ages to admire; that so in beholding they might learn to
know the difference between Virtue and Vice; and from thence conclude, that
there is nothing permanent; and that those things wherein men most glory do
oftentimes soonest decay. For if this City which commanded the Nations and
Princes of the Earth (whose Colonies, Armies, Legions, Confederacies, and
Treasures were so Mighty, and extended so far, that there was almost no
Country unconquered, or Nation that did not fear to hear the Inhabitants
thereof named) is made desolate and laid level with the Ground* what then may
be said of petty Cities, Towns, Lordships, Manors and Houses; shall not they
likewise be subject to the like Calamities, and wasted and destroyed through
the continuance of time? Verily yea. Wherefore let not the King glory in his
Power, nor the strong man in his Strength, nor the Rich man in his Riches: but
let him that glories glory in the Lord.

A Table of the Persons, Towns, and Places mentioned in the foregoing Treatise.
A.
ADam Fol. 51 Abarim 93 Abel of the Vines 94 Abner, and his Travels 145
Abraham, and his Travels 56 The typical Signification of Abraham 62 Absalom,
and his Travels 148 Achor 98 Aethiopia 154 Ajalon 98 Alexandria 244 Amanus 271
A^^^chus Epiphanes and his Travels 245 Antiochus Eupator 269 Apamea 242 Aphec
123 Achitophel 142 Arabia 395 Aroer 114 Asdod 99 Azeca 98 Asteroth 66 Athens
410 Antipatris 419 Ahab, and his Travels 164 Aeziongaber 91 Arbona Ibid. Almon
Diblathaim 93 Athniel 105 Arad 106 Abdon 115 Ascalon 117 Of the Ark of God 123
Abiathar 134 Abishag 150 Ahaziah 165 Ahaz King of Judah 185 Ahaziah 180 Athalia
181 Amazia 182 Azariah Ibid. Adoraiim 176 Abia Ibib. Abiin 177 Aza Ibid. Amos
216 Ammon King of Judah 187 Assarhaddon 196 Abelmehola 205 An Instruction to
understand the Prophets. 223 An alphabetical Table of all the Cities and
Countries mentioned in the Prophets from 224 to 232 Abimelech, and his Travels
111 Abiathar, Abimelech's Son, and his, Travels 134 Ange 240 Antiochia 396
Asseremoth 253 Adarsa 259 Addus 265 Addor Ibid. Arabath 267 Alexander, Son of
Epiphanes 270 Alcimus, and his Travels 280 Arbela 281 Adummim 324 Aenon 325
Antiochia Pisidia 400 Attalia Ibid. Amphipolis 409 Apollonia ibid. Assus 415
B.
BAbylon from 191 to 194 Babylon in Egypt 381 Baaena, and his Travels 148
Baesa, and his Travels 161 Bazra 237 Baelath 152 Benhadad, and his Travels 172
Benhadad II. 174 Berea 112, 182 Bethabara 325 Bethania 363 Bethoron or
Bethocoron 152 Bethel 72 Bethlem 75, 318 Bethphage 364 Bethsaliza 129 Bethsan
132 Bethsemes 124 Bethsura 176 Bethulia 242 Beerzaba 61 Baalzephon 85 Benei
Iaachon 91 Balaan, and his Travels 94 Beseech 410 Bahurim 144 Baalhazor 148
Baaelath 152 Ben Merodach 197 Balthazer, Emperor of the Assyrians 201 Bildad
239 Bithron 146 Bischamath 265 Bethsaida 344 Bethbesan 263 Bythinia 405
C.
CAdes Barnea 90 Caesarea Philippi 337 Caleb, and his Travels 104 The typical
Signification of Caleb 105 Caphar Salama 259 Carchemis 200 Carmel 129 Cedron,
or Kydron, a little Hill that runs through Jerusalem 368 Chasor, or Hazor 264
Crete, and the Situation thereof 273 Chehelah 89 Chasmona 90 Chesbon 93
Chineroth 173 Cilicia 141 Caspin 258 Caspia 233 Chazor, a Field 264 Canah in
Galilee 321, 330 Capernaum ibib. Chorazin 345 Of Cana Syrophoenicia 353 Of
Mount Calvary 369 Caesarea Strato 378 The Isle of Cyprus, and how it is
situated 397 Corinthia 412 The Isle of Chius, and how situated 416 Cous, how
situated, and why so called 418 Of the Isle of Clauda, and how situated 423
Of Colossa in Phrygia 418
D.
DOthan, so called from commanding 80 Doch, a Castle 268 Dora, a Haven Town 275
Dibon Gad 93 Deborah and Barak 107 Debir 99 Danites, and their Travels 119
Demetrius Soter, and his Travels 269 Demetrius Nicanor, and his Travels 272
Decapolis, and why so called 354 Derbe 400 David, and his Travels 135 The
typical Signification of David 144 Damascus, a famous City of Syria 394 Dibon
Gad 93 The Prophet Daniel 212
E.
ELeazer (Abraham's Servant) and his Travels 69 Esau, and his Travels 77 The
typical meaning of Fsau ibid. Edrie 94 Elim 86 Eglon 99 Ehud 105 Of Mount
Ephraim 106 Eson and Ebzan. 114 Estaol 117 Elimelech 122 Ecron 124 Engedi 130
Endor 132 Ella 162 Elah 183 Ezekias 186 Evil Merodath, Emperor of Babylon 201
Eliah the Prophet, and his Travels 203 The typical Signification of Eliah 206
Elizeus or Elisha ibid. His typical Signification 208 Ezekiel 241 Elam 115
Egbatana, a famous City ibid. 240 Euxine Sea 218 Eleutherius 264 Esdrasthe
Lawyer 233 Of the Book of Esther 235 The Types and Figures collected out of
Esther ibid. Eliphaz the Temanite 238 Esdrelon 241 Ephraim 363 Emmaus 371
Ephesus 383 Queen Candaces Eunuch, and his Travels. 389
G.
GIhon, a Hill 28 Gerar 61 The Country of Gilead 73 The Land of Gosen 76 Goren
Atad 80 The Graves of Concupiscence 88 Gideon, Judge of Israel. 108 The typical
Signification of Gideon 111 Gilgal 97 Gibithon 161 Gibeon 98 Gaza 100 Of Mount
Gerizim 112 Gath 124 Of Mount Gilboa, where Saul killed himself 131 Gazer 144
Gesur 147 Gurbaal 184 Gath Hepher 217 Gesem 241 Genezereth 264 Gadara 339 The
Lake of Genezereth 340 Of Gethsamene, and the Gardens thereabout 367 Of the
Country of Galatia, and how the Inhabitants came to be called Galatians 402
Gnidus 422
H.
HAran, or Charan 57 Hebron, and the Inhabi^^^^^ thereof 60 The Field of
Hakeldama 29 The Hill Hamoskita ibid. Hazezon Thamar 66 Hadad, and his Travels
158 Hagar, and her Travels 67 Hagar's Well, and the Signification of it 68
Heliopolis, otherwise called the City of the Sun 80 Hadsi 147 Of Mount Horeb 84
Hazaroth 88 Harada 89 Hor gidgad 91 Of the Mountain Hor 92 Hazor 101, 108
Hemath 97 Hai or Ai ib. Hiel 163 Hobab 106 Hasael, and his Travels 173 Hannah
the Mother of Samuel, and her Travels 122 Haggai the Prophet 222 Hananias the
false Prophet 211 Hosea the Prophet 215 Of the Prophet Habaccuck, when he
lived, how he lived, when he died, and where he lies buried 222 Of the River
Hydaspis 240 Hion 173 Hyrcania 274 Heliodorus, who would have robbed the
Treasury of Jerusalem 276 Hermopolis, or he Town of Mercury 320 Hosea, King of
Israel. 170
I.
OF Jerusalem 5 Of the Situation of it 16 The Description of it ib. The
Circuit and Bigness of it ib. The Gates of it 26, 27. The Destruction of
Jerusalem by Vespasian, from 29 to 37 Of Jerualem after this Destruction, from
37 to 40 Of Jerusalem as it is now, from 40 to 46 Of the Sects in Jerusalem,
from 46 to 51 Where Ishmael dwelt 69 Of Isaac, and his Travels 70 The typical
Signification of Issac 71 Jacob, and his Travels 72 The typical Signification
of Jacob 76 Judah, and his Travels 78 Joseph, and his Travels 79 The typical
Signification of Joseph 81 Jotbatha 91 Igim 93 Jahza ib. Jaezer ib. Iael, and
her Travels 106 Joshua, and his Travels 95 The typical Signification of Joshua
101 The Names of the Kings that Joshua overcame, and where they dwelt 102 Of
Jehoahas King of Israel 166 Jaboch Jogbeha 110 Jotham 111 Of Jaier Judge of
Israel 112 Jephta, and his Travels 113 The diverse Opinions concerning his Death
114 Jabes 122 Jonathan, Saul 's Son, and his Travels 134 Of the Country called
India 153 Jeroboam, and his Travels 159 Of Jeroboam's Wife, 161 The Journey of
the men of God which came out of Juda ib. Jezreel 164 Jehoram, and his Travels
165 Jehu, and his Travels 166 Jehoahas ib. Jeroboam, the second of that Name,
and his Travels ib. Jehosaphat, and his Travels 173 The typical Signification
of Jehosaphat 179 Joab, and his Travels 146 Ioram King of Juda, and his Travels
ib. Of Joas King of Israel 167 Joas King of Judah 181 Jabnia 184 Jotham, King
of Juda, and his Travels ib. Josiah, and his Travels 188 Jehohahas King of
Juda, and his Travels ib. Jehoiakim King of Juda, and his Travels 189 Of the
destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar 190 Of the Prophet Isaiah 208 Of the
Prophet Jeremiah, and his Travels 210 Of the Prophet Joel 216 Of the Prophet
Jonah, and his Travels 217 The typical Signification of Jonah 221 Japho 217 Of
the holy Man Job 236 Of his three Daughters 239 Of Jesus the Son of Syrack 244
Judas Macchabeus, and his Travels 253 The typical Signification of Judas
Macchabeus 259 Jonathan, and his Travels 260 John Hyrcanus, and his Travels 268
Jason, and his Travels 277 John Baptist, and his Travels 323 Jericho 97, 362 Of
Joseph of Arimathea 363 Joppa 380 Jordan 100 John, and his Travels 381 The
testimony of the Fathers concerning John 383 Iconium 400
K.
KIriathaim 66 Karkor 110 Kirjath jearim 119 Kyr 195 Kerith 205 Keder 240
Kegilah 134
L.
LAbassardach 201 Lot, and his Travels 62 Of Lot's Daughters 65 Of the Kings
that took Lot Prisoner ib. Of Libnah 89, 99 Lachis ib. Libanus 100 The Levite
and his Trav. 120 Lais 119 Of Lacedemonia, called also Sparta 278 Lidda 378
Laodicea 388 Lystra 400
M.
DIversity of Miles 1 Of Mount Moriah 8, 62 The allegorical Signification of it
9 The Buildings upon Mount Moriah 19 Of Mount Acra, from 21 to 23 Of Mount
Bezetha 24 Of the Mount of Olives 28, 365 Of the Mount between Bethel and Hay
59 Machanaim 74 Mount Seir 77 Moses and his Travels 81 Midian 83 Marah 85
Mithca 90 Maceheloth ib. Maseroth 91 Makedah 98 Merom 100 Mizpah 113 Minneth
114 Michmas 129 Maon 130 Memphis, by whom, and when built 155 Menahem, and his
Travels 168 Maresa 176 Manasses, and his Travels 187 Micah 221 Malachi 223
Mallos 241 Mattathias 252 Meda^a 263 Menelaus and his Travels 278 Of a Mina 284
The Virgin Mary and her Travels 315 Machares 325 Of the holy Mountain near
Capernaum 338 Misia 406 Of the Isle and City of Mitilene 415 Of the Isle and
City of Miletus now called Malta 417 Magdala 354 Of the Island Milete 422
Merodach 197 Myra 419 Of Masloth 281
N
OF Neapolis or the new town 25, 408 Of Noah 56 Of Nimroth ib. Nob 130 Nadab
161 Nabach 110 Naaman the Syrian and his Travels 173 Nebuchadnezzar and his
Travels 197, 198 Ninus or Niniveh, when built, and by whom 219 Nahum the
Prophet 221 Nehemiah the Prophet 234 Naphtaly 243 Nazareth 317 Naim 339
Nicopolis 429 Niriglissoroor 201
O
OF the Cave of Odullam 7 Oboth 9 Omry, and his Travels 162 Obediah the Prophet
216 Orthosia 276 Onias, and his Travels ib.
P
OF the Pool of Bethesda 12 Of Paradise, and where it stood 51 Of the Palm or
Oak of Mamre where Abraham dwelt 59 Penuel 74 Of Pihachiroth 84 Phunon 92
Pisgah 94 Of Phrygia 404 The Plain of the Vines ib. The Philistines Travels
from their Camp to Michmas 133 Pharaoh and his Travels 155 Peka and Pekahiah
169 Of Phul Belochus King of the Assyrians and his Travels 194 Pharaoh Necho
King of Egypt and his Travels 203 Pelusio 200 Persepolis, when built, by whom,
and why so called 250 Ptolomais 264 Of the Country of Parthia 274 Perea 338
Peter and his Travels 374 Allegations of the Author to prove that Peter was
never at Rome 375 Of the Island called Pathmos 385 Of the famous City Pergamus
386 Philadelphia 388 Philip and his Travels 389 Paul and his Travels 391 Of
Paphos, why so called 399 Of Perga ib. Of Philippa 408 Patara 420 Puteoli 427
Q
THe Queen of Saba and her Travels 159
R
OF the Roman mile 2 Rachels Grave 75 Raemses, at what time it flourished 84 Of
the Red Sea ib. The Mystery of the Red Sea 85 Rephadim 86 Rithmah 89 Rimmon ib.
Rissa ib. Rechob 97 Of the Rock Eta 117 Ramah 120 Reason, Solomon's Adversary
159 Rehoboam and his Travels 175 Of the four Rivers that watered Paradise 52 Of
the River Cheber 212 Of the River Eulaeo 214 Of the Angel Raphael 243 Of Rages,
a City of the Medes ibid. Of the Isle and City of Rodes and why so called 419
Rhegium 427 Rome and why so called 249 Rogel 148
S
OF Stades or Furlongs 1 Of Mount Sion 7 The Allegorical meaning of Mount Sion
8 Of the Springs and Fountains about Jerusalem 28 Of the Sarazens and Turks
from 48 to 50 Of Sem 56 Sichem 58 Sodom 63 Of the Sea Asphaltites ibid. Of the
Valley Siddim 67 Succoth 75 Salem ib. The Desert of Sin 86 Of Mount Sinai ib.
Of Saphar 89 Sidon 100 Sampson and his Travels 115 The typical Signification of
Sampson 110 Of the River Sorek 117 Samuel and his Travels 124 The typical
Signification of Samuel 126 Saul and his Travels ib. The typical signification
of Saul 133 Sur 143 Sunem ib. Suchar 144 Shimei 149 Solomon and his Travels 150
The typical signification of Solomon 153 (...) Travels of Solomon's Ships 153
Saba, and the Situation of it, 154 Samaria, by whom built 163 Seleucia, when
it was built and flourished 273 Syria ib. Of the Star that appeared to the
Wisemen of the East 322 Sychar 332 The Sea of Galilee 338 Teh description of
the holy Sepulcher 369 Sallum 168 Saerah King of Aethiopia, and his Travels 177
Salmanasser, and his Travels 195 Senacharib, and his Trav. 196 Sysach, King of
Egypt, and his Travels 202 Sarepta 205 The Sunamite and her Travels 208 Of
Susan 213 Serubbabel 234 Sobal 241 Simon, and his Travels 265 Sephala 268 Of a
Sicle 283 Siloh 101 Simon of Cyrene who carried Christ's Cross 372 Samaria 376
Smyrna 385 Sardis 387 Saba 390 Salamais 398 Samothracia 407 Samus, an Isle 417
T.
TAnais 59 The desciption of the Temple 91 Of the Porches or open Courts of the
Temple, from 11 to 15 Of the Allegorical or Spiritual meaning of the Temple,
from 16 to 19 The Tower Antonia 20 The Tower Ophel ib. The Tower of the
Centurions 21 The Travels of the two Angels 64 the Tower Aeder 76 Thimnah 78
Thahath 90 Tharah ib. Thabor 107, 355 Thebes 111 Tholah 112 Thob 113 The
Travels of the Children of Israel when they fought against the Benjamites 121
Thecoah 149 Thamar 152 Thirza 160 Thipza 169 The Travels of the People that
Salmanasser carried into Captivity 1^0 Tiglat Phulasser, and his Travels 195
Tyrus, or Zor. 200, 347 Thisbe 205 Tharsis 206 Tobias 242 Of the City Tharsus
250 The Tubiani, a People 258 Tripolis 270 Tryphon, and his Travels. 274 Of a
Talent 284 The Travels of the Wise Men out of the East 321 The Travels of our
Savior Christ in his Infancy 326 The Travels of our Savior Christ from his
Baptism till the first Year of his Ministry 327 The Travels of our Savior
Christ in the second Year of his Ministry 333 The Travels of our Savior Christ
in the third Year of his Ministry 340 Tyberias 345 Trachonitis 353 The Travels
of our Savior Christ in the fourth Year of his Ministry 356 Thyatira 387
Tarsus, or Tharsus 393 Troas 407 Thessalonia, or Thessalonica 409 Trogillium
417
V.
THe Valley of Cedron 24 The Valley of Hinnom 28 Vizziah, or Azariah, and his
Travels 182 Vriah, ad his Travels 211
W.
OF the Walls that compassed the City of Jerusalem 25 Of Weights, Measures, and
Moneys, from 283 to 311 The way between Iudaea and Egypt 320
Y.
THe Years of the Iniquity of Israel 160
Z.
ZOan 59 Zin Cades 92 Zalmona ib. Zarea 117 Zoba 129 Ziph 131 Ziglag 143
Zemeraim 160 Zephah 104 Zachariah 168 Zarea 176 Zedekiah 189 Zephaniah 222
Zachariah ib. Zophar 239 Zabadei 264 Zacharias 314 Zidon 350 Zeboim 133 Zimri
162
FINIS.

