Bull-Feather Hall: OR, The Antiquity and Dignity of HORNS, Amply shown.

As also a Description of the Manners, Rites, Customs, and Revenues belonging
to that ingenious and numerous Society of Bull-Feathers Hall.

Together with an exact Relation of their manner of going to Highgate with
Trumpets and Horn-Musick, and their Pioneers intended for the levying of the
Hill.

LONDON, Printed for the Society of Bull-Feathers Hall. 1664.

To the Noble Patron, and the ingenious Society of BULL-FEATHER HALL.
Sir, give me leave to speak but what is true,
I dare aver, Horns don't belong to you.
Yet though they do n't it is not amiss to know
What Cuckolds are, though none of you are so.
Accept these lines then, and the Author says
That he will wear y'r Feather for his Bays
Bull-Feather-Hall, OR The Antiquity and Dignity of Horns amply shown, etc.
THe bare naming of Bull-Feathers-Hall, will rather amuse such as understand
not what it is, than give satisfaction what is meant thereby. Therefore to
avoid prolixity, I shall take in hand the subject matter, to wit, the Horn, and
so in short wind up my discourse. What the Bull's Feather signifies, there is
none so ignorant but may easily conjecture, and none so wise but has or may
have it, to the obtaining of which, jealousy is the readiest way. To show how
far this ingenious Society is from the least suspicion, they publicly play
with those Feathers which are the emblems of other men's aching foreheads. They
are wise as the Serpent, that most of all guards and looks to his head, and are
withal harmless (or as it is in the Original, hornless) as Doves. Now the
truth of it is, there are none Cuckolds but such as think themselves so, which
proceeds from consciousness of some defect, and so the word signifies by three
letters therein contained, if you will believe the ancient and Orthodox
Expositors of the Word, O cold, O old, K knave, which put together is
cold-old-knave, or as others would have it derived from Cock old, according to
the French coquage, as much as to say, an aged Cock. This Etymology is drawn
barely from supposition, since the youngest and most lusty are not exempted out
of that number; when the sign is in Capricorn or Aries there is no withstanding
the fate of Cuckolding. Coy and squeamish stomachs disrelish sound, solid and
wholesome flesh, when a nicety, a codlin, or so forth, they shall greedily
swallow. Nor is it the bucksome girl alone, but the seeming chaste Diana that
transformed Acteon's head, therefore there is no restriction can deter a woman
from having two bolts to her door, if she so please; and for that same reason,
it is Epidemical patience only that must destroy the growth of that budding
infamy. It is only the strength of imagination that does oftentimes convert the
Asse's long ears into horns; thus much concerning the rise of the name, now
touching the grounds for which they are said to wear Horns: And truly it is no
wonder so many have them, since the first lesson they learn is taken out of
their Hornbook; the reason I say that they are said to wear Horns, may be drawn
from the effect thereof, to wit, plenty; that man need not want that has an
handsome Woman to his Wife, that will be as willing to entertain, as he to
conceal and wink at the actions of amorous visitants. Hence it was that the
Ancients pictured Rivers with a man at the head thereof, with an Horn in his
hand, intimating plenty flowing through it; Others will have it derived from
the Indians, they having this custom, that whosoever presented and Elephant to
any woman, though married, might freely lie with her, which the Husband took as
a great honor, that his Wife's beauty deserved so great a present, and
therefore kept the horns to be shown, as we do our Coats of Arms. Neither do I
know why any should be ashamed of his Horns, since the Gods in former times
were pictured with them, their Statues being made of Ivory. It Is storied, that
Horns grew on the head of Cippus, which were presently interpreted, that he
should be Emperor.

Moreover, Aries and Taurus, the Ram and Bull are signs in the Zodiac, whereas
Vrsa Major and Minor, with other creatures, whose heads were never adorned with
Antlers, are content to enjoy the honor of a constellation. Mahomet in his
Alcoran declares, that the world is supported by an Ox; it is not improbable
but that he meant the people who are called a Beast of many Heads, and
consequently of as many Horns. An Ox in former time was held in such great
estimation as to be accounted a man's fellow, and whosoever killed him was
adjudged worthy of death: what this Ox was, and what moral may be drawn from
hence, I shall leave it to others to imagine. Besides, of what great use horned
Beasts are to mankind, none will deny, either for food, as the Bull, Ram, Goat,
Stag, etc. and their flesh not alone, but the Horns of some are of most
excellent use in physic: the Hearts Horns, and Unicorns Horns being the
greatest cordials that are. Take off your eyes from the earth, and take a view
of the superficial Heaven, and there observe the Moon Horned, Aries and Taurus
horned, besides Capricorn, etc. all which have their operations and influences
on us mortals. It is the Moon that makes us become Lunatic, or Horn mad, and
therefore Tom-a-bedlams wear Horns about them, as acknowledging her power: but
such of Bull-feathers Hall wear them to give the world to understand how free
they are from suspecting their Wives intregrity, making a public laughter at
that which so much troubles others. This ingenious Society does, as Plempius a
famous Physician did, write of the sight learnedly and elaborately though he
himself was blind, or as D. Harvey composed an excellent Treatise of generation
whereas he himself had no Children. But something more of the dignity of the
Bulls Feather. Jupiter when he fell in love with Europa converts himself into a
Bull, not scorning to wear what he gave to others, although he ventured his
taking up for a sacrifice. Mars on such another amorous account turns himself
into a Ram.

It will not be amiss since we have treated of the dignity of Horns to speak
something of their antiquity. Rabbi Joseph affirms, that Cains mark was a
Horn in his forehead; Cupid they say for certain tips his bow with horn: and
therefore the Ancients report, that in the Chapel of jealousy, the music of
the Quire was Rams Horns and Cornets; the horned Moon, or Diana, had her usual
sacrifices of Bulls heads; there are none but have heard of the battering Rams
of old, and how the walls of Jericho fell by the sound of Rams Horns: The
Spaniard of old made an Office which they held in great honor called Gent. of
the Horn, and happy was that Citizen that could be admitted into so high a
place. Heralds make Horns a good bearing in Arms, and the Germans fancy above
any thing to have them for their Crests; among us it is an ancient custom to
have Horns in Halls or Parlors to hang Hats or Cloaks on, and some at this
present take great delight to drink out of a Horn, and truly I am apt to
believe that Corona which signifies a Crown, is derived from Cornu a Horn;
hence the Italians call the Duke of Venice Crown Corno, and is not much unlike
an Horn, Seleucus and Lysimachus gave strict charge that their Statues should
have Horns, in memory of the Bulls they held by the Horns flying from the Altars.

To conclude, in the nonage of the world, there has been some born with Horns
really growing on their heads. Who then but Horn-madmen will be displeased at
the sight of a Horn? the way to make it no eie-sore, is to be familiar with it;
accustom your selves to it as we do, and you may look upon a Bulls Feather,
and yet your eyes not water. The men of old pictured Madam Luna with her shoes
turning up like an Horn, from whence we draw this moral, that all jealous
suspectful and distrusting thoughts that cause the growth of the Bulls Feather,
are to be trodden under our feet, choosing rather to wear seemingly what we have
not, than to carry what we imaginarily have obscurely in our pockets. We take a
course to stab jealousy to the heart, that it may not excruciate us with
disquieting thoughts; we know that the curbing females of their desires does
but coach them to run headlong into precipices, and if we fear to be deceived,
we teach them but to decieve; and to be sure, where jealousy is Jailer the
wife will not fail to break prison. Jupiter ingeniously confesses, that it was
Juno's suspicion that was the cause of his transformation into a Bull,
bellowing out his lustful desires; It is very certain, according to the opinion
of most Physicians, that imagination produces real diseases, and by conceiving
a thing it seals an impression or idea of the thing imagined, and therefore
fancies of being cornuted never trouble our heads, we have a supersedeas
against them, and have erected to our selves an Assurance Office for our wives
chastities: Provided, they should get a fall, we must consider they are, not
Angels, but flesh and blood, and live among Englishmen, in Latin called Angli,
as if one should say, good Anglers in other men's ponds, therefore do not lace
them too strait, lest you make them go awry; the tyranny of constraint will
never get the monarchy of hearts. Lastly, if it be your fortune that your Horn
must be exalted among the rest of your Brethren, be content, since 'twas the
decree of Fate; it is not absurd to inhabit where another has dwelt. Antoninus
that brave Emperor honored that person for loving too too amorously his
Empress Faustina. King Agis was so far from being troubled at Alcibiades that
cornuced him, that though it was publicly known, thought himself inconcerned
with his Wife's infamy. You see the Heathen wear patiently their Horns, and in
that even outvie a Spanish Christian; should it happen to any of us to have
Antlers carved to us, we should look upon them no more, than as the merry
thoughts of Pullets; and I should think him unwise that would throw away the
dainty bit merely for the resemblance of the bone: if you will not allow of
this doctrine, neither permitting Jove your Rival, nor admit of Pythagoras with
his golden Ship as Partner in your sheet, I wish you shipped in the ship of
fools, bound for Cuckolds Haven, but by the way dashed against the Rocks of
suspicion and discontent.

The Description of the Manners, Rites, Customs, and Revenues belonging to that
ingenious and numerous Society of Bull-Feathers Hall.
THis Club of Bull-Feathers-Hall is composed of selected Citizens, both
ingenious and such whom Fortune smileth on, besides Gentlemen of no mean rank
and quality. They meet every Tuesday and Thursday in the evening at seven a
clock, in Chequer-Yard in White-Chappel: Their intent of meeting is only to
solace themselves in harmless mirth and merriment, and to propagate good
society; when met at the time appointed, the Patron in his Crimson Satin Gown,
with his Cap furred and guarded with a small pair of Antlers, seats himself in
his Chair under a Canopy adorned with a large pair of Feathers: then is the
Crier of the Court commanded to proclaim, that every Brother of the Society
then present cover his head with Court Caps, and so pay in his Club to the
Stewards, which sit on the right and left hand of the Patron; the Table before
them is covered with a green Carpet, and before the Patron a large Velvet
Cushion, on which lies the horned Scepter and Sword. The Brethren in very neat
fur'd Caps, every one diversely adorned with Feathers (as the custom of the
Court is to call them) seat themselves promiscuously, or as he finds his
inclination leads him to delight in one Brothers society more than another.
They drink out of horn, which they call plate, and in the Room (which is very
large, suitable to the Society,) are placed round several sorts of Horns, which
they call Utensils belonging to the Court, Their Orders or Laws enacted are
very many, and are strictly observed, there are not any of them but what are
absolutely necessary, or necessarily convenient; for, cursing, swearing, and
blaspheming is forbidden, nay, abhorred and severely punished with a mulct. If
one Brother abuse another, either by word or action, he is fined; neither do
they tolerate carping at, or upbraiding other men's miseries, or meddling with
State affairs, and more especially Holy Writ, with many more very requisite.
Now if any Brother shall be complained on to the Patron for breach of any Order
contained in a long Roll, the Brother offending, is by the Controller brought
to the Bar; then is a Jury of three Brethren empannel'd by the Clerk, and sworn
by him on a blank book covered with Horn: the witnesses being sworn likewise,
they give in their evidence, upon which the Prisoner has full liberty to
tender his defense. By way of digression, it is extremely pleasant, nay
profitable to the understanding, to hear how ingeniously sophistical some will
answer the charge drawn up against them, and to observe with what moderation
and gravity the Patron weighs each particle, opening and stating the case to
the Jury, who after that withdraw, and according as they find the fact so is
the Prisoner fined, which fine is immediately paid unto the Steward, and laid
up in public stock; all which is done with sobriety and without contradiction.
There are several Officers belonging to the Court, which are elective or chosen
once a quarter, and so should the Patron; but he that now is has so prudently,
gravely and discreetly managed that honorable place, the society in general
has conferred upon him, that they are not inclinable to a new election.

The names of the Officers of Bull-Feathers Hall are these, The Patron. Two
Stewards. The Sword Bearer. The Mace-bearer Adopting Mace-bearer. Master of the
Ceremonies. Mr. Controller. Crier, or Porter.


As yet the Revenues of Bull-Feathers Hall is but small, and what does
appertain unto it lies dispersed. As Horn-fair, the toll of all the gravel
carried up Highgate-Hill; They have some propriety in Horusey and Cow-laue, a
considerable quantity of Plate the Horners owe them: Beyond the Seas
Crook-horn, Leghorn, and Oxman town in Ireland pay them constant tribute, nay
the Great Turk acknowledges himself indebted to them for his Demy-lunes. And
truly would every Brother that is so, or merits adoption into the Fraternity,
leave but a small legacy to this Society, their Horn of plenty would exceed all
others.

The manner of their going from Busby's folly to High-gate.
On Monday being the second of May, some part of the Fraternity met at Busby's
folly in Islington, where after they had set things in order by a due
consideration and consultation among themselves, they thus marched out --
ordine quisque suo. First a set of Trumpets, then the Controller or Captain of
the Pioneers with thirty or forty following him with Pick-axes and Spades to
level the Hill, and Baskets withal to carry gravel: what quantity of gravel
pits were ordered to be dug by that Tun of flesh (alias) the Viceroy of
Cornucopia, is yet uncertain. After them another set of Trumpeters, and also
four that did wind the Horn, after them followed the Standard (alias) an
exceeding large pair of Horns fixed on a pole which three men carried, with
pennants on each tip, the Master of the Ceremonies attending it, with other
Officers. Then followed the Flag with the Arms of the Society, with horned
beasts heads drawn thereon, with this Motto,

To have, and not to use the same,
Is not their glory but their shame.
After these came the Mace-bearer, then the Herald at Arms, with the Arms of
the Society, The Coat I cannot rightly blazon, but I remember the supporters
were on the one side a Woman with a whip in her hand, besides that of her
tongue, with a menacing look, and underneath half the Motto, Sic volo, sic
jubeo; on the other side a man in woeful plight, and underneath him Patientia
patimur. Then the Sword Bearer, and after him the Patron, on whose right and
left hand went the two Stewards in Plush Jackets with large red Scarfs, the
Patron in a Crimson Satin Gown; after these followed the rest of the Brethren
by two; each in a various fur'd and horned Cap, and were brought up by no mean
Officer with a large pair of Horns. The Crier or Porter being then Marshal went
by their sides.

In this Equipage they marched, and in very good order, attended by multitudes
of peoples, some admiring, as well they might, as being a strange sight and
unusual, others spending their judgments, and passing their verdicts according
to what their fancies represented. 'Twere impossible to relate those witty
taunts and replications that past interchangeably, therefore I shall pass over
all, and only give you an account of transactions at High-gate; approaching
near the Gate, the Viceroy of the gravel pits came out to meet them with his
Mace and Cap; and after several congratulations reciprocally past between them,
made a speech to the Patron at large in a full Horn of plenty. After they had
gone through the Gate, they came back, and so round the pond, and then came up
to the Gate again, where one made a speech, to this purpose.

HARK!
Methinks I hear censorious Mimicks say,
This is a May Game for some Holy Day.
Each day's a Festival, to them that may
With freedom sport themselves on every day:
Such are our persons, and our fancies, we
Both from confinement, and from Horns are free,
Who then controlls our pastime, or it scorn?
The greatest Gallants love to wind an Horn,
Besides it is customary to some Nations,
To take delight in imitating fashions.
But should most wear, what is for Cuckolds made,
Surely 'twould spoil the Feather-makers trade:
Our Feathers then don't shame us, since the best
Fancy themselves they have a fairer crest;
Whence observation plainly lets us know,
Imagination makes a Cuckold so.
The speech being ended, they went to dinner, which was sumptuously and readily
brought up at the sounding of Trumpets, and winding of Horns. All things were
ordered with such foresight and prudence, as it gave a general satisfaction to
all. After dinner several were adopted in manner and form following, the
Officers of the society in the several and respective places advanced about the
room twice, or thrice, singing the song of the Bulls-Feather in these words.

IT chanced not long ago as I was walking,
An Echo did bring me where two were talking;
'Twas a man said to his wife, die had I rather,
Than to be Cornuted, and wear the Bulls Feather.
Then presently she replied, Sweet, art thou jealous?
Thou can not play Vulcan before I play Venus:
Thy Fancies are foolish such follies to gather;
There is many an honest man wears the Bulls Feather.
Though it be invisible, let no man it scorn,
Being it is a new Feather made of an old Horn:
He that disdains it in mind or heart either,
May be the more subject to wear the Bulls Feather.
He that lives discontented, or in despair,
And fears false measure, because his Wife's fair,
His thoughts are inconstant, much like winter weather;
Though one or two want it, He shall have a Feather.
Bulls Feathers are common as Ergo in the Schools,
And only contemned by those that are Fools:
Why should a Bulls Feather cause any unrest,
Since Neighbor's fare always is counted the best.
Those Women who are fairest, are likest to give it;
And Husbands that have them are apt to believe it:
Some men though their Wives they seem for to tedder,
Would play the kind Neighbors and give the Bulls Feather.
Why should we repine, that our Wives are so kind,
Since we that are Husbands are of the same mind;
Shall we give them Feathers and think to go free,
Believe it, believe it, that hardly will be.
For he that disdains my Bulls Feather to day,
May light of a Lass that will play him foul play;
There Is never a proud Gallant, that treads on Cows leather,
But may be Cornuted, and wear the Bulls Feather.
The shortest, the tallest, the foulest, the fairest,
The fattest, the leanest, the common'st the rarest;
When they and their Ducks are all merry together,
Will be using tricks to advance the Bulls Feather.
A King and a Cobbler, a Lord and a Loone,
A Prince and a Pedlar, a Courtier and Clown:
Put all their degrees and conditions together,
Are liable always to wear the Bulls Feather.
Though Beer of that Brewing I never did drink,
Yet be not displeased, if I speak what I think;
Scarce ten in an hundred, believe it, believe it,
But either they will have it, or else they will give it.
Then let me advise all those that do pine,
For fear that false jealousy shorten their Line:
That Disease will torment them worse than any Fever,
Then let all be contented, and wear the Bulls Feather.
The Gentleman that is to be adopted, is arrested by the Sword Bearer in the
Patrons name, to be of that society. The Master of the Ceremonies immediately
places him in the Adopting Chair, where being sat, the Controller cries three
times, Ceremonies, at which all the Brethren are bure. Then does the Master of
the Ceremonies, take off his hat, and in stead thereof places on his head a
cap, and on a blanck-book Horned all over, gives him this Oath following:

The Oath that is given a Brother at his adoption.
In the Patrons name of the Bulls-Feather,
And the society met together:
I thee adopt, and on this book do swear
Truth to the smock, and what is to it most near;
And when thy natural strength thou find'st decay,
And on Veneral Viols can not play,
With fiddle stick and finger I command,
You frig and digitize with cap in hand,
And then a leg in querpo shall thou make;
This shall thou do for Madam Venus sake:
Lastly observe, thou shall esteem none other
Equal to this our Club, so welcome Brother.
After this there is another name given him, and so presented by the
Sword Bearer and Controller to the Patron, who with much gravity receives him.
At which all the Brethren make acclamations of joy: His name is entered, and the
Orders given him to read. To conclude, this ingenious society every quarter
keep a feast, choosing then new Officers. They are not so profuse in expense,
nor extravagant in their mirth as to render them incapable or forgetful of
doing works of charity, for on every such feasting day they give 12 dozen of
penny bread to the poor.

FINIS.

