VIRGINIA Impartially examined, and left to public view, to be considered by
all judicious and honest men. Under which Title, is comprehended the Degrees
from 34 to 39, wherein lies the rich and healthful Countries of Roanock, the
now Plantations of Virginia and Maryland.

Look not upon this BOOK, as those that are set out by private men, for
private ends; for being read, you will find, the public good is the Authors only
aim.

For this Piece is no other then the Adventurers or Planters faithful Steward,
disposing the Adventure for the best advantage, advising people of all degrees,
from the highest Master, to the meanest Servant, how suddenly to raise their
fortunes.

Peruse the Table, and you shall find the way plainly laid down.

By WILLIAM BVLLOCK, Gent.

19 April, 1649. Jmprimatur, Hen. Whaley.

LONDON: Printed by John Hammond, and are to be sold at his house over against
S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1649.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and the Lord
Baltamore.
Right Honorable,
HAD those worthy Gentlemen been so happy, to have labored for the settling a
just and equal Government, and designing the best advantages, as in
discovering the Country, this labor had been spared; Wherefore he humbly
prays, that you will look on this Piece as through a Prospective, by which you
have these places rendered at a nearer distance, and you may easily find the
impediments of their happiness; which, with as much ease as turning of the
Glass, you may remove far off, or out of sight: I must confess, it is some
boldness for a private person to deal with Governments; but when you shall
find I speak your thoughts, for having lustice impartially dealt, and this
from a smarting sense of injustice done, I am confident you will excuse me, and
the rather, for that I have shortened your Lordships studies, which as I have
often heard, are for settling such a Government in these places, as might keep
the Balance even: and if your Lordships, upon perusal, shall find me only to
aim at the General good, I am confident you will own me to be,

Your Honors humble servant, WILL: BVLLOCK.

TO THE GOVERNOR AND Council of Virginia, Health and Prosperity.
Gentlemen,
WHat your rules of Government or Justice now are I know not, but what they
were you will find in the ensuing discourse, wherein I strike at no man's person,
but at the general abuse. I can speak knowingly of some of your endeavors in
former times for Reformation; to which you will find the way laid down, which may
be done without eclipsing any power above you: it is proposed for absolute
Freemen, or a people under a higher power; it is a becoming garment, and
strongly put together: if you shall put it on, it will beautify the body of
your little Commonwealth, and make all men in love to dwell with you. When you
have read this over, you will find my love has swallowed up my loss, and that
there is nothing more desired, then the flourishing prosperity of unparalelled
Virginia, by

Your loving friend and Servant, William Bullock.

To his much esteemed Friends, M. Samuel Vassell, Captain Richard Cranley,
Captain Thomas Davis, Captain Benjamin Cranley, Captain William Ryder,
Captain Peter Andrews, and the rest of the Gentlemen Adventurers to the
English Plantations beyond Sea.
Most loving Friends,
Diverse of you having been pleased, to think me able to advise in Cases of this
nature, (when in truth, I have been more enabled by your questions put, then
you could by my resolves) I determined to join my own experience with such
Collections I had made from you, to compose a Tract, which might be useful;
wherein I intended to show, how Love, Profit, and Pleasure might be raised, and
after maintained by a sweet and orderly Government; and this is that which I
present ye: sure I am, if you weigh it well, 'twill be like a pleasant Garden,
where you may gather simples for many special uses: and although the Scene be
laid in Virginia, yet it may be applied to diverse other places. Pray believe, I
have not done this for the advantage of telling you in Print, I am your
Servant; but the necessity of a Work of this nature, at this time, there never
being any before, spurred me on: And since in this, I do but trace your steps,
in laboring for the public good, I doubt not but you will entertain it kindly,
and give the Author leave to style himself,

Your truly loving friend, Will: Bullock.

To his much honored Friends, the Knights and Gentlemen that importuned this
Work.
HAD you given me more time, I should have been larger in your satisfaction,
but this is what six nights could produce, which time you know is all I had;
and of this, the recollecting and reading my ancient studies took up much: but
what is done (upon examination) you will find is clear and true: and having
finished the work, fear (lest some material thing should be omitted) would
not let me sleep, when at last I found I had forgot to tell you that I am,

Your faithful friend and servant, William Bullock.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis small Work is undertaken for the general good, as well of the
Inhabitants, as the Adventurers, and therefore requires a familiar pen, and
plain matter, more then height of style: the Author had rather do good, then be
commended; therefore refused to let the Work be ushered in by the commendation
of others: he is not ignorant, what a slight esteem this place has amongst the
generality of the people, and knows a good name is sooner lost then recovered,
and that when men join with common fame to destroy a good Work, the Devil has
got a victory; wherein it is extremely considerable, how great an enemy he has
always been to the Planting of the Gospel, especially, in places where (as
here) the Natives own him for their God: Therefore let no man wonder, the good
of this place has been so much obstructed, since now they know by whom. I have
in this place lost some thousands of pounds, yet cannot harbor an ill opinion,
since I am fully satisfied, the fault was only in the men I trusted, and this
has been every losers condition: wherefore let the Country suffer no longer
under our hard censures; Good Laws duly executed, will make good men, and
quickly change the aspect of these places, there wanting nothing else under God
to make them flourish. Ambition, amongst other things, has been none of the
least hinderance: Therefore he does advise all such as intend to be laborers
in this Harvest, to study meekness, and the general good: for if it be well
considered, it is much better to be equal to, then a Justice of Peace, in which
sense he speaks himself; and if thou be such, then he is thine,

William Bullock.

The principal Motive, that drew the Author to this Work, was,
THat finding many Gentlemen have unsettled themselves, with a desire to better
their fortunes in remote places, and in this condition, inquisitive after the
several Plantations abroad, to the end they might make choice of the best, in
which they are much troubled with the various relations both by books and men,
whose only aim is to draw all men to themselves; and to further that Work,
are liberal to abuse all other places but their own: by which means men are
dispersed abroad in several small numbers, at great distances from each other,
which is very uncomfortable and disccusolate, whereas if they had been all
directed to any one good place, they might have been in this time a great and
flourishing people: and finding also (without disparaging of other places) that
this Country of Virginia is abundantly stored with what is by all men aimed
at, viz. Health and Wealth, so that there wants nothing to their happiness
that go over, but good Instructions, which were never yet endeavored, more
then to show the place; I thought that man that should kindly take the stranger
by the hand, and lead him to it, showing him not only the richest Mines, but
also how to dig them, would deserve much thanks.

I cannot omit, by way of Caution to my dear Contrymen, to admonish them,
That at this time there is much struggling to draw men to new Plantations,
never yet seated; and if they will peruse the books that have been set forth in
the Infancy of the most of our English Plantations abroad, they shall see with
what loss and dangers they have been settled; viz. by having their ships cast
away, for want of knowledge of the place; by want of food, till supplies; by
strange diseases, never before heard of; by Divisions and Factions amongst
themselves, and an innumerable of other Incidents happening to them, wherely
the places have been several times deserted, and again Planted, before ever
we could keep our footing.

Wherefore, I shall advise all men to make use of other men's woeful experience,
and to dispose themselves to such places as are already Planted, where all
difficulties are now overcome.

THE TABLE.
SECTION I.
THe Lands and Bounds -- in 1. Reanock. page 2. 2. Virginia. The temperature of
the Air -- 3. Maryland. What this Country affords, of Beasts, Fowls, Birds,
and Fish, for food, and commodity. -- viz. 1. Beasts for food. p. 4. 2.
Beasts of prey. 5 3. Fowls and Birds for food. ibid. 4. Birds for delight. 6
5. Birds of prey. ibid. 6. Fish, for food and commodity. ibid. 7. For present
use, and spending. ibid.

What Trees, Fruits, Roots, and Plants, are naturally found in this Country.

What English Provisions, and what stores are there at this time. ibid.

What Commodities are here found, growing from Nature. 8

SECT. II.
The true reason, how this Countries prosperity has been hindered, which is
termed the Countries Disease, which has been -- viz. 1. By the Government.
p. 10 2. By the Commodity that they have always made their Staple. 11 3. By
not raising Commodities, to drive a Trade for Ships. ibid. 4. By miscarriage of
good designs for Staple Commodities. 12 5. By the Indians. ibid. 6. By
malicious slanders. 13 7. By the unfitness of the people transported. 14

SECT. III.
How the Country may be recovered. -- viz 1. By an equal Government; and that
Government proposed. p. 18 2. By raising Commodities, for the constant
employment of Shipping; which has made New England and Barbado's flourish, and
will quickly do this, there being much more advantage in the place. 30 3. By
fixing upon Corn, Rice, Rape-seed, and Flax; and all the rest of the rich
Commodities examined, and how and when to be fallen upon, but for the present
laid by, with the reasons. 33

SECT. IV.
A Scale, whereby, after the proportion of 60. li. stock, all men may know how
to lay out their money for advantage. -- viz. 1. How they shall lay it out in
England. p. 35 2. How they shall dispose of themselves when they come over into
the Country. 36 3. What and how much ground they shall plough and sow, and
with what. 38 4. What their first years Crop may produce in the Country. 40 5.
If they will send it for England, what it shall produce there, and how to
insure it. 42 6. What they may be worth the third year. ibid.

A great encouragement to people of all degrees. 43

SECT. V.
How Passengers may be best transported, for Health, and Charge. -- viz. 1. By
the old way, with the convenience and inconvenience. p. 46 2. How to go in the
old way, and yet save a third part of the Charge. 48 3. A Victualling proposed
for the Planter, in his Voyage thither. 49 4. To go by New England Ships. 50
5. The best, and the nearest way, to go by the Newfound-land Ships, in March,
April, or May, where you may go at half the old Charges. ibid.

When the Gentlemen are over in the Country, how they shall dispose of
themselves till they be settled. 51

A great Encouragement both for Masters and Servants. -- Showing, How Masters
shall employ their Servants to their best profit, without their oversight, or
trouble. 53 How Servants shall work for their Masters, and themselves, without
hard labor. 54

SECT. VI.
How to reclaim the Indians. -- viz. 1. Wherein is first considered Love p. 54
2. Force. 55 It being not to be done either of these two ways, 3. A third way
is proposed. ibid.

SECT. VII.
An Advice to the Adventurer. page 60

An Advice to the Planter. ibid.

An Advice to Servants. 62

The Authors offer to all men; by which they will find he is unbyast, and in this
Work has no private ends.
He freely offers to all that shall be desirous to be further satisfied,
concerning any particular mentioned in this Book, or shall meet with any
Objections to any thing therein propounded, to repair to the Author, who will
clear all Doubts, and show them the best and newest Draught, or Plot, of the
Country.

Read this first, the Work next.
BEfore you cast your eye upon the Work it self, look steadfastly upon the
Author (and as thou likest him give him credit) whilst he tells thee that he
was never in this Place himself he writes of with such considence; and
therefore before he began, he had many struggling thoughts within him,
persuading and dissuading. But when he considered, it is no new thing, out of
collections to make up the History of a Kingdom; And that the Work is not so
much to set out the Country (it having been already done by many experienced
men) as to take off that Odium, that malicious tongues have thrown upon it; By
discovering the true grounds and reason why the prosperity thereof has been
so long obstructed, and to apply a perfect cure to it: As also having Warrant,
that the Places are what he sets them forth, from the discoveries of M. Heriot,
M. Lain, and Captain Smith, Printed near forty years since, and diverse
several Books lately Printed; and also, having discoursed severally, and at
several times, with Captain Mathewes, Captain Pierce, Captain Willoughby,
Captain Clabourne, and diverse others the principal men of that Country, here
in England, about nine years since, and his own father living there above
twelve years, besides Captain Andrews, Captain Douglas, Captain Pryn,
Captain Russell, and diverse other Captains and Masters of Ships, that have
constantly used that Trade; and lastly, 20 years experience of his own, bought
with 5000. li. he hopes all cause of doubt will be laid aside.

SECTION I.
THere having been already so many Books published of Gods blessings upon
these Places both for Health and Riches, I shall not need to trouble the Reader
therewith; the rather, for that the principal end of this Work is,
Man-Midwife like, to preserve the Mother already in Travel, and bring the
Child lively into the World, advising how to cherish it in the growth, until
it have strength to provide it self, wherefore I shall but give a short touch
of them: And first,

Of the Lands and Bounds.
THe Continent is upon the East bounded with the North and East Sea, garnished
with many delicate Islands of several Magnitudes, and to the West it has no
bounds, until you come to the West and South Sea, which is many miles over: on
the South side is many thousand miles of Land; on the North is Land to
New England, and many thousand miles further: the distance between Maryland
and New England, is not above 200 miles by Land, and in this distance there are
many English planted, insomuch, that there are Posts which go by Land between
Virginia and New England.

The Country is full of Hills and Dales, and fine Prospects, and toward the
Sea in Virginia very level, yet not without pleasant ascendings, and
descendings, but not of height to be called Hills: the body of the Country from
the River is generally woody, but not like ours in England, for they are so
clear from Under-woods, that one may be seen above a mile and a half in the
Wood, and the Trees stands at that distance, that you may drive Carts or
Coaches between the thickest of them, being clear from boughs a great height,
yet in the Summer they agree that the Sun shall injure none that puts himself
under their protection, whilst he refreshes himself with Strawberries and
Grapes of a most delicious taste, which grow there in abundance. There be many
fair Navigable Rivers, Rivelets and Springs, imbrodered with fresh Marshes and
Medows, very delightful to the prospect, sending forth exceeding sweet and
pleasant savours that perfume the Air, from the Sasafras, Strawberrie, and
natural Flowers; all which well considered, this place may well deserve the
name of the New -Paradise.

Whosoever desires to see the Draught of this Country, may look into Smiths
Travells, or into Mercators Atlas, and there he shall see the whole Continent.

The soil is a rich black Mould, for two foot deep, and under it a Loame, of
which they make a fine Brick, and with it plaster their Houses within, and
cover it over with Lime made of Oyster-shells, which is much harder and more
durable then our Lime in England, made of Chaulke, and of which there is
plenty: the outside of their Houses they commonly cover with Board, or case
them with Brick.

The next in consideration, is the temperature of the Air.
TO speak first of the most Southerly Climat, viz. from the degree of 34 to 36,
the Air is extreme pleasant and wholesome, as it was found by M. Ralph Lain,
M. Heriot and others, who with their Company sat down upon the Island of
Roanock, which is a little to the Southward of that place in Virginia, where
now the English are planted, in the year 1585, and continued there one year:
the Winter is very little, but it is to be observed, that as you pass from one
degree to the other Northerly, the Winter grows stronger and longer; this
place is but now upon Planting.

In that part of Virginia, where now the English inhabit, which is under the
degree of 37, and part of 38, the Air is pleasant and wholesome, especially to
those that are seated above the flowing of the Salt water.

But for such as are set down within the flowing of the Salt water, it is much
like in health as here in England upon the Salt Marshes, which are subject to
Agues and Fevers: the Winter is not much above six weeks, which begins in
December, and ends about the first of February.

Maryland is also very pleasant and wholesome, and is further Northerly, viz.
part of 38, and 39, and therefore more cold; the Winter longer then in
Virginia, but nothing like our Winter in England: whence it is, that some men,
in the Months of June, July, and August, finding their constitution of body not
so well agreeing with heat, retire themselves in those Months to Maryland,
which is but twelve hours passage by Boat from Virginia, and there enjoy
perfect health, although sick when they left Virginia.

What is in this place found, of Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fish, Trees, Fruits,
both for Food and Commodity.
Beasts for Food.
Elkes, bigger then Oxen, excellent good meat, and the Hide good to make Buffe.
Dear in abundance, excellent Venizon, and the Skins good Clothing.
Racoones, very good meat. Hares, Coneys, very good meat. Beaver, excellent
meat, and the Furre Rich. Squirrells two sorts, good meat.
Beasts of Prey, yet some of their Skins are valuable.
Lions, Bears, Leopards, But these and the Elkes are but seldom seen near
our English Plantation, their range being up in the Mountains. Foxes, Wild
Cats, Otters, Warm Furs. Martens, Minkes, Rich Furs. Wolves, but very few.
Poulcats. Weasells. Musk-Rats, so called, for that their Codds are stronger
sented then Musk-Codds from East India, and never to be worn out.
There are other sorts of Beasts, but their names are not known to the English.

Fowls and Birds for Food.
Turkeys wild innumerable, weighing above 50. li. weight. Heath Cocks, Pigeons,
Partridges, Black Birds, Thrushes, Dottrells, Cranes, Hernes, Swans, Geese,
Brants, Ducks, Widgeons, Oxeyes, Abundance, and exellent meat.
Birds for delight, some for singing, others for sight.
A Bird that sings after any Birds noat. Nightingales that sing sweetly. Red
Birds. Blew Birds.
Birds of Prey.
Eagles. Hawks of six several sorts. Owls.
There is many more that have no English names.

The next is Fish.
First, of those that are both Food, and may be made a very good Commodity,
there being in their seasons infinite plenty. Drums Codd Herrings Sturgion
Salmon.
Fish for present spending, and these are, Base Sheepshead Conger Eeles Trouts
Mullets Playce Soales Mackerell Brett Shadd Perch Lampreyes Lobsters
Shell Fish. Shrimpes Crey-fish Crabbs Oysters Cockles Muskles

All these Fish for delicacie far exceed the Fish in colder Climates: There
are diverse other Fish excellent good for food, but for that they are strange
to us, I omit them.

And that you may not want Bread to all this good Cheer, there is plenty of
Indian Wheat, Beans, and Pease.

Trees above twenty kinds, many no English names.
Two sorts of Oaks, Ashes, Walnut two sorts, Elmes, Cedar, Cipres, Mulberry
trees, Chestnut trees, Plumme trees, Puchamine trees, Laurel, Cherries, Crahes,
Vines, Sasafras.
Fruits.
Grapes, Plummes, Strawberries, Raspices, Maracokes; Puchamines, Muskmelons,
Pumpions, Apples, Pears, Quinces, Apricocks, Peaches, etc.
There is all sorts of English Fruit trees, insomuch, that out of one Orchard
has been made in one year fifty Butts of Perry, and out of another thirty
Butts of Cider.

For Roots, there is,
Potatoes, Parsnips, Onyons, Sparragras, Carrots, Turnips, Hartichokes, all
sorts of Herbs for Physic or Pot; all which grow without any such trouble as
is taken for them in England, and for delicacie far exceeding the best
Gardens here in England.
For English Provisions.
There is above thirty thousand Head of Cattle, and an infinite number of
Hogs, in such plenty, that you may buy Beese and Porke under sixteen pence
a Stone: Wheat and Barley is very cheap; most of them brew their own Beer,
and have diverse public Brew-houses, that brew excellent Beer and Ale: Goats
flesh, and Mutton, but not yet so plentiful, by reason they have not been
suffered to increase, till of late years: There is all sorts of tame English
Foul. There is above two hundred Horses and Mares, and above seventie Asses;
these came thither but of late years.
Natural Commodities of the Country are,
1. Silk grass. Of which, I have seen here in England dressed, exceeding
strong, and pure, fine like Silk, which without question would make strong
Stuffes. A piece of Grogram was made of this Silk-grasse, and presented to
Queen Elizabeth. Silk. In Roanock they found Silk-wormes bigger then Walnuts,
and were informed by the Indians, that higher in the Country there were
abundance, and bigger. Flax, and Hemp. Which differs something from ours in
the Leaf and Stalk, but thought to be every way as good. Alum, Nitrum,
Alumem plumeum. Are all to be had from a mighty Vein of Earth, that runs
all along the Sea Coast, on the Southermost part of Virginia. Wapock, Of the
same value with Terra Sigelata. Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentine; many Drugs;
Wine from three sorts of Grapes; Oil from Walnuts, and excellent sweet Oil
from three sorts of Berries, about the bigness of Acrons; diverse sorts of
Fur, Sivet Cats up Roanock River; where is Pearl also to be had, Iron,
Copper, Tynne, Lead, diverse kinds of sweet Gummes, several sorts of Dies,
Woad, and Sugar Canes, in Roanock.
To which you may add, they being now there, and which yields wonderful
increase, English Corn of all sorts, Rice, Flax, and Hemp, Potashes,
Rape-seed; and to say no more, you shall not find the Earth ungrateful for
any thing you trust her with.

And to encourage Gentlemen, that are desirous of winning honor, by making
Discoveries of such places as may bring the greatest Wealth and Riches to their
own Countries, in which they shall not only very much enrich themselves, but
eternize their Names; let them peruse M. Henry Briggs (that famous
Mathematician) his Book printed about 28 years since, wherein he makes it
plain, that a Trade from Virginia may be easily driven into the South and West
Sea, lying on the backside of Virginia, not far distant from thence, and so
consequently to the East Indies, and this by Rivers that have their Rise in the
same place, with the great Rivers of Virginia; but as the Virginia Rivers empty
themselves into the East or North Sea, so the other Rivers empty themselves
into the West or South Sea.

In the degrees of 34, and 35, they receive three Harvests in five Months of
the Indian Corn from the selfsame ground, viz. they sow in April, and reap
in June; sow in June, and reap in July; sow in July, and reap in August.

Virginia yields two Harvests in one year, viz. they reap their Wheat in July
and then sow Barley, and reap in October.

Their increase is general from 8 quarters to 12 quarters of an Acre.

Their Indian Corn yields them above 250 quarters for one.

English fruits that have been transported bear wonderfully, and twice as fair
as in England, and in deliciousness far exceeding what they were before;
their Apricocks and Peaches grow all on standing Trees, and not against Walls:
Let this suffice for the Country.

SECT. II.
I Am in the next place, in order to the Cure, first to discover the Disease of
this Country, and how contracted; The Countries Disease.
of which,

The Government is the greatest of all; for no wise man will either transport
himself, or send his estate to such a place where is no settled Government, and
wholesome Laws to preserve men's lives and estates, and to maintain honest
commerce.

The Government is, by Governor, Council, and Assembly.

The Governor is commonly a Stranger, sent from England, and is to last but
three years, in which time, he must not be blamed, if he do his own Work.

Amongst other things, he can call Trustees and Debtors to be of the Council,
which puts the Adventurer to a stand.

And this well considered, has gone a great way in the Disease.

For, by it Justice is stifled, and the Adventurer must never hope for Justice,
since the Debtor is by the Governors favor, made both Judge and Party; by
which means it is clear, the greater the Adventure the surer lost, for the
Trustee shall be the sooner a Councellor.

In these things I speak experimentally of such as were before, but do not
charge the present Governors, for by their care the Plantation is in some
reasonable condition of recovery.

Next, by the People.
The Assembly in manner as it has been chosen, has been mischievous, for
they have not been elected for their honesties and abilities, but by their
great Port, although maintained with an Adventurers purse; and such was the
Assembly, when most of them being bound to pay Mony-Debts, made an Act of
Assembly, that they should pay their Debts in Tobacco at 12. d. per li. when it
was sold at the same time in the Country for one penny.

The Laws were bad, and worse administered, by which means industry was
discouraged, and strifes countenanced.

The Counsels time, that should be better spent for the encouraging of others,
taken up in hearing, but not determining unnecessary strifes.

Next, the Disease grows by the Commodity they have and do make their
Staple; which,

First, from the very infancy of the Plantation, they have made Tobacco their
Staple, which has been sent for England in such quantities, as many years
there has been some hundred thousand pounds weight, not worth the fraught and
custom, and by this means many a poor Planter has been destroyed.

Secondly, Tobacco being once in the ground, is never out of hand till in the
Hogs-head; and, which is the misery of it, the Months of June, July, and
August, being the very height of the Summer, the poor Servant goes daily
through the rows of Tobacco stooping to worm it, and being overheated he is
struck with a Calenture or Fever, and so perishes: This has been the loss
of diverse men.

Thirdly, the Tobacco is ripe but once in the year, and Ships go for Virginia
at that time when they may have the Tobacco for their home-ward fraught, there
being nothing else to lade them, which makes many here in England think, that
it is a years Voyage to Virginia, whereas if there were other Commodities to
lade Shipping, they might go and return in four or five Months at the most, by
which means many a man that would willingly have gone away in March, had there
been Shipping to transport him, is of another mind, or has otherwise settled
himself before September comes, which is the usual time of going.

Fourthly, that by ships going in this manner, they are pestered with people,
who thereby are very much endangered in their healths, and the passenger is at
as much more charge in his transportation as otherwise he should be, for he
pays 5 l. 10 s. for a man's passage, and keeping his men at charge in the
Cooks Shops in Saint Katherines five or six weeks, stands him near in 3 li.
a man more, whereas, if ships were constantly going, it would not stand him in
above 4 li. 10 s. a man.

The Indians Treachery, like a malignant disease, has hindered many friends
from visiting it, for the massacre in 1622, wherein was slain 350, has scared
many people from coming to it, which if truly understood would not fright the
meanest spirit, since the English, by reposing trust and confidence in the
Indian, gave the opportunity, for it was not the strength of millions could
injure them. And whosoever shall read the relation of the massacre, set out
1622, will find there is no danger in them, except you give them weapons, and
stand still whilst they destroy you.

And next, the miscarriage of good designs for Staple commodities has added
much, wherein I could instance in particular, by whom the designs of making
Potashes, Rape, and Walnut Orle, and other Staples, as also setting up
Saw-Mills, were set on foot, and the particular reasons how they came to fail;
which was not for want of the Countries being plentifully stored with
materials, but by other casualties: the particuculars would take up too much
room in this place; My desire being to make this so short as the very essence
of the matter will bear, that it may not tire but delight and fully satisfy
the Reader: wherefore I will give you some few generals, whereby such may be
adminished, as shall come after, how to avoid the mischiefs they fell under.

1. The first is, that this Country being in it self so rich as is before set
forth, many men aiming from small stocks to be suddenly rich, have spent
themselves in courting their designs, and when all parties were agreed, not so
much money left, as would procure the License to marry.

2. Next, having built their designs upon some one Artificers life, his death
has brought destruction to the Work.

3. Or the Work being here formed and sent over, some principal part has
been lost, or broken, and none in that Country able to repair the loss, the
Work has suffered.

4. Or else having fully outed themselves at the first, what they intended to
adventure, and upon that expecting a sudden and certain return, when in
stead thereof they have been saluted with a Bill of Exchange to pay, or a
particular to provide a second supply; and being put by their confident
expectation, they fall into despair, and since it will not come at the first
pull, give it over.

5. They go in partnership, and upon some petty difference draw several
ways, and let the design to the ground.

6. A sixth is, that when men come fresh over, their Credits are sound, and so
soon forget wherefore they came, idling out their time, till their
new-contracted Debts overtake them, and so they and their designs are lost:
And this I have known to be the loss of many a good design.

Malicious tongues has impaired it much: For it has been a constant report
amongst the ordinary sort of people, That all those servants who are sent to
Virginia, are sold as slaves: whereas the truth is, that the Merchants who send
servants, and have no Plantations of their own, do only transfer their
Time over to others, but the servants serve no longer then the time they
themselves agreed for in England: and this is an ordinary course in England,
and no prejudice or hurt to the servant.

And lastly, the unfitness of the people transported for the Work, or being
fit, not well ordered, has hindered the Countries recoverie very much.

The usual way of getting servants, has been by a sort of men nicknamed
Spirits, who take up all the idle, lazy, simple people they can entice, such
as have professed idleness, and will rather beg then work; who are persuaded
by these Spirits, they shall go into a place where food shall drop into their
mouths: and being thus deluded, they take courage, and are transported. But
not finding what was promised, their courage abates, and their minds being
dejected, their work is according: nor does the Master study any way how to
encourage them, but with sour looks, for which they care not; and being tired
with chasing himself, grows careless, and so all comes to nothing. More
might be said upon this subject, were it fit: it is most certain, that one
honest laboring husbandman shall do more then five of these.

SECT. III.
HAving thus considered the Disease, and how contracted, I shall prescribe a
plain and easy way for the Recoverie, which shall be, first, by a wholesome
and equal Government, that may encourage, delight, and secure all men.

Before you enter into the Government, observe the Proposer, whom you shall
find more employed about the Foundation then the Building, since it is found,
that the first failing, the second cannot stand: And that he may not appear
altogether ignorant of what he undertakes, it is fit you should understand, that
amongst other things he looked into the Fabric of Englands Laws, and finding
Reason the Key, he endeavored to enter, where at the very first, his Reason
quarrelled with that part of the Building. wherein the dissent of fee-simple
estates was lodged, since the door only opened to let in the brothers of the
whole blood, but was shut against the brothers of the half, although they were
the children of one father; and that rather then let them in, though so near,
the estate must look an heir of the whole blood, though he can but call Cousin
at never so great a distance, who as it were shall snatch the estate away, as
if the half brothers were all Bastards. And prying further into this part, he
found many mischiefs depending on it; to instance one for all: A man in
poverty marries as poorly, and has a son; the Wife dies, he after marries
richly, and has many children, purchases a fee-simple estate, then dies: the
son by the first venture, enters and dies; his Cousin, it matters not in what
degrees distant, shall wipe the rest of the children of the estate which was
brought by their own mother. My reason told me, that the fathers own children
should be successively let in before the Cousin of the whole blood: but being
satisfied in knowing the harsh reason of this Law, which was only to preserve
the estate in the whole blood in a right line; he ventured further, desiring to
understand the uniformitie, but met such contrarieties of Judgments and
Opinions, both in Law and Equity, upon the selfsame Cases, occasioned by the
strength of Reason, more prevayling with one Judge then another, and Rules in
Pleading, accompanied with various Circumstances and Niceties, full of
Intricacies, and multitudes of Officers and Offices, (to know which severally,
requires an Age) had swelled these Buildings to that vastness, that he
plainly saw, it was not one man's whole lives study could make him Master
thereof; all which proceeded from the mixture of the Laws of other Nations, who
in several times had power over this Kingdom: all which considered, made him
retire, and to content himself in seeking upon what foundation this strange and
Labyrinth-like building was erected, which he discovered to be politic reason,
and then he thought whether (since the groundwork in the general was so good,
and those who had the Government so minded) those parts of the foundation, that
are so harsh and rugged, might not be altered and made more smooth and equal,
and the building made to answer: but he found it could not be, without apparent
danger to the whole, since so many with several titles had built their estates
upon it.

Next, he apprehended to take the whole building down, and the foundation from
the best of the materials new laid, and then, whether men might not in the
mean time, and until the fabric should be again erected, lodge their estates
in some safe hand, to be delivered them back, after the structure finished, by
some general and free title: he was presently answered; That happily many in
possession would willingly consent, but those interessed in estates Tail, the
heirs of the whole blood, and of the half, the heirs according to several
Customs, the Lords of Manours, and their Customary Tenants, and many more of
like nature, would never agree about the redelivery of them back. By which he
perceived it was impossible to alter any of Englands Laws, with Justice to all
interests, only some thing might be done to prevent the mischief that lay
upon the Subject in the course and proceedings of the Laws, and this no better
way, then having in all times faithful and able Lawyers, and that there might
be some better way found out to make such as intend to profess the Law, to
spend more time in their studies, before they undertake to advise men how to
lose their estates.

All which being weighed, he was resolved, that no structure could be so
commodious and delightful, as when it is carried up entire, with
consideration, that in case the Family increase, there might be additions
without defacing.

Wherefore having by the means aforesaid a little knowledge of the foundation of
Englands Laws, and having by experience found many mischiefs and
inconveniences to grow from several parts thereof, he considered, whether he
might not venture from thence to design a pleasant and entire building,
wherewith all men (not otherwise clogged and fettered with estates, held by
Ancient and intricate titles and Customs) might be taken, and cheerfully
contribute to the work: and upon enquiry after a place to set his Frame upon,
he found the foreign Plantations were already hard at work about it; but
having surveyed their Draught, he clearly saw they had left too many doors for
inconveniences, and which was worse, the foundation was mistaken, and so the
higher they built, the more dangerous. All which was easy to be rectified,
since in respect they were as yet but pined together with their interest under
a common title, and slightly fastened with personal ties: being glad of this
advantage, that possibly he might be the Author of so good a work, he
cheerfully undertook the Modelling the same. And finding that Government is no
other then the extraction of power into the hand of one or more, to the end it
may be dispensed upon all occasions for the peoples good and safety, he
considered, that those in whom the power rested, ought to be for wisdom,
justice, and integrity, drawn from the very quintessence of the people, which
must be done by a through knowledge of each other, whereby they would be able
from amongst themselves, to set the best, the first step toward the
Government, and they presently to have power over those that chose them, but
not to be in the Chusers power to call back; the highest power, after, shall by
steps raise them according to their abilities, which you will find more plain in
the following Government.

The Medell of Government proposed.
First, Before the going over of the Company, they together with the
Adventurers, to choose thirteen able and fit men to be of the Council.

Secondly, That these shall from amongst themselves This prevents strife about
elections.
make choice of an able man to be Governor; and this to be done by a
Balletting Box, that it may never be known who was for, or against the
Election.

This election being simple, gives way, that if there be one man in all the
Council, although the youngest in degree, fitter then the rest, he may as soon
arive at the Government as any of his Seniors, by which it is possible that this
Common wealth may be Governed by the wisest and justest men in the Country,
which cannot be, when two stand in competition for it, then the one must have
it: and this will draw every man to be ambitious to study the good of the
Country.
Thirdly, That the Governor shall be elected in manner following; viz. the
eldest of the Council to stand first singly for Election, but he to have no
hand in it; and in case the Election go on the Negative, then the next of the
Council in senioritie to stand, and so every man of the Council shall stand,
until the Governor be fixed. And in case the Electors shall be even, viz. six
to six, it shall be taken in the Negative: But if through Faction the Negative
shall go round, so that no man be elected, then the eldest of the Council,
that first stood for the Election, shall be Governor; This is a tie upon the
Governor, to walk equally and justly before the people.
And he at the years end shall surrender up the Government, and sit at the
Table as eldest of the Council: By this the Governor, if just, able, and
good, may continue his life in the Government.
And then the Council shall proceed to a new Election of the Governor for the
ensuing year; which shall be done in manner aforesaid, beginning first with
him that was the late Governor.

Fourthly, The Governor and Council to agree upon some knowing man of the Law
to be Secretary.

That the People may be satisfied of the equality of the Government, and that
all men may be encouraged to study the good of the Country, they shall find
steps raising them to the Government.
Wherefore I propose, That until the Country shall be in a condition to be
divided into Shires, Hundreds, and Parishes, the People shall be numbered by
Freeholders; and every forty or fifty Freeholders, more or less, according
to the number that are nearest neighbors, shall be called a Division, by the
name of the chiefest man inhabiting amongst them, or by some other name, as
shall by the Council be thought fit: And these to have power at a certain day
and place in every year, to meet within their own Division, and then to make
choice from amongst themselves of six able and fit men; and their names being
presented to the Governor, he By this it is possible, that the ablest and
honestest of the people shall always be in Authority: for this is the first
step to the Government.
by himself, in the presence of the Council, shall appoint three out of the
said six, who for the year following shall be styled the Superintendents of
that Division, and shall have such power as is hereafter provided: And at the
years end, the people of every Division shall in like manner meet, The people
will be careful to choose good, and able men, since those they choose shall
immediately exercise a power over them.
and shall make choice of three more from amongst themselves, whose names,
together with the last Superintendents, shall be presented to the Governor,
and he shall out of them, in manner aforesaid, appoint three that shall be
Superintendents for the following This will encourage men to be just and
deserving.
year: By this, the three first Superintendents, if found honest, may still
continue.

The General or Great Assembly shall By this means the people shall have an
Account of the Governors and Councels carriage for the general good.
consist of the said Superintendents, who at a certain day and place, every
year, as shall be most convenient, without further Summons, shall meet in the
Assembly, and in this Assembly, the Governor shall have the chief place, and
the Council to have places there according to their degrees. The Secretary of
State shall have a place By this a good understanding will be had between the
Governor and the people, and nothing in probability may be presumed shall be
moved, whereby the Commonwealth shall be in danger.
under the Governor, and shall be Speaker in these Assemblies: the Governor,
for that he is the Head, and has a power above them all, shall not Vote; but
hearing the Debates, and making Objections, he will be the better enabled to
use his power in his Negative voice.

But when the Country shall be so well This provides, there may be a good
Council of the wisest and honestest of the people, and by it a confusion of
Council and Councillors is avoided.
peopled, that there may be 50 of the Division aforesaid, then all the
Superintendents shall not come to the Assemblies in manner aforesaid, but the
people shall choose one of their three Superintendents, in every Division, to
come to the Assembly.

No Assembly shall sit longer then twenty days.

Before the rising of the Assembly, the Governor These 12 are next in degree
for Counselors, and in the Interim serve for excellent uses, as you shall see
hereafter.
shall appoint twelve men of the Assembly to be Assistants to the Council, for
the year following.

There shall be a Judge, or Judges. There shall be a Treasurer. There shall be
a Surveyer.
It must be agreed, when the number of Assembly men be known, what number of
Assembly men, and what of the Council shall make a Court.

All Laws shall be made in manner following.
They shall be proposed and debated in the Great By this course there can be no
surprisalls in making Laws, but all Laws will be truly understood and weyed,
before confirmed.
Assembly: And if the Vote of the Assembly be for the Law, then the Governor
and Council by themselves shall debate it; and if it be agreed by them, then
the Governor (who is also not to Vote with the Council) shall consider of it;
and if he assent to it, then to be a Law, otherwise not.

The Power of the Great Assembly.
Besides their consents to the Laws, they shall have By this, the people have
a tie upon the Governor and Council, and yet they be not endangered by the
people, but upon just and clear grounds.
Cognizance of Appeals from the Governor and Council, and shall examine and
punish all Briberie that any of the Council or Secretary shall be found
guilty of; and the Governor shall also be answerable to them for Briberie or
injustice done by him: But the Governor shall not be questioned, until the
Charge, if it be Briberie, shall be proved by Oath; and none of the Council
shall be questioned for any the matters aforesaid, unless the Plaintiff make
Oath of the truth of the Charge: And then the Charge being upon debate thought
fit to be taken into consideration, the party charged shall not be admitted to
sit in the Assembly till he be cleared, nor have any Vote upon the debate of
his Charge. No single Oath shall charge any more then one man of the Council,
but there shall be two men's Oaths to charge two, and three men to charge three,
and so for more. The fame of the parties swearing the Charge, either against
the Governor or Council, shall be first considered, if desired by the party
charged; and upon that, the Charge to be accepted, or thrown out.

The Secretary, Treasurer, and By this they are Servants immediately to the
Commonwealth, and not so easily drawn to serve ends.
Surveyor, shall not be displaced, but by the Assembly.

None of the Assembly, except he be It Laws established may upon some fond
conceit of a self-wise man be struck at, the Laws will be always tottering:
but if there be any Law inconvenient, let it be showed to the Governor, and
Council, who should best understand the Laws, and they being made sensible of
it, let them move it.
of the Council, shall begin any Motion in the Assembly against any Law
already made, upon pain of being dismissed the Assembly, and his other places of
trust in the Colonie.

All Assembly or Councell-men that shall presume to move any thing tending to
the subversion of the Government, or the apparent disturbance thereof, shall be
punished according to the merit of the offense, as the Assembly shall think
fit.

The Power of the Governor.
Besides his Negative voice in making of Laws, he shall have power to command
the due execution of the established Laws.

He shall on a certain day every year, in the presence of the Council, choose
out of the six presented to This may be either by himself, or with the
Council, as shall be thought fit.
him by every Division, the three Superintendents, and in case any of them dye,
or upon complant be discharged, then out of the three that shall be presented
to him by the Division, whereof he was a Superintendent that was discharged, he
shall choose one to supply the place of the dead or discharged Superintendent.

The people shall not present one man twice in one year to be a Superintendent;
all Warrants shall issue out in his name.

He, by the assent of the major part of the Council, shall give such titles to
men of desert, as shall be warranted by the Law.

He shall by himselfed etermine all Causes of Appeals in equity under 50. li.

He shall have an Arbitrary power in all matters concerning the peace, not
otherwise provided for by the Laws.

He shall have such allowance, and in such manner for the defraying of his
charge, as shall be agreed on by the Assembly.

He shall have power upon complaint, to discharge any Superintendents, and to
send a Warrant to the Division to elect new men, but the party discharged may
appeal to the Council, by delivering his Petition to the Secretary.

If any Division cannot agree about the choosing men to be Superintendents, then
he at the time and in manner aforesaid shall appoint three of that Division, as
he shall think fit to be Superintendents.

He shall treat with all Agents and Messengers from other Colonies, and after
advice had with the Council shall give answers.

He shall on a certain day, in manner Out of these 12 shall be always chosen
men to represent the Adventurers, in examining the Trustees accounts,
aforesaid, appoint out of the Assembly twelve to be Assistants to the Council
for the ensuing year.

He shall in manner aforesaid, nominate every forty or fifty Freeholders of
the nearest neighhourhood, that shall choose men to make Superintendents.

He shall take care of the Adventurers estates in such manner as is hereafter
provided.

He shall, with the advice and consent of the major part of the Council, call
Assemblies so often as shall be thought fit.

Upon complant of the Superintendents, he shall examine the Trustees of the
Adventurers Plantations, and shall prescribe such rules for the prevention of
the abuse of the Adventurers, as shall be thought fit, and shall refer the
punishment of the Trustees to the Council.

Upon the complaint of the Adventurers, he By this the Trustees shall not
prevail with the Governor, to get his friends nominated to take the accounts.
(without notice first given to the Trustees) shall appoint three of the
Assistants to audite and examine the Trustees Accounts, and report it to the
Council, who shall see Justice done between the Adventurers and Trustees.

The Secretary shall be assisting to him in all the matters aforesaid, to
inform the Governor what the Law is at all times, as occasion shall require.

No Appeal from the Governor, but to the General Assembly, except in case of
turning out a Superintendent, who shall appeal to the Council.

He shall determine all differences concerning place either in the Council or
elsewhere.

He advising with the Council, shall pardon death, but the Judge before whom
the matter was tried shall first certify.

He shall appoint two or three of the Assistants to audite any Accounts that
shall be in difference.

The Power of the Governor and Council Joint.
They shall determine all Appeals that shall be brought before them.

No Appeals from them to the General Assembly shall be admitted, until
obedience be first given to their Decree.

These, in all cases that concern the good of the Colonie, except raising men
and money, shall have an Arbitrarie power, except in such cases as are provided
for by the Law.

These, together with the major part of the Assistants, By this, the danger of
laying continual burdens upon the people is taken away. This prevents the
Governor for making a Council of his favorites, which if admitted, might be
destruction.
shall have power for the raising and levying of men and money for defense of
the Colonie, and an account thereof shall be given at the next General
Assembly, which shall be reported there by the Secretary.

These to have power over their Members, without the consent of the Governor,
and put out and take in by the former manner of elections, whom they please of
the Assistants, but shall not exceed their number, and they shall refer the
punishment of a Councellor to the Great Assembly, except imprisonment, which
they shall have power to do.

They, together with the Governor, shall have power to elect Judges, and
remove them, as they shall see cause.

They shall elect all Officers as are not otherwise provided to be elected.

They shall have power to question and punish all inferior Officers.

The Power of a Judge.
He shall keep his Courts upon such days, and in such places as shall be
appointed him by the Council.

He shall issue out his Warrants to the Superintendents, to impannell Juries to
attend the Court, and in case the difference happen to be between two men of
two several Divisions, then a Jurie to be made up equally out of both the
Divisions.

He shall sit in Court in the fore-noones, and try all Causes properly tryable
by Juries, and in case any matter of equity that he shall think fit be
offered, he shall after Verdict respite Judgment, and in the afternoon of
the same day, shall sit Judge in equity, where the Witnesses being all ready,
as may be presumed because of the trial at Law, he shall determine the equity
of the Cause: but if it shall appear to him that Witnesses, or papers were
wanting, and not by default of the party; Then he shall leave the Cause to the
Governor, if under 50. li. if above, to the Council.

He shall for discovery of the truth, examine the parties upon their Oaths if
desired, but in this case the parties Oath shall conclude the Cause.

If any captiall Offender be tried before him, and he shall think the Prisoner
capable of mercy, then he shall certify the Governor thereof, and for the
present reprieve the Prisoner.

He shall refer all accounts to be audited by such men as the Governor shall
appoint.

The Power of the Superintendents.
They shall once in a Week or a Fortnight keep a Court.

They or any two of them shall finally determine all Causes arising within
their Divisions, not exceeding 10. li. in which cases no Appeal shall be but for
apparent Injustice.

They shall call the parties before them in all other Causes, and end the
business if they can, but without coercive power.

None shall be admitted to sue or petition, unless he allege that the
Superintendents have had the hearing of the Cause, and could not end it. and in
case the Suggestion be false, then the Petitioner shall pay costs, and be
dismissed back to the Superintendents.

They shall appoint a fit Officer to attend them, who shall be as a Constable, to
execute all Warrants.

They shall have power jointly and severally in all Cases of the Peace, as a
Justice of Peace.

They shall command before them any Trustee of an Adventurers Plantation within
their Division, and examine him concerning frauds, or other indirect courses
taken, whereby the Adventurers may be in danger to suffer and reprehend him, or
certify the Governor, as occasion shall require.

They shall immediately take care of any Adventurers estate, upon the death of
a Trustee, and secure it until the Governor can be certified thereof, and he
take further order in it.

They shall cause all such Warrants to be executed, as shall be directed from the
Assembly, Governor, Council, and Judges to them.

No Appeal from any Court, but for Injustice, which must be made good in some
one particular, otherwise the party appealing, to make reparation to the
parties from whom he did appeal, as shall be thought fit by the Court appealed
to.

Concerning Adventurers,
All Adventurers that send any Adventure, may direct a Copy of his Adventure
to the Governor and Council, together with the names of the Trustee; who
shall before the Governor acknowledge himself to be trusted with the estate,
and from this time the whole Colonie shall take care that he be not injured, by
any indirect practice of his Trustee: and without this the Colonie shall take
no care of the estate.

No Bond or Bill shall bind any Trustee, unless the same be acknowledged
before the Superintendents and entered by them into a Book, to whom such Trustee
shall give satisfaction for his so running into debt.

None shall buy or take any Servants, Cattle, Carr, Plough, or Utensills
belonging to the Plantation of any Trustees to pawn, unless it be in manner
as aforesaid.

No Trustee shall be compted a Freeholder, unless he have 100 Acres of his own
Land stock't and manned, and a Plough going in it.

None but Freeholders shall be Superintendents.

All debts to be paid by any Planter in the year to come, shall be acknowledged
before the Superintendents of the Division wherein the Planter lives, otherwise
not to be recoverable which acknowledgement shall have the force of a Judgment.

If a Merchant complain of his Factour, the Governor in presence of the
Council, shall appoint either two Assistants or any Superintendencie to take
the account and certify the Council that Justice may be done.

If any Planter or Merchant dye the Superintendents of the place shall at the
perils of their Divisions, immediately seize upon the estate, and shall
inventorie and appraise it, and if the Executor or he that has right to the
Administration be not in the Country to receive the same, then they shall send
a Duplicate subscribed by them, of the Inventorie and Appraizment to the
Governor, that the same may be entered into the Register.

The Superintendents may put in such persons to manage the estate and take such
security from them, as they shall think fit for the whole Division shall be
answerable for the estate to the Governor, and the whole Colonie shall be
answerable to the party interessed.

But if the Governor, upon perusal of the Inventorie, shall find the estate
too weak to bear the charge of management, or that there is any dead
Commodity therein; then he shall direct his Warrants to the Superintendents,
to make sale of both, or of the Commodity only, as he shall think fit, who
shall appoint a day in the ensuing week for the selling thereof. But on the
Sunday before the day of sale, the said day, together with the particulars to
be sold, shall be published in their own Church, and three more of the nearest
neigbouring Churches, and the same at the day aforesaid shall be sold to the
fairest bidder, and a Duplicate of their doings herein subscribed, they shall
send to the Governor, which shall be also entered as a foresaid.

The Superintendents (for that the Division is to be charged) shall have power
to command all debts due to the defunct, to be levied or well secured, so that
nothing be lost by their negligence, otherwise the Division to be answerable
for it.

All money that shall be received, shall be paid to the Treasurer for the use of
the interessed, who shall not deliver it but upon the Governors Warrant.

By this means, the whole Colonie is chargeable to make good the estates that
shall fall in manner aforesaid.

Oaths to be drawn for Governor, Council, Assembly, Judge, Superintendents,
Overseers, and other Officers.

This Model will serve, either for a free people that shall sit down of
themselves, without any Superintendent Power over them for their protection, or
it may well agree with Superintendent Power in any Plantation already settled
(unless the Owner of that Power intend to rule by Will) if the Election of the
Governor be only altered in this manner; viz. That those who have the Power,
shall nominate the first Governor, and he not to be displaced but by the Great
Assembly; and after the Council, in manner as is set down before, to choose
three from amongst themselves, out of which, such as have the Power may appoint
one to succeed, and till his or their pleasure be known therein, the Council
out of themselves to elect a man to supply the Governors place.

The mischief, by sending strangers to govern this Country, who neither
knows the people nor their customs, neither they him, must be prevented, if
ever the Country prosper.

Study this Model of Government, and compare it with any other that has
been, or is now in being, and you shall find prevented those mischiefs, that
like so many degrees of poison make some giddy, others deadly sick, swelling
them to bursting. In it you may, see every man harmoniously working, according
to his several indowments of mind and body: first, to preserve it in health,
by stifling in the infancy all contentions and love-breaking strifes; next, to
feed, clothe, and enrich it, resolving with speed to make their Commonwealth
flourish; which cannot be doubted, since in it all are so much pleased and
delighted: the common people fitting and choosing the stones for this strong and
sumptuous Building, the Governor and Council laying and setting these stones
(so provided) for the best advantages, whilst the Adventurer is searching for,
and sending materials from all places.

Another good means to the Recovery must be by raising Commodities for the
constant employment of Shipping; and although this speak it self, yet examples
will do well.
And first let us look upon New England, a Plantation begun thirteen years
since Virginia, viz. in the year 1620, the ground no more comparable to
Virginia, then the North of Scotland, is to the South of England, they have no
Sugar, Indigo, Ginger, or any other of the rich Commodities before spoken of,
neither will they grow there; yet in this little time of 28 years they are
become a flourishing people, and with many gallant Ships built, and every way
fitted with materials raised out of their own Country; and also ladden with
their own Native Commodities, drive a Trade with all the world, insomuch as men
shall seldom miss passage for New England from London, once in two Months;
and by this means, have many fine Towns, and are full of people.

Next look upon that little Island of Barbado's not much bigger then the Isle
of Wight, which lay languishing of the disease Virginia now groans under, (till
within this five or six years past,) you may see how by the strength of an
indifferent Staple Commodity, viz Sugar, Indigo, Cotton Wool, and Ginger, it is
strangely recovered, that there is whole Fleets of Ships constantly going and
coming between it and England, so that Passengers are going, thither
constantly, and they are grown to that height of Trade, that it has been
affirmed to me from very good hands inhabiting in that place, that the last
year there was from all places employed thither above onehundred Sail of
Ships, and they are seldom without twenty, or thirty Sail in their harbor.

Yet I can well remember the time, when their fame was much worse, then
Virginia's now is.

By this means, they have great numbers of men transport themselves of all
degrees.

And all this is forced, by the commodity; for their Government is not so good
that any wise man should be in love with, nor is this Island so extraordinary
pleasant to entice men above other places, also the Adventurers have had as
indifferent measure there.

And this well and wisely considered, how much more shall that place flourish,
whereby a sweet and harmonious Government all men shall have fair and honest
dealing, in a land full of pleasure and delight, yielding abundance of the best
Staple commodities in the whole world.

The next help to the Recovery, must be by the commodity, we are to fix upon,
wherefore, we will examine all, and make choice of the best.
There is without question in this Country, store of Gold, and Silver Mines,
which I could clearly demonstrate, but the discovery will bring ruin to the
place, for all Princes, and Potentates claim an interest in Gold and Silver,
which they will reach with their swords. I shall say no more of them.

The next is Sugar, Indigo, Cotton Wool, and Ginger, the very Commodities of
the said Island; all which will grow on the Southermost part of Virginia, but
yet they will not do the work, for first the Sugar Canes and Indigo seeds to
plant, must be brought from the Barbado's or some other place, and then they
are two or three years before perfect; and experienced men will also be
wanting, and will be a work in respect of the charge, that but a few can
compass: and which is worst of all, the said Islands having gotten the start,
will make those commodities drugges, before our Harvest; for in this little
time, Indigo is fallen from nine shillings per pound, to three shillings six
pence, and I have heard some of the Gentlemen themselves say, that Indigo in a
very little time will not quit cost.

These are fine commodities for wise men to be doing with, indifferent
quantities, but not to be the Staples that must do the work.

The next in consideration, will be Wine, Reisons, Dies, and Drugges; truly
great quantities of these, will make them Drugges indeed: besides, the time and
money spent before they can be brought to perfection, may happily make the
poor Planter, with the horse starve, whilst the grass grows.

Yet I confess all these are very good to be brought on by degrees, without
prejudice to the main Design.

The next that offer themselves, are Mines of Copper, Tin, Iron, and Lead, of
all which, there is plenty in Virginia. These are clearly of the best sort of
Staples, but they require a great deal of charge and time to bring them to
perfection, and there is much of casualty happens in the working raised.

Therefore, if we run greedily upon them, they may chance to be too heavy for
us, either in lifting, or carrying.

Wherefore my advice is, that these things may be stolen upon, at most leisure
time, and when we have built a sure foundation upon Staple Commodities of a
quicker production.

And now will I think of Silk, Potashes, Rape, and Walnut oil: and these are
very good Staples. But yet when I consider, we are not all Potashes, nor
Oylemakers, nor Masters of the Silk-worme mystery, nor can presently be at the
charge, these are not such as must be built upon for the present Staples.

I will not say, but a single, double, or treble purse, so as they be strong,
may easily with great advantage effect any of the aforesaid Staples; and by
degrees, the rest may follow.

Then we find in the Country Masts for Ships, Pitch, Tar, Rossine,
Turpentine, Clapboard, and Pipestaves: These are good Staples, but gross
Commodities, and most of them fitter to be made use of in the Country for
building ships, and will do well when there are no other Fraughts.

These in their proportions are sure Commodities, and will help exceedingly,
after better Staples are set upon.

I will now present you with Englands Staples, amongst which I find Corn, Hemp,
Flax, Rape-seed, Cattle, Wool, to which I will add one more, that cannot be
had in England, and that is Rice, I am sure we can all be masters of the
Plough, and shall soon be Masters of the rest.

And here I fix for these reasons.

First, for that we may all fall to these works so soon as we are landed, and
the season come.

Secondly, because Flax, Rice, and Rape-seed will grow all the Country over,
and Wheat in all places, where the ground has been broken up before, of which
there is plenty upon every Plantation which is past bearing of Tobacco, yet the
best for Wheat; and there be diverse other places, where Wheat will prosper
exceedingly, that are not over-rich; for in many places, where the ground was
never broke up, it is too rich for our English Corn, sending up the Stalk so
high, that the wind lays it: and Cattle are there already in abundance.

The principallest reason is, that many Ships may be yearly laden by a few
hands employed in Corn, Rice, Rape-seed, and Flax, and if you observe but the
following Scale, you shall find three hands to make yearly above twenty two
tons of Corn, and Flax: and so proportionably a thousand hands employed in
Wheat, Rice, Flax, and Rape-seed, will yearly lade fifty Sail of Ships, of one
hundred and fifty Tun a Ship; by which it is evident that an infinite Trade
by Sea might be suddenly driven, there being already in this place above 15000
men, besides women, and children, and such numbers of Ships constantly coming
and going, would quickly people the Country: and it is not from the purpose
to show the failings of the first Adventurers for want of this foundation, for
if you peruse their books Printed 1622, you shall find after they have told
you, what the beauties are of the place, that their Commodities they intended,
were Cordage, Potashes, Iron, and the like; in all which many hands can make
but slow work, as to the lading of Ships, for the advantage of this place is,
to raise the best of rough Commodities to be transported. Where hands are
plenty, labor is cheap.

And for the greater encouragement, there is in this Country all materials
for the building and complete finishing Ships, to carry these Commodities to
their Markets: Before I go further, let me recollect my self, and think what
a blessed Country must this be, where Gods blessings severally distributed
upon other Countries meet all in one.

SECT. IIII.
A Scale, whereby after the proportion of 60. li. stock all men may know how to
employ their money upon this work.

This Scale is made for a Master and his two Servants.
li. s. d. A Plough every way fitted 02 00 00 Three Spades, three Shovells,
three Mattocks, two Felling-Axes, two Hatches, one two Hand-Saw, and 1 one
Hand-Saw. 01 08 00 Three gallons of Strong Water, and a Case. 01 00 00 One
Fowling-peece, powder and shot 01 15 00 A Casting Net 01 00 00 Hooks and Lines
to fish. 00 05 00 One Iron Pot, one Prying Pan, one Spit, wooden Platters,
Dishes and Porringers. 01 00 00 To be invested in Linen or Woollen Clothes,
Shoes, Iron-worke, or Stuffes, to be carried over. 20 00 00 28 08 00

This 20. li. thus invested you may be confident to make 40. li. in the
Country, since you are to deal with them for Cattle, Corn, and Flax-seed;
this Adventure shall provide Cattle for the Plough, Corn, Sow, Pigges, and
Poultrie for your House, and to sow.

For Clothing the two Servants.
Two Cloth Suites 01 10 00 Two Canvas Suites 00 14 00 Two woollen Drawers and
two Wast-coats 00 14 00 Six Shirts 01 00 00 Four pair of Stockings 00 07 00
Four pair of Shoes 00 12 00 Two Monmouth Caps 00 04 08 Six Neck
Handkerchiefes 00 04 00 Eight else of strong Canvas to make Bed and Boulster.
00 10 00 One Rug and two Blanckets 01 00 00 The abovesaid charge of Servants is
06 15 08 The passage of three will be 16 10 00 Head money to the Chyrurgion of
the Ship. 00 07 06 The fraught of a Hogs-head in tonnage 00 15 00 24 08 02
brought from the other side 28 08 00 the total is 52 16 02 Remaining of the
60. li. to be disposed of as he shall think fit, or he may carry another
Servant. 07 03 10

How the Planter shall bestow himself when he first comes over, until he can
settle; and what he shall employ himself upon, with a reasonable proposition
what in a year, God assisting, may by his labor be produced.
Now having thus fitted our small Family, I shall advise them, when they come
over, how to settle, which shall be in this manner, either for the first year
join strength with some Planter there, where he shall find them all willing to
receive him, either to diet, or he diet himself, and lodge with them; yet it
will be best for him to board; for he may board himself, and his two men for
twenty pound a year, and in this I speak much with the most; for my self was
offered eight years since, by Captain Matthewes, Captain Pierce, and diverse
others, to board all my Family at five pound a head, and to have better
entertainment then any Gentleman in England for thirty pound a year, and now
diet is much cheaper, and of this let no man doubt, since in the North of
England, Wales, the Isle of Man, and in the West he may diet at the same rate,
and cheaper the reason is, where money and Trade is not quick, diet is cheap,
so that if he resolve this course, which is far the best, then much of the
abovesaid charge might be saved, insomuch as he might carry over another
servant for the same charge, and being thus fitted, I shall advise him, to fall
upon some piece of the Planters ground, that is cleared, and left by the
Planter, because he has wrought it out of heart with Tobacco, and is to him
of no use, yet the best for this Design, of which grounds, there are great
quantities, the Planter will give him leave for nothing, or for a very
inconsiderable matter, and when his seed is in the ground, then he shall have
good time to look out where to fix, and after he has taken his first years
crop, then to remove to that place he intends to settle, where he shall have
one hundred, and fifty Acres, for ever; that is to say, fifty Acres for each
man he transports; and his Crop by Gods blessing, will then enable him to build
a pretty house, and treble his strength in Servants; and next year a Gentleman.

Let not our young Planter fear that he shall want any thing for being new come
over, and uningaged in the Country, his credit for any thing he shall want,
will be as good as the best man's in the Country, but let him not be bold with
it, lest he forget his errand, and loiter out his time in good fellowship, then
which, there can be nothing more dangerous, since he is but now entering into
his preferment: This Caveat is good, for it has lost many a man.

And now having fitted him to his work, I will advise him in it.

He shall plough but twenty three Acres, twenty whereof he shall sow with
Wheat, and three with Flax, for which work I will allow him eight weeks with
two hands, which may with much ease be done, the ground being light: but if the
Dutch ploughing comes in use, as I doubt not but this year it will, then one
man does the work of ploughing, and the two spare hands shall fall upon the
enclosing the ground that is a ploughing, and after the seed is in the ground,
the third hand falls in, there being nothing else to do till Harvest; long
before which, I doubt not, but the enclosing 23 Acres will be done, when they
may fall to building their new house, or preparing of ground against the next
year by enclosing.

The Harvest being come, the Flax is first to be reaped, which I should have
told you before, must not be sown till May, for which work and the beating
out the seed, I allow three weeks; then comes the twenty Acres of Corn to be
reaped, for which I allow three weeks; there needs no trouble of carting till
it be threshed, for it shall be threshed or trodden out with Oxen in the Field; I
shall allow six days in work for watering of the Flax; for the threshing of
the Corn I allow ten weeks, but if it be trod or rubbed out as in the Islands
with Oxen, a fortnight and less will do it; I allow twenty five weeks for
dressing nine hundred stone of Flax, in which a man shall dress but two stone
a day, in this work the year is completely spent; in England I know it would
be done in two thirds of the time, but I had rather value it as I do, that
every man may be satisfied of the truth of the proposition.

Now, notwithstanding what is so confidently reported of the great increase of
this Country, of which truth I am satisfied, I shall only esteem it equal
with the best of our English ground; and then five quarters from an Acre of
Wheat, and three hundred stone at 4 li. to the stone of Flax, and sixteen
bushells of Flax-seed from an Acre shall well content me; if there be more; it
will discourage no man, and it is well known, we have some ground in England,
that bears near six quarters of Wheat, on an Acre: and diverse of the
Flax-masters about London have confessed the Proposition for Flax, to be true.
Now let us turn our Commodity into money, and see if our labor be not sweetly
recompensed.

li. s. d. The 20 Acres produces me at 5 quarters an Acre, 100 quarters, which
I value but at 2. s. 6. d. per bushel, which is 20. s. per quarter, and is in
toto 100 00 00 The 3 Acres of Flax at 300 stone per Acre is 900 stone, which I
value at 1. s. 4. d. per stone, and is 60 00 00 48 Bushells of Flax-seed at 5.
s. per bushel. 012 00 00 By which it is plain, selling of the Commodity in
the Country, his years labor produces 172 00 00

What a strange Adventure that man runs, that puts himself in Print, he is
sure to be judged without hearing. Pray Gentlemen, speak out: but not
altogether; and I shall endeavor your satisfaction: you object, that the
Corn, lying so long in the field, before threshing, must be spoiled, or in
great danger; if you will enquire of the honest Gentry of that Country; they
will tell you the weather at that time is not inconstant, however, with little
labor, it might be stackt safe; your second is, who shall buy it?

Truly Sir, since it is for the Advantage of the work, I will admit your
objection, and so am driven to seek a Market, and for want of other Shipping,
am forced to send it for England, which in the common opinion, will be sending
Sugar to Barbado's.

But we are bound to see it, and now

I lade 100 quarters of Wheat shot in Hold, which is 20 Tons, and pay 3. l.
per Tun fraught, which is 60 00 00 Nine hundred stone of Flax, for which I
allow three Tun, at 4. l. per Tun, which is 12 00 00 The Flax-seed I keep
in the Country, for that will sell there. 72 00 It is ten to one you have not
less then 4. s. 6. d. a bushel for it in London which is 36. s. per quarter,
and is in all 180 00 00 The 900 stone of Flax of Virginia, being far beyond
other Flax in color and strength, I doubt not but it may yield 22. d. per
stone. 082 10 00 the total is 262 10 00 Fraught deducted 72 00 00 the
ramainder is 190 10 00 The price I would have taken in Virginia for the Wheat
and Flax was, 160 00 00 Cleared by this bad Market to petty charges and profit
over and above the money I would have sold it for in Virginia, 030 10 00

And I am confident a worse Market cannot be had, I hope having proposed every
thing we buy at the highest rate, and every thing we sell at the lowest rate,
and in the worst Market; you will be satisfied of the reality of the
proposition, and that it is a sure Foundation for a greater building.

I see you have something else, pray what is it? you would know what the poor
Planter shall do to supply him till the return of his Adventure, and then
what shall become of him if his Adventure miscarrie?

Truly you have give me that advantage by your objecting of dangers, that I
shall insure the Adventure and the new Planter at the end of the two first
years, shall insure him self to be in a better condition then the Gentleman
that in England has 200. li. per annum, and shall every year double his
estate at the least, and this with much ease.

Wherefore I must tell you that our Planters credit is strong, either in the
Country with the Planters, or with the Merchants, for so much if not more then
his commodity is worth; his old stock is still the same, and therefore wants
nothing, but to pay for his and his man's diet and their wages for the
foregoing year, which is 30. l. yet I will allow him to spend the overplus
above 100. li. which in the Country was 72. li. or in England will be more, and
this 100. l. in goods he shall send by the last Shipping that comes for England,
he needs not fear to have his Market forestalled since his commodity is so
Staple, and his advantage will be, that he may send his letters of advice to
his friends by the first Ships, that they may in England before hand know, what
Ships the Adventure comes in, and cause the 100. l. Adventure to be insured,
which has been usually done for 50. s. and the Adventure being arrived in
England, I propose it to be laid out for the Planters good in manner following.

50. li. for the passage and clothing of six men, which it will plentifully
do, since they will need nothing but clothes and to pay their passages.

06. li. In two Guns, powder and shot, Plough, Irons, and Iron-tooles, as he
shall appoint.

30. li to be invested in Commodities as he shall direct to buy more Cattle in
the Country.

02. li. 10. s. paid for the Premio of the first ensurance.

11. li allowed for petty charge, and content his friends that shall do his
buisines.

02. li. 10. s. to ensure the Adventure to Virginia. 100 -- 00

And now is our Planter secure of his estate, and when the Adventure comes
over, he is nine men strong, and by their reasonable endeavors may against the
next return, in the follwing year by the rule aforesaid, have an estate of
above 600. li. 00. s. besides his stock, which shows him he is in a happy
condition.

And to encourage the new Flanter, let him consider with himself that it is
but two or three years care, to bring him to this safe harbor, and what
pains and labor is taken by the poor Farmer in England, getting his bread
with the sweat of his brows, and after eating it with care and sorrow, and all
this but to pay his Land-Lord's Rent, and to procure some small subssistance;
whereas here is no Rent to pay, and yet the Land twice as good as the best in
England, food plenty, cost nothing but taking, which is done with much ease.

Rice, and Rape-seed are far richer Commodities, and done all with the same
or lesser care and labor, these grow best upon the richest ground, and
therefore most fit for the Country, the increase and profit much greater then
those I have taken to illustrate the Proposition by, for my desire was, to
examine the meanest of the said Staples; and let the best alone to help
themselves.

If all this will not make Thomas a Believer, let him then enquire of the
principallest straights and Spanish Merchants, walking the Exchange, and they
shall tell him, that when they can be satisfied that there is either Corn,
Rice, Hemp, or Flax to be had, there shall be no want of ships, and ready money
paid for it, at the rate that I propose, they will tell him a hundred pound
has been usually assured from Virginia for 50s.

Thus having brought the Planter to happiness in this life, I shall with some
few admonitions shake hands and leave him to the God of mercies protection.

First, that God be by him and his Family truly served, and before and after
work his blessing be duly implored.

Secondly, I shall advise him that he let not his mind rise with his riches,
for that is the ready way to forget that God that gave them, and to make them
like the sweetest sins that delight the body, but poison the soul.

Thirdly, That he halt not between this and any other design, let it appear
never so beautiful, but fall close to this, till he has put himself past
danger.

Fourthly, that he make no use of his Credit, but for absolute necessity.

For other advise, he shall find them under the title of advise in the end of
the book.

And now let me turn back, and look upon my poor Spirited Countrymen in
England, and examine first the meanest, that is, the poor ploughman,
day-labourer, and poor Artificer, and I shall find them laboring, and
sweating all days of their lives; some for fourteen pence, others for sixteen,
eighten, twenty pence, or two Shillings a day; which is the highest of wages to
such kind of people, and the most of them to end their days in sorrow, not
having purchased so much by their lives labor, as will scaace preserve them in
their old days from beggary: where by adventuring themselves, in a four, or
five weeks voyage (at most) over the Seas; which is nothing; they may with
less labor, and care, in four or five years see themselves in a condition
never again to want; but to live like Gentlemen, and that by their own Trades
they have been bred in, for where a great Merchant-like Trade is driven, as
will be suddenly in this place; all Artificers and handicraft labor is dear,
which will appear more plain, if we here in England, consider the difference,
between the North parts, where you may have a labourer for four, five, or six
pence the day, and London where we pay twelve, fourteen, or sixteen pence the
day, the reason is because of the great Trade that is driven at London by
Merchants, and the little or Trade in the North.

Next I shall look upon the poor Yeoman, For if 60. li. aforesaid shall
produce above 170 l. per annum. 200 li. which is the Estate I here value, may
produce much more then 300 l. per annum, and the Master live plentifully.
with ten, fifteen, or twenty pound per annum land, or the value thereof in his
purse; which with continual care helps him to eat bread; yet this Estate
weighed by the aforesaid Scale, will truly tell him, that being transported to
this place he is a Gentleman of three hundred pound a year at least.

Then come I sadly to look upon the poor Gentleman of fifty, sixty, or a
hundred pound per annum, who was happily the youngest Son of some Gentleman,
of a great Estate, which was settled upon the eldest son and this to keep up
the Family, only that the younger Children might be quiet, there is some
superfluities thereof, thrown amongst them, which together with their
Gentility, and the expectation of an elder Brothers death, holds them up; till
Children and Charge sucks them under misery: Let these men timely bring their
estates to this balance, and they shall make themselves Elder Brothers.

The Merchant is ready for receiving the Commodity, Adventurer is in the sense
of the book him that sends to plant The Government will preserve this estate
with the increase.
and to perform his part; but that is to be done without the Scale: yet I must
join him with the Adventurer; for which I know in time he will give me
thanks: and my Advice shall be to him, and the Adventurer to bring four or
five hundred pound to the Scale, and they will find it profitable without
danger: for the Government will make the Scale go true.

The man of money too, if his heart will serve him, may weigh two or three
hundred pound at this Scale, and he will find it in two years, more then
balance the yearly use of four or five thousand pound, and the Government for
his security, will assure him, that his money is placed secure.

And lastly, I propose to the Gentlemen or Elder Brothers, (who have had or now
have great Estates) that it is good policy to have two strings to their bow,
for it has been a thing taking very much with wise men not to adventure all
their estates upon one title, nor in any one County, and their wisdom never
appeared so much as in these distracted times; for when the enemy had
possession of their estates, in one County they have happily been free in
another which was enough to support Examine how many Gentlemen have run
themselves in debt beyond their estates to supply them in the Wars.

Examine those that lay under the power of both Armies.


them in the storm during the War, but how miserable are the vanquished, it had
been happy for them, had their estates been divided in two or three Kingdoms,
for there is many a gallant Gentleman, who before these Wars, had some one,
others two, and some three thousand pounds per annum; and now not able to feed
their Families: and others living upon their estates have had their bread taken
from them to feed taxes, and in the best condition have been content, to
receive the ordinary Revenue of their estates, and being full of Children, have
been glad to set down under; that their Estates mihgt grow over them, and if
they shall bring part of their Estates to this Scale, they shall not only find
a safe harbor to retire to, in the worst of the storm; but till then, that
little part will be growing, and in a short time swell bigger then the bulk of
all the rest.

SECT. V.
THe next thing that I am in order to handle is, that until Commodities be
raised, for a constant Trade of Shipping, how Passengers may be transported
with the best convenience, both for health, and Charge.

And first I will tell you of the ordinary way, with the Conveniences, and
inconveniences, both for health, and Charge.

The ordinary time of going, is about September, or October, which times Ships
have made choice of, in respect the Crop of Tobacco will be ready for their
homeward fraught, which is always in, or about December, and so they lade, and
return in February, March, or April.

The Charge.
li. s. d. The Servants are taken up by such men as we here call Spirits, and
by them put into Cooks houses about Saint Katherines, where being once entered,
are kept as Prisoners until a Master fetches them off; and they lie at charges
in these places a month or more, before they are taken away. when the Ship is
ready, the Spirits charges and the Cook for dieting paid, they are Shipped,
and this charge is commonly 03 00 00 The Passage Money for a man is 05 10 00
Head Money to the Chyrurgion 00 02 06 So that a Servant stands them commonly in
08 12 06 They pay for a Tun of goods fraught 03 00 00

Health.
The Ships taking of men by the Pole is extreme Unhealthy, for by this means
to make the greater fraught they take so many, that their Ship is pestured, and
subject to diseases, which has happened very often.

And they being only bound to land the Passengers in Virginia at large, or
else in some particular River; they take no further care, but at the place
where they themselves design their Ships to go, they set their Passengers on
land, which many times falls out to be distant from the Plantations, to which
the most of the Passengers are bound some thirty, forty, or fifty miles and
more, and some of the Passengers being sickly at their landing, perish before
they arrive at their home. And the latter the Ships come to Virginia the worse,
for then they are set a shore in the very strength of Winter, which is about
the last of December, and being weak are spoiled with cold, whereas if they
had been set down at their Plantations, they would soon recover their healths.

The best and cheapest way for those that intend to go at these time, which for
the reasons aforesaid are the worst, as also being longest, in that they go
above 200 leagues out of the way, hauling over to the Azoras or Western
Islands, for the advantage of the wind.

Let them upon the Exchange inquire what Passengers are going, and there make a
consortship of those who live nearest together in the Country, and having made
themselves up a considerable number of thirty or forty, let them then bind the
Master to set them down with his Ship, at or so near that particular place
they design to go to, as the Ship can come.

But the better way will be, if they can make up so many Passengers a will give
a Ship a fraught, then to hire a Ship amongst themselves, to set them down at
their place in Virginia, which will make the Planters stock go further by a
third part, then it would do by transporting himself as aforesaid; which I
demonstrate in manner following.

Suppose I had 120 Passengers, and 100 tuns of goods.

I look out for a Ship of 150 Tuns, which will do it very well, and hire her
either by the Month or the Voyage, which I shall find best cheap; this Ship I
can have for 100. li. a Month, but in respect they will not let her for a less
time then five or six Months, and I having no commodity as yet to relade her
home, I will therefore agree for the Voyage outward, and after I am set down,
let him make his best advantage of any employment he shall meet with, and to
perform this service I can have him for 300. l. at the most, the Owners
victualling their own Company, and finding all things perteining to the Ship;
but you may observe, if you will take upon you a Flemish bottom, she will go
cheaper, which in case a Fleet of Ships went together, I would do.

Now for that I have observed salt meats which is the Sea diet, does not so
well agree with Land-men, and besides that manner of victualling is very dear,
I shall for the Passengers propose a better and more pleasant diet and far
cheaper which will not stand you in at above three fourths of the usual charge.

And first I propose a meat with which the Dutch victual very much, and call
it Gruts, which like Oatemeale thickens extremely in boiling, and being
buttered is a very pleasing and satisfying dish, which I have experienced in
Dutch Ships, or otherwise you may have Rice and a little Spice, with Butter or
Bag-Puddings with Plumbs, with a little Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and Fish, which
well proportioned will both please and fill the Passenger; in diet if the mind
be satisfy, the stomach soon agrees.

And after this rate let us examine the Account.

Victual for 120 men for two Months at 16. s. a man per Month is 192 00 00
For freight of the Ship 300 00 00 So that the charge of transporting 120 men
and 100 Tons of goods is 492 00 00 The former way it will cost you viz. 5.
li. 10. s. per man for 120. men is 660 00 00 For freight of 100 Tons of goods
at 3. l. per Tun is 300 00 00 The total of the charge of 120 men and 100
Tnuns of goods by this course is 960 00 00

By which it is plain you may carry your men and goods, at a very little more
then half the charge that you give the other way.

And I shall desire you to consider what an advantage it is to the poor
Planter, to have his stock made twice as good as 'twas.

All this considered, let it justify the Scale, in the charge of Passage.

The next way is upon New Englands Ships, which go and come almost all the
year, but this will be after the old Charge, except you take her wholly to
Freight, or have a very considerable number toward the same, the difference,
which is much will be, you may take your own time to go over.

But within one year or two, I doubt not, but the Staples aforesaid, will be
there in such quantities, men shall pass all the year long at the
forementioned easy rate.

But the last, and best way, will be in the Months of February March, April,
by our Shipping that go to New Foundland, those that go first, go to Fish: the
last go to take in that fish, all these Ships go light to New Foundland,
except some of the Fishers, who lade salt for the Fisherie.

And I am confident, you may have one of those Ships, (and they are commonly of
the best, and most warlike Ships of Merchants) of 300 Tons for 400 l., and
one of these will carry handsomely 200 Passengers and 200 Tons of goods; and
let us see our condition now.

The diet of the 200 Passengers for the time in manner aforewith fresh meat is
320 00 00 The Fraught of the ship is, 400 00 00 The total Charge of
transporting 200 Passengers, and 250 Tons of goods is, 720 00 00 Should you
carry them by the old course, the Passage of 200 men at 5. li. 10. s. per man
is 1100 00 00 The Fraught of 200 Tons of goods, at 3 l. per Tun is 600 00
00 The charge in the old way of 200 men, and 200 Tun of goods is 1700 00 00

By which it is plain all parties very well satisfied, the Planter is not at
much above one third part of the usual charge.

Pray mark it, that whereas our Planter by the old way could carry but five
men, he may by this carry thirteen.

Besides which it is extremely to be considered that the Freight being so
cheap, there may be store of good horses carried over in a short time; there
being as yet in the Country, not much above 250 horses and Mares, and that
would quickly make them do, what is not fitting every man should know

Besides that, the Passage is so cheap, it is exceeding And if you will look
into the books Printed by the Virginia Company, in 1621, or 1622 you shall find
that of 900 men transported in one Fleet, in the time aforesaid here died but
one.
advantageous; especially, if you get away in March, your Passage will be
pleasant, both for fair weather, and shortness, since now you go not out of
your way to the Azores as in the Winter voyage: But you go the straight way:
for these two ways differ just as the Bow and string, and your voyage, is
sometime under a Month, seldom above: for in this time of the year the winds
hang Easterly from our Coast, which follows you all the way; nor is this all:
for you shall come into the Country, the pleasantest time of all the year,
when being in the splendor of her beauty, she will ravish you with delight for
welcome.

Nor are you come at this time to pleasure without profit, but if the pleasures
will let you retire to your business, you may fall presently into the ground
and before August have a Crop of Flax, Rice, Corn, Beans, and Pease.

Having now brought the Gentlemen and Yeomen into the Country, I Will be their
Harbinger, and provide them good quarters till they shall be settled.

I know it is a common opinion received, that such as go to Virginia, come to a
wilderness, and they must lie in the fields, till they can build them a house,
such false rumors has locked up this paradise of the earth from many a
deserving man, but the truth is let thy titles be what they will, thou art but
a Gentleman, and very many such thou shall find there, who to prevent thy
asking will freely and with all sweet respects invite thee to be their Guest,
and count themselves sufficiently rewarded that you will entertain their Motion;
men of lower condition shall find the like with as hearty welcome to their
Beef, Bacon, and Bag-pudding, as ever Tom gave Dick, or Winifred gave Parnell
in our Country; and being thus fitted they will willingly leave you their
ground for a crop, or you may look out to seat your self upon your own,
which so soon as you have made choice of, will by the Court be confirmed to
you and your Heirs for ever.

I should have fitted you with Servants, before your coming into the Country,
but since it is only our fancies have been there to take a view against our
persons come, we will not go without Servants.

And of Servants the best are best cheap.

Therefore I Will not advice the Spiriting way, which sends Drones to the Hive, in
stead of Bees, but that you take stout Laborers and good Worke-men, giving
them honest wages from 3. li. to 10. li. a year according to the quallity of
the men, for if we in England can pay 2. or 300. li. per annum rent for a
Farm, and give great wages, we may much better give wages where our ground is
twice as good, and no rent paid.

Besides it keeps a Servant in heart, and makes him at all times willing to
put forth his strength in that Masters service, that gives him means to
thrive, and taking this course you may pick and choose your Servants.

Only this I must advise, that you agree with your Servant for four years at
least, and considering that you pay his passage, and are at other charges with
him, let the charge be proportioned upon the four or more years wages that he
is to serve you, and so deduct it every year.

And for Servants encouragement, they shall find themselves at the very first
in the condition of Journymen for four or five years, and before seven years
end he shall have a fair estate.

I will in the first place help the weakest to avoid the trouble of the
strongest, whom I suppose may have three pound the first year, and presuming
for that he went well clothed out of England, it will be all his own at the
years end, with this three pound I Will buy him a Haifer, and send twenty
shillings of it into England in some commodity of the Country, as to say
three or four flitches of Bacon or the like, which he may well do with twenty
shillings and more; and for that the Bacon of Virginia surpasses our English,
which I have often experimented here in England, I doubt not but at the least
(for I love to value all things of this nature at the least) it will yield him
eight groates a stone, and supposing his four flitches way but twenty stone
which they will do (and ten more) he has here in England for his Bacon two
pound three shillings four pence, and this lade out in Pins, Laces, and
Combs, for the Maids shall in Virginia be double, and now his Cow has Caved,
and he has five pound in his purse, besides his years wages to receive, which
tells him he has now served his Master two years.

And following this course if I find him at the end of his time with less then
sixty pound in his purse, besides his Stock of Cattle, I shall say he has
either been an extraordinary ill Husband or a negligent simple Fellow which if
he have not.

Let him bring his 60. li. to the aforesaid Balance and then (if he look up
to God) he may see himself fit to woo a good man's Daughter.

Besides this there are better things, for men will plant very little Tobacco,
and at leisure time he may without any prejudice to his Master, plant 50. li.
in Tobacco a year, which as the quantity faules will rise in price, and may
be worth to him 2. s. 6. d. per li. I have known it sold at 5. s. and 3. s. 6.
d. the worst, so that here is 6. li. 5. s. gotten every year, and the
employment of this money will rise to a good fain in two or three returns.

Nor is this all, for he will find in the end of this Book, I shall advise his
Master to give him something else.

Truly I would say something to Maidservants, but they are impatient and will
not take advice but from a Husband, for if they come of an honest stock and
have a good repuce, they may pick and choose their Husbands out of the better
sort of people, I have sent over many, but never could keep one at my
Plantation three Months, except a poor silly Wench, made for a Foil to set
of beauty, and yet a proper young Fellow must needs have her, and being but
new come out of his time and not strong enough to pay the charges I was at in
clothing and transporting her, was content to serve me a twelve Month for a
Wife.

To conclude this, whereas in England many Daughters makes the Fathers purse
lean, the Sons here make the lean pursgs, wherefore to avoid this danger, I
shall advise that man that is full of Children to keep his Sons in England,
and send his Daughters to Virginia, by which means he shall not give but
receive portions for all his Chlidren.

SECT. VI.
The next in order is, how be Gods assistance the Indians may be reelaimede
wherein I shall first bigin with love.

ANd when I consider this way has been attempted but the success: for by it
diverse honest men have been lost, I shall let love alone to work with
Christians, for with Indians it cannot, since there must be an acquaintance to
procure familiarity upon which trust and confidence is reposed, which is the
common foundation of love, but the Indians being a wild people and of a subtle
and treacherous nature, as sad experience tell us we must not acquaint our
selves with them to trust.

Next I will consider force and that has bin fatal to the Indians, there
having been great numbers of them slain.

And this will not do till they be wholly vanquished, which is a work
(although a small number of English may, and can deal with great numbers of
(Indians not, to be effected, but with a vast expense both of money and time,
in respect of the largeness of the Continent, wherein the Country is, being
much bigger then many Englands, Scotlands and Irelands together.

Wherefore and for that this course agrees not with the profession of
Christianity, I shall not think of it.

I will therefore consider of a third way, in which (not leaving our dependence
upon God for his assistance) I shall look upon nature.

And I will examine the ordinary course of taming wild and fierce beasts, these
differing from them in nothing, but that they are endued with natural reason.

It must be observed, the more you thwart nature, the fiercer you make it: And
therefore we are first to study, what they are most inclined to: and having
found it, then to fit them with those things they naturally are delighted in,
and so by degrees you take from them all fear; which is the principal
abstacle, and at last reclaim them: this is enough for the General.

Now to come to our wild people, who being endued with natural reason, I
doubt not, but they may more easily reelamed.

First, therefore I will inquire what most predomminates in nature, and I find
ambition to be to the princpall mark that nature aims at.

For all men are naturally ambitious either of knowledge, honor, or of wealth,
to attain which the greatest dangers harshest studies and the hardest labors
are made pleasures.

Therefore we must make use of ambition being the universal net of nature to
take these men.

Now let us look what it is that draws us to this net and we shall find it to
be a sense of our own nakedness, and it was the case of Adam and Evah our
first Parents, wherefore I shall say, that if the Devil could by this means
work upon them, to so bad an end, God will assistus by the same means (since
it is to a better end) to work upon these it being to his glory.

Now in order to the reclaming of these men we must consider.

First, that they are ignorantly naked in the knowledge of all things, but what
they are prompt to by nature for self preservation.

Secondly, that the Country affording plenty of provisions to sustain nature,
they take little care for the future.

Thirdly, that being thus provided, they seek not nor care for comerce.

Fourthly, that for the reasons aforesaid they are independent upon any other
people, and care not to converce with any but themselves.

Wherefore if ever they be reclaimed it must be.

First, by making them sensible of their nakedness.

Secondly, By taking them off from their confidence upon nature, whereby they
may take care for the future.

Thirdly, that they may desire comerce.

Fourthly, that they may be brought to depend.

And for that they cannot be talked into a sight of themselves, I shall propose
that we gently steal through their nature, till we can come to pull off the
scale from their eyes, that they may see their own nakedness; which must be
done in manner following.

Either by making them ambitious of Honor, or by making them ambitious of
Riches.

In the first we must take their Werowances or great men: they already being at
that lock of being one better then another.

In the second, let us not doubt but we shall take them all, for there is but a
very few men in the World either Christian or Heathan, that are not taken with
it.

First, I shall advise that slight Jewels be made at the public charge of
thirty or forty shillings price, and one better then the rest, of some such
toys as they shall most affect, which fitted with Ribands to wear about their
necks or their heads, as their custom amongst them is; shall be sent from the
Governor of the Plantation in his own, and also in the name of the People and
the Governor to distinguish them by some pretty titles, which should be
always after observed; as also to make some of them favorites, and to
solicit their preferment with their King, and this by degrees will kindle the
fire of Ambition, which once in a flame must be fed, and then is the time to
work.

For the second I shall advise, that their nature be observed what way it most
points at, and then fit them with what they most desire, and if by degrees you
can bring some of them to wear slight loose Garments in Summer, or to keep
them warm in the Winter; which if you can effect, the work is half done, and
this I am confident is very easy: for a little to the Northward of the place I
write of, they are fallen into a way of clothing themselves without course
Welsh cloth of Blew and Red colors, and the better sort of the Indians in
this place do wear Coats of Skins, with the Furre side next to their bodies
in the Winter, and the Skin side in the Summer: and that you may perceive them
already coming, they have for the most part altered their old Fashion, of
making their Coats, and now in imitation, make them like English Cloakes; but
this must be at the public charge, they having few valuable Commodities to
purchase them, yet the charge will not be great, for I shall advise that this
be not practiced upon the generallity, but upon some one King and his People
that are most tractable, and of the nearest neigbourhood, and they are commonly
about two hundred or two hundred and fifty Indians, and five or six shillings a
man will do it; besides, there will be something to retribute the charge, viz.
Beaver, Otter, and other Skins, Indian Corn, Beans, and Pease, with other
things, so that it is possible the charge may be defrayed, and having won
these, you need not fear the coming in of the rest.

The poor Indian being clothed, his sight is cleared, he sees himself naked,
and you will find him in the snare.

For now they begin to vye who is the better man, which must be determined by
their Clothes, and to purchase them, they will be at their wits end, since they
have nothing valuable, and if you draw the net wisely they are sure.

But it must be considered, that although their minds be fettered, yet their
nature is not tamd, wherefore you must think of proposing some thing to them,
that may enable them to be Masters of Clothes, which must in no ways trench
upon their liberties.

Therefore in the first place you may propose easy works, and draw them on by
degrees, and you shall find, that for themselves they will work, but not for
you.

You shall likewise propose to their King, that if he will send thirty or forty
men to help in your Harvest, he shall have a Cloak, or Breeches and Doublet,
or the like, and his men should have every one something.

Or otherwise, set them to peeling of Hemp, or braking of Flax in Winter,
where they should for the present, to encourage them, have more then they
earned, and then bring them to drive the Plough, or thresh Corn, or the like,
but in no wise let them continue at any one work to a dislike, but play with
them, you still fitting variety of works to their fancies; thus by degrees
(God assisting) you shall make them conquer themselves: by this means in two
or three years you will draw them to a confidence in you, to trust their
Children to be brought up by you, and they will learn English, which will be a
good step to bring them to Christianity. Having brought them thus far, you
need not be directed how to lead them further, your own reason and profit
will do it; never fear their falling back, for their own ends shall keep
them to you, because their minds will prompt them to pride, and they will cover to
be finer then their fellows.

And now have you opened their eyes, made them care for the future, drawn them
to commerce, and made them depend.

And in the end, by Gods mercy to them, make them good Christians.

Thus have I done with the Indians: only this take notice of, I do not advise
that at any hand you suffer them to come into your house, or any further then
your field or out-working houses, neither admit more of them to come then you
can master, and that they always come without their arms, until you see them
so sensible of their poverty, that they come necesitated to work.

SECT. VII.
I Am now to advise the Adventurer, Planter, and Servant, of such things as are
proper to them.

Having before advised of the mischief of procuring of Servants, and of the
convenience and inconvenience of the usual passage to Virginia, and how to
prevent the inconveniency, as also of a better way of passage, and like wise to
dispose of your self in the Country when you come first there, and what
commodities to fall presently upon, I shall now advise.

First to the Adventurer.
First, that whatsoever his design be, not to depend upon the life of any one
man for the perfecting the work, but to send two at the least of equal
ability, and one to succeed the other in case of death.

Secondly, that for whatsoever belongs to Art, that it be here made in
England, least when the work comes over, none be found there able to do it,
and so it perish, or if there be any principal in it, that may be endangered
to be lost or broken, that he send two of the same for fear of falling.

Thirdly, that if there be Parteners in the business, they so Article that the
fayler to supply his part, shall forfeit it to the rest.

Lastly, whatsoever the design be, yet send over a Plough or two, for this if
their design fail, or until the design be perfected, will turn to account,
and make them great gainers.

Secondly to the Planter.
First, that they take the Planters leave where for the present they shall
reside, and do not neglect the opportunity of falling into the ground with
the Plough so soon as the seasons come.

Secondly, that when the Corn is in the ground, then Choosing of ground.
is the time to look out for the place, they shall after settle themselves
upon, in which they must take care not to settle on the places near the ebbing
and flowing of the salt water, for they are there, as here in England all
aguish, next that they make choice of some place near a navigable River, where
they may have the convenience of fresh Marshes, Meadows, and Fish, and if they
can where some pleasant rising Hills be, but at no rate do not strugle too
far from Neighbors, for that is disconsolate.

Thirdly, let them build their Houses of Brick, or otherwise with Timber, let
it be done with substantial Building of Houses.
complete lengths (since they have Timber enough) which will save half charges
in Carpenters work, line it on the inside thick with Loame, and cover it with
Lime, for that will make it warm in Winter, make your model or plate-forme
such that when your family shall increase you may add to your buildings
without defacing or inconveniencing any rooms.

Fourthly, examine the ground and sow proper seed in the proper parts, sow
not Wheat in the richest, for What seed to sow, and upon what ground.
that will be too rich, and will not turn to account, but in your richest sow
Rape, Rice, or Flax-seed, and two or three crops of this, will bring the ground
to bear Wheat your life after.

In England choose good Servants, able Worke-men; and give them good wages, fear
not the wages: of every Carrying of Servants.
ten Servants let four be Boys, and ever after send for good lusty Youths,
for they will serve eight or nine years, whereas men will hardly be gotten to
serve above four or five, and taking this course the Boys will be Men when the
Men's times expire, and being trained up in the service under good men, they
will prove excellent Servants.

Fifthly, That the servants may do their work without trouble in over-seeing,
or without fretting or vexing their Masters patience, I shall advise such a
Servants reward.
way, as they may work for themselves, and their Masters together for be well
assured, the best of them; will work more to get themselves a Shilling, then to
get you ten, and that they may with much content, and profit to themselves,
make their Servants show the best of their abilities, it were good to consider
what or how much of any work to be done by a Servant in a day would be
satisfactory, and then that being done, he should have an allowance for what he
should do more. As for Example; two stone, or two stone and a half of Flax to
be dressed in a day is indifferent, I would then give him four pence a stone,
for what he should do more: this will extremely encourage the Servant, and very
good use may be made of it, or let him have the remainder of the day to plant a
little Tobacco for himself, or for any other thing; I have tried all ways,
but never found the like.

Sixthly, That for such Servants as are above the age of twenty years, who can
deserve wages in England, give them wages in manner following, viz. three pound
the first year, and so increase the wages twenty shilings a year to the end of
their time.

Seventhly, and for youths, when they shall attain to the age of twenty one
years, to give wages, and increasing to the end of their time, in manner
aforesaid.

Eighthly, and to undertake to give the Servants. 30 acts of land, at the end
of their time, to them and their heirs for ever: which land shall be given the
Master, by the Court, for them.

Ninthly, That they agree with Artificers for shares.

Tenthly, that they enquire after all advantageous Commodities that are
produced from the Earth, and learn how to bring them to perfection.

Eleventhly, that they enquire after all manner of slight Engines, that will
save hand-labour, there being nothing dear in the Country but labor.

Twelfthly, and for that the Masters will be at charge of transporting and
clothing them; let that charge be deducted proportionably every year out of
their wages.

Thirteenthly, they must be careful to Covenant with their Servants, to
forfeit for every days work they shall neglect, double the value of their
days labor: but for neglect in harvest, ten times the value.

Fourteenthly, the difference that may arise between the Master and Servant,
upon their Covenants, to be determined by the Superintendents.

Lastly, They must show their Servants Indentures to the Court, and then they
shall have 50 Acres of land for every servant settled upon them, and their heirs
for ever, which fifty Acres, is over and above what the Servants shall have.

For Servants.
First, they to Covenant with their Masters, not to plant above two hundred
weight of Tobacco per annum: whereas heretofore a Servant planted 1500.

Secondly, this will take off all men's depending on Tobacco, which has been
the fatal commodity of that Country, and Masters will find a better way to
employ their Servants.

Thirdly, that they look their Masters Covenant, to give them thirty. Acres of
land, and pay them the wages they shall agree for in money, or the Commodity of
the Country, money worth.

Fourthly, let the Servant agree with his Master upon the sum laid our for him
before his transportation, that he be not abused therein when he contes into
the Country, and let the same be set down in the Indentures.

Fifthly, this carefully observed, with the rules before prescribed in this
book, will assure the Servant, that at the end of his time, he shall be in a
flourishing condition, never more to serve any man.

A single man that can but pay his passage, may have ten pound a year for his
service, and be found meat and drink.

Lastly, if any Gentlemen or others with their Families, and also Artificers in
any Trade, Laborers or Servants shall be desirous to transport themselves for
the bettering of their fortunes, either to this place, or any other of the
English Plantations abroad, let them repair to the Author, who for the love he
bears his Country, will freely advise them how to dispose of themselves for
their greatest advantage, which shall enable them to do much more with one
hundred pounds then they could heretofore do for one hundred and fifty pound,
of which benefit the Planter shall also have the Advantage, and Servants shall
be upon sure terms knowing their work, and their conditions, and they shall
see plainly that in a little time, they shall by Gods blessing, become men of
good estates, he will also advise how they may transport themselves with the
best safety in these times, from any danger of being taken.

And if any Gentlemen that shall not go themselves, but are desirous to
adventure, he will direct them how they may best dispose thereof for their
advantage, and that in eighteen Months they shall be reimbursed their
principally money, and after shall, constantly receive much above fifty pound
for every hundred pound they adventured at first, and owners of Ships shall
have good employment, for their Ships not letting them lie rotting by the
Walls, as (...) now and heretofore they have done. The Author is sensible that
these offers are something large, yet let no man doubt of the truth thereof,
the being enabled thereto by his dear bought experience, and all men may be
satisfied, that it has been rarely found, that any one particular good work
has been fallen upon, but some one man has originally been the Author, or the
original motion has proceeded from one man's breast. Those rich Mines of the
West Indies were first offered by one man to Henry the seventh: but he not
having faith enough to believe, or not willing to venture a little money to be
satisfied of the truth, refused it: and after, it was offered by the same man
to the then King of Spain, who hearkened to him; and all the world knows, that
from this one man's motion, the Kings of Spain have within this 150 years
received from thence many thousand millions of pounds: besides, it has
extremely enriched the Gentlemen, and Merchants of that Kingdom. Many of the
like examples might be showed, but they are so generally known to all men, that
I Will say no more, only that there was some time spent, after the King of Spain
had set footing in the West Indies, before he could come by travel to the
Mines; and these places the English have inhabited much more time then the King
of Spains Subjects had done in the West Indies, before they discovered that
Countries wealth. But God, that is the Author of all good things, has not in
all this time been pleased to let any man look further then Tobacco; and no
man can say, but that he is now pleased freely to offer his blessings bestowed
upon these Countries, in the riches thereof, to us, since all this time, there
was never any man that had the heart to labor for the General good in this
nature before.

Reader I cannot let thee go till I have again put thee in mind of my Epistle
to thee, in which I discovered the great Obstructor of this Countries
prosperity; who I know being now again alarmed, will fiercely send his
Spirits abroad with lies and calumnies to abate the peoples courage, since his
Kingdom will be so much endangered, by the through planting of this place with
Christians; and I am confident he shall no longer prevail: for my Spirit would
not let me rest, till I had by this, bid defiance to him and all his subtle
practices.

Therefore be not led by any false reports, for thou shall find me ready with
all freeness to give thee full satisfaction in the truths that any way
concerns this Place, or is contained in this Book; and this I freely offer to
men of all conditions, whether Masters or Servants. You have my name in the
Title Page, and you shall be directed to my Chamber in the Middle Temple,
either by M. Collinson, an Iron-monger in Cornehill, M. Pollington a
Haberdasher in Lumbard-Street, or M. Beadle. Stationer in Pleet-Street, next to
the Middle Temple Gate, or the Shops under the said Gate.

My time would not permit such care of the Press, in Correcting, as was
fitting; but since it is right in the matter, I shall desire the Reader to
excuse the Printers slips in the manner.

Page 7. join Plants with Roots, and then read for Roots and Plants.

Page 40. the Sum of 72 l. next under 12 l. and 60 l. is only the total of
the Fraught, and not the value of a particular, as by the placing you may
suppose it.

FINIS.

