INFIRMITY Inducing to CONFORMITY: OR, A Scourge for impudent Usurpers; AND, A
Cordial for impotent Christians.

Preached not long since in St. Peter's the Poor, Broadstreet, London; and in
St. Pancras Churchyard when it could not be admitted into the Church. July 8.
1649.

BY PETER BALES, Master in Arts; and a persecuted Minister of the holy Word and
Sacraments.

PROVE. 24.15, 16. Lay no wait (o wicked man!) against the house of the
righteous; and spoil not his resting place:

Ver. 16. For, a just man falls seven times and rises up again.

TERTUL. Conditio presentium temporum provocat hanc admonitionem nostram.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, M.DC.L.

To all Royal and Loyal Englishmen, etc.
Sirs,
THE Nos Omnes, in my Text, has brought me to Vos omnes with this chartaceous
Present; which, in all humility, and some confidence of your favorable
acceptance and construction, (having already experimentally found your
benevolence and bounty toward me and mine) I do now tender to your religious
consideration: To you (I say) does this my poor labor properly belong, who
are so endowed with the grace of God, as to go out of your selves, that Jesus
may enter in; to exinanite your selves, that you may partake of the fullness of
Christ; knowing, that all your Perfection (as Saint Jerome says) consists in
acknowledging your own Imperfection. As for self-applauding Usurpers, and
self-justifying unjust Ones, who do measure themselves with themselves,
neither my Text, nor this treatised Sermon does appertain unto them; unless
to be as a whip to lash them, I am certain, not as a cordial to comfort them.
There is but one truth, yet encountered with as many falsehoods as there were
gobbets and shreds of dismembered Pentheus; and surely, never with more, in this
quondam flourishing Church, then in these our days, when and where
giddy-headed Fantasy and ambitious Liberty do most imperiously oversway the
Judgment, and overthrow the Law.

Sirs, I am not Dominis Arrisor, neither Ecclesiae aut Reipublicae Arrosor, I
neither faune upon my Masters, nor devour the Church or Commonwealth: But I
beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, Do not dare to make
your selves of the number, or to compare your selves to them which praise
themselves; yet they understand not that they measure themselves with
themselves, and compare themselves with themselves, 2 Cor. 10.12. (...), in se
scipsos metiuntur, in themselves they measure themselves, that is, through a
vain persuasion of their own excellency they arrogate to themselves more than
is meet and right.

The humility of the mind, is the sublimity of a Christian; and the more vile
and base we are in our own eyes, the more glorious are we in God's account.

God made the Heavens before the Earth: but Man must lay his foundation first
in the Earth (in rightly weighing the ponderousness of his depraved
disposition, and terrene affection) before ever he shall come to Heaven. Let
humility (therefore) be nourished by you: First, by the assiduity of
Subjection. Secondly, by the meditation of sublime matters. Lastly, by the
daily and serious consideration of your own frailty: So, shall you not be many
Masters, and then your commendation (not condemnation) will be the greater.
For, In many things we offend all.

Dear Friends and Christians, Though we all offend in many things, I have not
wittingly and willingly offended (in this discourse) God or Good-men in any
thing: I am not prodigal of pompous wit, or choice of words, there may be
absurdities and literal faults; if there be, I crave your friendly pardon and
pretermission, and for the substance your courteous acceptance: God grant it
may be as profitable unto you as it was intended for you. Amen.

Your poor Servant, in, and for the Lord Jesus; PETER BALES.

INFIRMITY Inducing to CONFORMITY.
St. IAM. 3. part of the 2. v. In many things we offend all.


THere is a Text of holy Scripture whereunto all Licentious Libertines,
Independent Usurpers, and Profane Atheists do (though most unjustly) lay a
peculiar claim, that it might be as a Covert to hide, or a Parasite to
palliate all their Diabolical Stratagems, Machiavellian Designs, and most
Detestable Abominations: viz: Eccles. 7. v. 18. Be not thou just overmuch.

And there is a place of holy Scripture wherein all God's dear Children have a
due interest and a just right and title; which is as a scourge to correct, or a
two-edged Sword to confound all their Enemies, and a comfortable Directory for
themselves: Jam. 3.2. In multis offendimus omnes, (i.e.) In many things we
offend all.

Petrus Tenorius Archbishop of Toledo, having a long time considered the
weighty reasons on each side, whether Solomon was damned, or saved; in fine
(remaining still doubtful of the truth hereof) caused him to be painted in his
Chapel half in Heaven, and half in Hell: Whether this Father deserved, for
this his uncharitable incredulity, commendation or condemnation, let all good
Men judge: Yet, am I confident, that I shall not deserve any blame, if I should
pourtray a good Christian half in Heaven and half on Earth; Half in Heaven; by
reason of his regenerate part; devout orisons, divine contemplation, and
heavenly conversation: Half on Earth; in regard of his natural part; inherent
corruption, Sathan's suggestion, and the world's infection: A Child of God
being like unto Saint Anselm's Bird soaring with winged swiftness toward
Heaven; but being tied (by the Shepherd's wanton Boy) to an heavy stone with a
long string, was forcibly brought down to the Earth again. We are pressed and
ready to fly (as it were) to do the Will of our heavenly Father, when we have
tasted the first fruits of the Spirit; but immediately are pulled down again
to our own earthly imaginations and sinful affections, by the stone-weight of
our own depraved nature: (...) For, in many things we offend all.

Which words do afford us Two general parts:

I: The first is the Delictum, or Offense: Aggravated,

First, by its perennity or assiduity: It is not said, we have offended, or
shall offend; but, we do offend: like a quotidian Ague, it takes and shakes us
every day.

Secondly, by its multiplicity: it cannot say as Elijah did, I am left alone,
and they seek my life: Non in pancis, sed in multis, not in a few things, but
in many things we do offend.

II. The second mentions the Delinquents or Offenders: Described,

First, by a plural Personality and a gracious affinity both in respect of God
and themselves. Nos, We.

Secondly, by their Generallity, not partially but universally expressed,
Omnes, All. Et qui dicit omnes excludit neminem, and in saying [all] he excepts
or exempts none at all, from offending, and that in many things. In multis
offendimus omnes, (i. e.) In many things we offend all.

Which Text is as an eye in the head wherewith we may see our own Deformity:
Or as a tongue in the head by which we may and must confess our manifold
infirmities and aberrations. It is as a Garden full of sweet flowers intermixed
with many and diverse stinking weeds. It is as a flourishing Vine laden with
sour grapes, which (by God's assistance) I shall press; that with the juice
of them your appetites may be more and more sharpened to eat and digest the
true bread of life.

Begin we therefore with the first general part of my Text, which is, the
Delictum or Offense:

The vulgar Latin translates the original word, Offendimus, we offend, or
stumble. Sin (indeed) is offendiculum, a stumbling stone, or block of
offense; and it lies in our way, which way soever we turn our selves; so that
if we stumble not upon it, but miss it; it was the grace of God that upheld
us, and gave us warning of it, that we might have the more free progress in
our journey to the heavenly Canaan. Sin offends God, our selves, and our
Neighbors.

First, it offends God, who is Holiness it self, and therefore cannot but
abominate it in his Creatures. It caused him to repent that he had made Man,
and to be sorry at his very heart, Genesis 6.6. Yea, sin is so offensive to him,
that nothing but the merits and intercession of his beloved Son and our alone
Savior, Jesus Christ, can appease his wrath, and turn away his displeasure
toward us.

Secondly, it offends our selves, and that, First, in respect of the new man
or regenerate part: If thy right eye offend thee pluck it out, Mat. 5.29. where
by the eye, hand and foot, our Savior means, the lusts of the flesh and the
concupiscences of the old man, which do often molest and offend the new man,
in its running in the path of God's commandments. Secondly, in respect of the
Conscience; every sin is a sickness, and a soar: It is flagellum animae,
yea, mors animae, as Saint Bernard calls it, the scourge of the soul, and
death of the soul. When the conscience is thoroughly awakened for sin, it
casts the soul into many pangs and throws, and leaves it void of all
comfort, till Christ Jesus brings it into his wine-cellar of consolation, and
spreads over it the banner of his love: If he does not, it proves, not only an
Accuser, and a Judge; but an Executioner also.

Thirdly, it offends our Neighbors: it made the holy Prophet David complain
bitterly in his abode with incorrigible, implacable, and profane Persons,
Psalm. 120. Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Meseck, and to have
my habitation among the tents of Kedar: My soul has long dwelt with those
that are Enemies unto peace. The Sodomits unlawful deeds vexed Lot's righteous
soul from day to day, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. And these five several ways, especially
do we offend our Neighbors: 1. By evil example. 2. By evil counsel. 3. By
base detraction. 4. By false doctrine. 5. By the abuse of Christian liberty.
Let therefore our light so shine before men, that they seeing our good works,
may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. Let us with Saint Paul,
therein exercise our selves to have always a conscience void of offense toward
God, and toward Men, Act. 24.16. Let us give no offense neither to the Jews,
nor to the Grecians, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32. In a word, Let us
not do any thimg without Faith and Charity: Whosoever walks according to
this rule, Peace shall be upon him, and upon the Israel of God.

But, we do not only give, and take offense our selves, stumble our selves
and make others stumble; but we also fall, and so our best Translation renders
it, In multis labimur omnes, (...), we fall many ways. This Fall is not
corporal, but moral; yet by a Corporal we may understand a Moral fall; for
as he that falls, in regard of the sight of his body, comes lower, and
withal, ordinarily takes a bruise, even so is it in a moral fall: Our nature
by it becomes not only more base and vile, but more feeble also: But this
phrase imports a difference of Sinners: some draw iniquity with the cords of
vanity; others account it vanity, and do feel vexation of spirit to be drawn
into iniquity with cords: Some do take pleasure in sinning; others do esteem
it a sin to take pleasure therein: some do sin through malice; some
through frailty: some commit sin; some fall: They sin through malice, in
whom the principles of conscience are corrupt, who wittingly and willingly
commit sin with greediness: neither before the fact feeling any reluctance,
nor after the fact conceiving any sorrow: These account darkness, light; and
light, darkness; evil, good; and good, evil; as the Prophet speaks, Isai.
5.20. It is improper to say that these do fall into sin; for, will any one
of set purpose fall to hurt himself? To be overtaken in a fault, (which phrase
Saint Paul uses to the Galatians, Gal. 6.1.) is nothing else but this falling
in my Text. The phrase reaches only those who sin, dum aut latet veritas,
aut compellit infirmitas, as venerable Bede speaks, either when they are
sophistically circumvented, or unawares transported, and so take a fall. Let
him therefore that thinks he stands to himself take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor.
10.12. For, it is not said, we have fallen, or shall fall; (though true enough)
but, we do; noting unto us the assiduity, or daily continuance of our falling;
which is the first Particular of the first General, and comes now in order to
be handled.

We do continually sin, even from the morning of our youth, to the evening
of our old age: yea, from our very cradles, even unto our graves. Our life is a
dying, and our dying is our life: Our breathing under Heaven is a breathing
against Heaven, and we live not a day without sin. A just man (says Solomon,
Prove. 26.16. falls seven times, yea, (in a day) every day. This is the common
addition, frequent in the ancient Fathers, though not found in the Original.
But, God himself says, that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth, Genesis 8.21. And (in Genesis 6.5.) he says, The imaginations of the thoughts
of his heart are only evil continually: The Hebrew renders it, every day.
Should not this teach us all to be ready to forgive the frequent, continual,
and daily fallings, and offenses of our Brethren?

Peter said unto our Savior, How often shall my Brother sin against me, and
I shall forgive him? unto seven times? Jesus said unto him, I say not to thee,
Unto seven times! but, unto seventy times seven times. Saint Austine makes this
question upon these words, Why (says he) does our Savior say, Seventy times
seven times; and not an hundredth times eight times? The answer (says he) is
ready; From Adam to Christ were seventy Generations; therefore, as Christ
forgave all the transgressions of whole mankind parted and diffused into so
many Generations; so also we should remit as many offenses, as, in the term
and compass of our life, are committed against us.

Again, what does this teach us to act toward our selves? Surely, every day
to examine our own hearts in our chambers and to be still: To keep by us an
Ephemerides of our thoughts, words, and deeds: To practice Pythagoras his
golden verse and advise, Before (says he) thou suffer sleep to possess thy
tender eyes, ask thy soul thrice over, (...); Whither have I gone? What have
I done? What opportunity have I lost? Or, to imitate Sentius, who, when the day
was past and the night come wherein he should take his rest, would ask his
mind, What evil have thou healed this day? What vice have thou stood against?
In what part art thou bettered? And then finding our fallings and offenses, let
us be instant in Prayer and Repentance: We do continually offend our gracious
God, making his displeasure to arise; let us therefore continually use the
means which conduce to a Pacification, and that is, Prayer: He that prays
most frequently is the best Christian, and has the most interest in Heaven, He
lives most comfortably, and dies most cheerfully. And being our whole life is a
time of sinning; let us make our whole life a time of repenting. Redeat homo,
c. 7. says S. Austine, Let a man return by daily lamentations to that from
whence he is fallen by vain delectations: Let not the Sun set in Gods anger
to night us: Let us not live a day longer before we begin to live indeed: Let
us not climb up into our beds, before we have climbed up into God's favor:
Let not the eyes of our bodies be shut with sleep, before the eyes of our
souls be opened by repentance. It would be (doubtless) a great deal of ease
to our troubled spirits, if this our continual offending were confined to some
one petty sin, whereunto we are unwillingly carried, by our own natural
concupiscence, provoking, by the Devils subtilty, persuading, and by the
world's vanity, alluring; But, behold our wretched condition, by reason of
sins multiplicity; which brings me to the second Particular of the first
General: viz: We offend, in multis, in many things.

Mill modis offendimus, we do offend a thousand ways: we run through more
sins every day than there be signs in the Zodiac: Our graces are in a
Shekel; but our sins in an Ephah: Our graces are diminutives; but our sins
are augmentatives. Sin like heresy, is of an encroaching nature; as one
heresy proves another; so does our sin usher in another, the lesser always
making room for the greater: Let us not therefore only weigh our sins; but
also number them: If they seem small, we cannot count them; for, as the Prophet
David speaks, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his Errors? or, Who can tell
how often he offends? A negative interrogation is as much as an affirmative
proposition, and an affirmative interrogation as much as a negative
proposition: Who can tell how often he offends? that is to say, not any one can
tell; viz: if we consider the acts of sin; but we may and must number the
kinds of sin, and ferret them out as so many Achans, by the poll. Consider
(my Brethren) that we are guilty of sins of Omission, and Commission; of
Ignorance, and Knowledge; of Weakness, and Wilfulness, etc. We sin within
us, and without us: Within us, by the Faculties of our souls, by the words of
our mouth, and by the works of our hands.

1. We sin in our Understanding, Will, Affections, and Passions.

2. In our Silence, and in our Speeches, whether Ordinary or Extraordinary,
whether Civil or Sacred.

3. In our Actions, whether Passive or Active; and in Active, whether Natural
or Moral; and in Natural, whether they be such as tend to our Being, or
Wel-being: and in Moral, whether Political, or Ecclesiastical. We sin
again, by the outward Members of our bodies, as Feet, Hands, Eyes, and Ears,
when we use them as members of unrighteousness. What shall I say? Do we not
in many things offend all? Surely, in our very best Actions we do scatter many
imperfections, and we fail, either in the end matter, manner, or measure of
our obedience. Should the Lord call us unto a strict trial, how ignorant would
our knowledge be found? How frail our faith? How wavering our hope? How proud
our humility? How froward our patience? How cruel our mercies? How lukewarm
our prayers? How superficial our repentance? Alas! alas! Many are the
infirmities of our souls, many the deformities of our lives; they are more in
number than the hairs of our heads, or the sands on the seashore; so that we
may well say with David, Psalm. 130.3. If thou, o Lord, be extreme to mark
what is done amiss, who can be able to stand? Surely, that who, (says Saint
Chrysostom) is no body at all. Let us therefore (with Martha, though in
another case) be much troubled for these many things, wherein we offend all;
and (with Mary) choose the better part, that shall never be taken from us, Luke
10.41, 42. Yea, let us, who offend in many things, beware that we give not our
selves the reins to offend in every thing: For, the Saints of God, though they
do offend in multis, yet, not in omnibus, though in many things, yet, not in
all things: Wherefore, all things work together for the best to them; but, non
ex ipsorum meritis; sed ex mera ipsius misericordia, not as flowing from the
stinking puddle of their own base merit; but, as issuing out of the clear
fountain of God's free and mere mercy: For, In many things we offend all.
Which brings me to the second General part; wherein I observed, the
Delinquents, or Offenders, described two ways:

First, by a plural personallity, and gracious affinity; both in respect of
God and Themselves: Nos, We.

Secondly, by their generallity, not partially; but universally expressed:
Omnes, All.

1. Begin we with the first, Nos offendimus, we offend. Are the KING-Deposing,
KING-Killing, ambitious, Jesuited Independents; the rigid, usurping
Presbyterians; the lovesick Familists; the milk-white Brownists; the lawless
Antinomians; the Saint-reigning Millenaries; free-willed Arminians;
newfangled, and schismatically entangled Reformers (I should have said
Deformers;) meritorious and supererrogatory Romanists, with many more, the like
Offenders, comprehended: Are they (I say) comprehended in this We, in the Text?
Surely, we find them not in the sacred Pages of holy Writ, much less in this
word We: But find them we shall, in their own fanatic Pamphlets, blurd with
self-justifying; yet, most damnable errors; making the holy Scripture a Nose
of Wax, or a Ship-man's hose, any thing, or nothing, to serve their own
turns; like Saint Austine's Heretics, of whom he thus speaks, Scripturas
ad suum sensum; non suum sensum ad Scripturas adducunt: They do not reduce
their senses unto the Scripture, when they read; but do wickedly captivate the
Scriptures unto their own senses and meanings. Let us therefore look upon the
plural personallity, it containing not a graceless, but a gracious company,
such as are magnum genus, (as Chrysologus terms them) of a right noble stock:
Yea, they are (...), Of the blood-Royall, in a spiritual sense: For, God is
their Father, Christ their elder Brother, the Holy Ghost their Comforter, the
Church their Mother, Heaven their inheritance, and Regeneration their Evidence;
yet, are they Offenders in many things, and this they do in humility and
sincerity of heart acknowledge. In many things (says Saint James) We do
offend: I, an Apostle, and you Professors, even we; who are called, justified,
sanctified, and redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. That the dear
Children of God, both Ministers, and People have been, are, and shall be
Offenders in many things, even to the world's end; not only my Text, but other
places of holy Scripture do sufficiently declare. Was not Noah a man beloved
of the Lord, and a Preacher of righteousness? yet, was he not inebriated with
his own wine? Vino captus, qui diluvium fugerat, says Saint Ambrose, He was
freed from a deluge of water, and drowned in a deluge of wine, Genesis 9.21. Had
not Lot his Epithete of Just, Just Lot? 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. And was not he vexed at
the uncleanly conversation of the wicked? And did not he see the Sodomites
burnt with fire for their lusts? yet, did not he do wickedly, and (being
delivered) burn with incest? Joseph sinned, in swearing, By the life of
Phardoh, Gen, 42.15. Aaron sinned, in making the golden Calfe for the
Israelites to worship, Exodus 32.21. And he and Miriam sinned, in murmuring
against Moses, Numb. 12.7, 8. The Prophet Jonah transgressed in flying from
Joppe to Tharsus, and in justifying his unjust anger for the Gourd. Moses
(though the Servant of the Lord, and the meekest Man upon the earth) offended
in unbelief and anger, Numb. 20.12. and 16.15. The Prophet David was a man
according to God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. and in the state of regeneration;
yet, his heart was unclean, Psalm. 51.10. and he fell into the sin of
adultery, hypocrisy, murder, and ambition, 2 Samuel 11. and 24. Solomon, the
wisest Man upon the earth, committed folly. Job the patientest, yet not
altogether to be excused of impatience; nor Elias of passion; nor the Sons of
Zebedee, of ambition; nor Peter and Barnabas of dissimulation, Gal. 2. No, nor
the blessed Virgin her self, of vainglory. Saint Peter was courageous, yet
pusilanimous; Confident, yet Diffident; so faithful that Christ built his
Church upon his Faith; yet denied, and that with execration, his Lord and
gracious Redeemer: nay, all Christ's Disciples (though at one time they forsook
all to follow him, yet at another time) they all forsook him and fled. But,
why should I thus discover my Father's nakedness? rather (indeed) would I go
backward and cover the same with the mantle of my pity: Yet, let us not be too
lavish in pitying them; For, God has caused their infirmities to be recorded:

First, to let us understand that both they and we have one and the same God,
who was always offended with sin, were the Persons that wrought it never so
great or glorious.

Secondly, to let us know that both they and we have one and the same Physician
to cure us of all our maladies, viz: the immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, who
saves his People from their sins, Mat. 1.21.

Thirdly and lastly, to teach us circumspection and cautelousnesse, to fly
from sin as from a Scrpent, and to say to it as Pharach said to Moses, See
that thou see my face no more; or as Abraham to Lot, If thou go on the right
hand I will go on the left, or if thou go on the left hand, I will go on the
right: For, if the dear Children of God, who have gone before us both in time,
and in the graces of the Spirit bear such reproach, by reason their
corruptions are registered; what shall we sustain, who live in a brighter Age,
and upon whom the ends of the world are come?

But, (alas!) so base is our nature that sin will be a Jebusite; it will be a
constant guest to our house, though it sits not in the chiefest room; it is
bred in the bone, and it will not out of the flesh, until Joseph's bones be
carried out of Egypt, (i. e.) until we be out of this world. As Israel could
not pass to Canaan, but through the Desert of Zin: so we must not look to
pass to our spiritual Canaan, but through the wilderness of sin. Sins
are like Rebels, that not only revolt, but also keep castle against their
Sovereign, from whence they are not easily removed. Aristotle tells us of
three things that do acquire wisdom, viz: Nature, Learning, and Exercise:
Sure I am, not these; but God's free grace can make us avoid sin.
Philosophers are of opinion, that if the inferior spheres were not governed
and stayed by the highest, the swiftness of their motion would quickly fire
the world: So I may very well hold, that if the affections of God's dearest
Children were not moderated by the guidance of his holy Spirit, they would run
so far into sin, as to precipitate their souls into the black gulf of
eternal destruction; for, our reason is no better than treason, and our
affections are no better than infections. We cannot truly say of our selves as
Isidore too boldly of himself; For forty years space (says he) I found not
in my self any sin, no, not so much as in thought, anger, or any inordinate
desire: or, as Alexander de Hales of Bonaventure, His life was so upright,
(says he) that Adam seemed not to have sinned in him. No, no, (my Brethren)
look upon a Christian, at the best, whilst he lives in this world, and you may
well compare him unto the Arc of the Covanant, which was but a cubit and half
high, an imperfect measure, by this you may know his stature; add what you
will, it will be but a cubit and an half: Perfectly imperfect was he, when he
began; imperfectly perfect when he ends in all his actions. Therefore (as we
do offend in many things) let us in humility and sincerity of heart
acknowledge and confess the same, (as Saint James in my Text) In many things
we do offend.

This has been the constant practice of God's beloved ones: What is man (says
Eliphaz) that he should be clean? and he that is borne of woman that he should
be just? Behold, God found no steadfastness in his Saints: yea, the heavens are
not clean in his sight, Job 15.14, 15. Therefore Job acknowledges his
failings, Job 7.20. and when he came to plead with God for his uprightness,
did abhor himself, and repented in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. Nehemiah makes
a large confession of his own and the Peoples sins, Nehem. 9.5, 6, 7. So
Ezra, and Daniel, in the behalf of the People, confess that justice belongs
to God; but shame and confusion to themselves, Ezra 9.5, 6, 7. Dan. 9.6, 7.
Solomon has his Book of Acknowledgment, viz: Ecclesiastes. David confesses
his folly in numbering the People, saying, I have sinned exceedingly in that I
have done, therefore now Lord, I beseech thee, take away the trespass of thy
Servant: for I have done very foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.10. He confesses likewise
his Adultery with Vriah's Wife, and his Murder, in causing her innocent Husband
to be slain: And for these he is content (if I may so speak) to do penance
every Lord's Day in our Congregations where his Psalms are preached, read, or
sung: For, in how many Psalms has he recorded his offenses with his own
hand! Those that came to John the Baptist to be Baptized of him, came
confessing their sins, Matthew. 3.6. Saint Peter said to Christ, Go from me
for I am a sinful man; and Saint Paul says, I do not the good thing, which I
would; but the evil which I would not, that do I, Romans 7.19. Nay further,
Saint John says, that we sin, in saying we have no sin, 1 John 1.8. If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.
But (peradventure) some will object and say, does not the same Apostle aver,
(1 John 3. part of 8, and 9. v.) that he who commits sin is of the Devil?
And whosoever is borne of God sins not: for his seed remains in him,
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God? I shall answer briefly, To
commit sin signifies, not simply to sin: It imports not a mixed action,
wherein the Sinner is partly willing, partly unwilling; but an absolute
resigning of that faculty for the performance of wicked designs. (...), he
which does settle and set himself to work wickedness, is of the Devil: But,
he that is borne of God sins not, nor can sin: that is, does not, nor can
indulge or cocker his sin; the one is transported by his own rebellious
will; the other enforced by urgent necessity: the one is carried forward by a
prompt and peremptory inclination; the other by violent and coactive
temptation: the former sins of a premeditate mind; the latter by constraint:
do what we can, whilst we carry about this mass of corruption, sin will
have its residence in us, even in the best of us; but we will not suffer it to
reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof. If
it violently overrule us, we will not willingly let it rule over us: If
therefore a poor Sinner can say with the Apostle, Romans 7.23. I would not
willingly do that evil which I do; It is the law of my members that
rebelleth against the law of my mind, and leads me captive to the law of
sin, he may look with comfort toward the Mercy-seat. For, Peccata non
nocent, (says S. Jerome) si non placent, Our sins shall not hurt us, if they
do displease us; for, in many things we do offend, --

But, why does not the Apostle say, we offend in a few things, but in many
things, and why in many things, and not in all things, or every thing? It is
resolved in a word, We offend, not in a few, but many things; because we have
not a few, but many subtle, malicious, vigilant, strong enemies; and, not the
least, is our own inbred corruption: We offend, not in all things, or every
thing; because the grace of God supporteth us, and his grace is sufficient for
us, for by grace are we saved, 2 Cor. 12.9. Ephesians. 2.5. In the best of God's
Children there is Nature, Creation, and the first Adam, which makes them to
offend in many things. Again, there is in them Grace, Regeneration, and the
second Adam, which makes them, not to offend in all things. If we think, that
we are too weak by nature to resist and vanquish sin; let us comfortably
assure our selves, that by grace we shall be Victors; yea, more: than
Conquerours, through Jesus Christ, who has so freely and dearly loved us. The
flesh, or the nature of man (says Saint Paul, Romans 7.) lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that we cannot do as we would: If
we would serve God, so holily, cheerfully, and constantly, as the Angels in
heaven, we cannot, because the flesh lusts against the spirit: If again we
would sin with full consent of will, so brutishly as the wicked do, we
cannot, because the spirit lusts against the flesh. Let us therefore implore
this spirit of Sanctification, and let us beseech the Almighty to drive the
Zanzummims, our sins out of the land of our hearts by the Israel of his
grace. It is said, that Hercules led Cerberus in a lease: Oh! let us pray to
God to give us power and victory over our monstrous, deformed sins, that they
may not command us; but we them: And, if at any time we be overtaken in a
fault, let our hearts smite us immediately; let us cry to God earnestly for
his pardoning, preventing, and persevering grace. Alas! what is our life? is it
not as it were a Book? our birth is the Title Page, our baptism the Epistle
Dedicatory, our groans and cryings the Epistle to the Reader, our childhood is
the Argument and Contents of the whole ensuing Treatise, our life and actions
are the Subject, our sins and errors are the Faults escaped; therefore let
our repentance be the Correction; let not us think our selves too good for the
office; for, even we are Offenders. Again, let us not turn ego into ille, or
nos into vos; let us not look upon the offenses of others, and forget our own.
The Cock clapped his wings first to his own sides and awoke himself, before he
crowed to awaken Peter; so let us say to our selves, we have offended, before
we say to others, ye have offended. It had been good for Narcissus, ut non
viderat ipse, that he had not seen himself; but our greatest happiness would
be in seeing our selves. Let us not be Mole-eyed toward our selves, and
Eagle-eyed toward our Brethren, and so turn Christ's, Sed vos pro vobis, into
Virgils Sic vos non vobis. Let us not be like Crates Thebanus, who is called,
(...), a Dore-opener; because he used to rush into every man's house (as our
English-H^drivers did alate) and there to find fault with whatsoever was
amiss. let us not say as Peter did of John, Hic autem quid? What shall this
man do? as one careful of other men's Estates: But, let us say, Domine! quis
ego sum? Lord! what am I? Domine! miserere mei peccatoris, Lord! be merciful
to me a Sinner. Lastly, let us, who offend in many things, beware that we want
not one thing, namely, a thankful heart to him, who will not suffer us to
offend in all things; but (notwithstanding our many offenses) will acknowledge
us for his own, guide and govern us with his grace in this world, and receive
us into glory in the world to come. In many things we do offend; nay, more, In
many things we offend [all:] which brings me to the last Particular, viz: the
Delinquents, described by their Generallity, All.

It is not said Ye all; but We all: Here is One, and All; Many, and All; yea,
Saints, and All: For, We All are under this black Rod. Would a Committee-man, a
Colonel, a General, assume to himself such a word of charge, and such a
chargeable word as this? No surely, though a Cobbler: Yet, the word is general,
and (for ought I know) belongs to a General: But, shall I say, to a Thomas,
who would not believe his Master? Nay, rather to a blessed Saint, (viz: Saint
James) who died (though a Bishop) for the honor of his Master, Quis non
contremiscat (faith Saint Austin) cum Apostolus dicit [Omnes?] non offenditis,
sed offendimus? Who cannot but tremble, like the heartlesse Deer, to hear the
Apostle pronounce this impartial word [All?] and not ye all, but we all
offend? Tremble then we must; for, the Prophet Isaiah has his Nos omnes too;
All we, like Sheep, have gone astray; we have, every one, turned to our own
way, Esaias 53.6. And, Peccare, est more peccandum errare; to sin is to go out
of our way, like silly Cattle, Sheep especially. Moreover, this [All] pricketh,
not only the Church Militant, which is invisible; but that part also, which is
visible: For, a meliori ad pejus valet argumentum: If Aaron makes a molten
Calfe, the Israelites will worship it: If the Commanders plunder, the common
Soldiers will steal: If the Babes of grace will depose their KING, the
graceless Babes will murder Him: If black Saints have their aberrations,
white Devils will have their transgressions; Who can say, I have made my heart
clean, I am clean from sin? Prove. 20.9. Surely, there is no man just on the
earth, that does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7.22. There is no man that
sins not, 2 Chronicles. 6.36. Wherefore the Spouse of Christ does ingenuously
acknowledge her black hue and swart complexion, Cant. 1.5. And, the Fathers do
commonly compare her to the Moon, and well may they do so, in respect of her
borrowed light, and spotted face: All the beams which she reflecteth to the
world, are darted upon her by the Sun of righteousness, and yet by reason of
her unequal temper, in her brightest shining, she appears spotty. As a fair
face, has a wart; a goodly pomgranate, a rotten kernel; good wine, lees and
dregs; the Sun, his eclipse; the Moon, her spots: So the visible Church of
Christ has her imperfections and faults: And that too, both in respect of 1
Doctrine, and 2 Conversation. We know but in part, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.12.
When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on earth? says our Savior,
Luke 18.8. Again, for her Conversation, she is like Jacob's party colored
sheep: there will be a speckled breed, so long as the flocks cast their eyes on
motly vanities, in the gutters of this world. There will be tares amongst the
wheat, in the same field: chafe with the corn, on the same floor, Mat. 3.12.
good fish and bad in the same net, Mat. 13.47. And all, even we all do offend
in many things. Was not Saint Chrysostom blinded with the opinion of
Free Will, and Peter's Supremacy? did not Saint Cyprian hold Rebaptization? did
not Origin maintain Universal salvation of Men and Devils? did not Saint
Austine write doubtfully about Purgatory, and for a while held confidently that
Children could not be saved without the Lord's Supper? Did not Saint Jerome
maintain Virginity above Marriage? Did not Tertullian believe second Marriage
unlawful? Illiricus fail about Original sin? And Luther about
Consubstantiation? Cum multis aliis, etc. Yea, whole Churches have offended in
matters of Faith, and good Manners. The Galatians erred about Justification:
The Corinthians about the Resurrection: The Romans, Colossians and
Thessalonians, had haughty spirits, brabling Sophisters, and brethren that
walked disorderly, Romans 12.2.16. Coloss. 3.8. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. ver. 6. and
15.9.13. and 17. Were not the seven Churches of Asia faulty? Jezebel prevailed
in Thyatira; Sardis had a name without life; Pergamus was tainted with
Baalisme; and Laodicea with luke-warmnesse; and Ephesus had forsaken her first
Love. And does it not appear, that the visible and glorious Churches of
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, have grievously erred and offended, if we
look upon the Superstition, Heresies and Atheism now reigning there?

And God (doubtless) permits these offenses and errors in his Church, that
the Elect might be employed and tried; Reprobates left unexcusable; Gods
strength appear in our weakness, and his mercy and justice in such variety of
objects; For, The best of us all do offend in many things: And are not we
(think ye) much bound to our Proto parents for this our frail and weak
condition? Surely, their unlawful desire of knowledge, brought upon them, and
us all, so black ignorance, as that we know nothing (as we ought to know) Job
8.9. But we see things, per transennam, or, rimulam, or (as Saint Paul
speaks) darkly, as in a glass. Can we truly say (as Saint Bernard sometimes)
the image of God is neither deceased, nor decreased in us? Or, (as most of the
Schoolmen) though the actual image is decayed in us, yet the aptitudinall
does remain? Place the image of God where you will: If in the Faculties, the
Understanding is obscured, and the Will opposite: In the Appetite? that is
distracted: In supernatural graces? those are defaced. Well (therefore) may we
conclude with Epiphanius, Though there be not an extinction of it in any part,
yet there is an inquination in all. Yea, in a word, Man being in honor
regarded not, but became like the Beasts that perish: The Fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge: Or rather, their sweet
meat has proved unto us sour sauce: Our first Parents, with a short
breakfast, have brought a surfeit upon us all, their Posterity, whereof they
cannot recover so long as they do breath under earths spangled Canopie: None
but Christ Jesus alone was free from sin, who was, (...), God-man: For, In
many things we offend all.

Do all we offend in many things? Then justly may we condemn many who offend
(shall I say, in great things; in the greatest things?) even in all things.

1. There is a generation as dark as Hell; yet, too too visible in our
Climate: How many Sons of Belial have we amongst us, who fear not God, no,
nor reverence man; though Gods Vicegerent, and their lawful Sovereign! How
many cursed, seditious Shebaes, blowing the tumultuous Trumpets of Rebellion,
and saying, we have no part in CHARLES, nor inheritance in the Son of JAMES;
every man to his Tents, O England! How many Sacrilegious Baltasars, Plundering
Achans, Heart-burning Saul's, Covetous Nabals, Oppressing Ahabs, Whorish
Jezebels, Temporizing Demasses, Fratricideous Cains, Regicideous Jehues,
Bloodthirsty Nimrods, Malicious Doegs, Backbiting Ziba's, Cursing Shimei's,
Scoffing Chams, and Profane Esaus! I say again, Oh how many! The Echo
answers, Many. And these are black, without show of the contrary, to a
discerning eye: Short of Agrippa, not worthy to be termed, seeming Christians:
Corrupt are they, and abominable in their doings, drinking iniquity like water,
and sinning as it were with Cart-ropes: Yea, they have sold themselves to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and in the sight of men: There is no
fear of God, nor shame of men, before their eyes: They have made falsehood
their refuge, and under ungodliness are they hid: Therefore shall the Lord
rain upon them snares, fire and brimstone, this shall be their portion to
drink: yea, the Lord shall bring upon them destruction; yea, the Lord our God
shall destroy them.

2. Again, there are a sort of People whose ways may seem right, even to a
good Man: but their ways are the ways of death: Our Savior calls them,
painted Sepulchers, Sepulchra, quasi semi-sepulchra, exterius nitida, interius
foetida, fair without, and foul within. They are like unto Apothecaries
Galli-pots, quorum tituli remedium habent, pixides venenum, without they have
the title of some excellent preservative; but within, they are full of deadly
aconite. Without, they are Catoes; within, Neroes: heart them, no men better;
search and try them, no men worse: they will have Jacob's voice, but Esau's
hand: Outwardly they will be John, but inwardly they will be Herod: They
profess like Saints, but practice like Satan's: they have their long Prayers,
but their short preyings. Counterfeit holiness is their cloak for all manner
of Villainies, and the Midwife to bring forth their subtilties. The Eagle
soareth on high, not to fly to heaven; but to gain her prey upon earth: So,
many do carry a great deal of seeming devotion, and lift up their eyes
toward heaven; but they do it, only to accomplish with the more ease,
safety, and applause, their wicked and damnable designs here on earth. But let
such know, that simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquitas, counterfeit holiness is
double iniquity; and our Savior denounces Eight woes against Hypocrites in
Matthew. 23. Neither (to my present remembrance) could I ever find that he
converted any such. Are thy hands full of blood? make thy many prayers then and
see if God will hear thee in the day of thy calamity. Isa. 1.15. He that
regards iniquity in his heart God will not hear; his very prayers and all
his outward acts of devotion, in the service of God, shall be turned into sin
unto him.

Thou do fast (perhaps) but is it to strife and debate, and to smite with the
fist of wickedness? Thou do give Alms to the poor (peradventure)
sometimes: Thou come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; but is thy heart
all this while swollen with ambition, covetousness, envy, hatred and malice?
assure thy self thy sacrifice is not accepted; for, God will have mercy, and
not sacrifice; to do this is but as the chopping off a Dogs neck. Thou
pretendest a reformation, but thou will have it purchased by bloody and
unlawful means: Mark therefore what the Prophet Micah speaks, Mic. 3.10, 11,
12. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The Heads
thereof judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the
Prophets thereof prophesy for money; yet, will they lean upon the Lord, and
say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come upon us. Therefore shall
Zion, for your sake, be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be an heap; and
the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest. To build up Zion
and Jerusalem, was (doubtless) an acceptable work unto the Lord: but to do it
with blood, injustice, and lies, was so detestable unto him, that he threatens
an utter desolation to both Zion and Jerusalem, for their sakes. Well then, if
we find these Wolves in Sheepskins, let us (if we can) hang them up; for they
are, and will be Wolves still: Sin they will, and that with a witness: Yea,
let us pray, that these many black and white Devils, who offend in all things,
may be cut off; that we all, who offend in many things, may not offend in any
thing: For, In many things we offend all.

But do we all continually offend in many things? And shall we do so till
death? What may we then think of those fanatic spirits, who do ascribe,
judgment, without error; and holiness, without sin, unto the most sinful
Sons and Daughters of men? Surely, from what we have already heard, we may
truly confute, and justly condemn the Church of Rome (that Whore of Babylon)
for assuming to her self such a garment of purity and infallibility, as to
merit and superarrogate Heaven; notwithstanding she has not left her Whorish
tricks, but still brings forth unclean Children, of an unclean seed; her
infallibility failing, and her purity being impure; that man of sin, viz: the
Pope, (say some of their own Writers) cannot sin, err, or offend: But, this
being openly and apparently false; for some of their Popes have been
Conjurers, Sorcerers and Inchanters, Adulterers, Murderers, Heretics and
Atheists; yea (in a word) their Innocents, Nocents; their Benedicts, Maledicts;
their Bonifaces, Malifaces, etc. Therefore (I say) their Jesuits of late have
found out a subtle distinction, viz: that the Pope may sin, err and offend
in his own person, as a man, sed non quatenus Papa, but not so far forth as
he is Pope, e Cathedra, to define and teach errors. Although we may grant it
to be a subtle distinction, yet not a solid one; for if the Pope cannot guide
his own faith, how can it be expected that he should guide the faith of the
Church? The rule must not only make strait that which is crooked, but it must
be strait it self. Moreover, these Romanists deserve to be blamed, for
affirming, that the blessed Virgin was pure from all sin, both Original, and
Actual: Their words are these; Our Lady never sinned; our Lady never sinned so
much as venially in all her life; she exactly fulfilled every tittle of the
whole Law, that is, she was without sin. That she was not so great a Sinner
as the rest of Gods Children, I do with humble acknowledgment believe; but,
that she was without sin, her own expression declares the contrary, in that
she said, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior: If Christ was her Savior, she
must of necessity be a Sinner.

Well may likewise the Manichees, Catherists, or Puritanes, be condemned, who
(as Saint Jerome writes) avouched, That they neither had sinned, nor could
sin; because they were trees of righteousness, and a good tree (said they)
cannot bring forth evil fruit: Therefore we cannot see how we should sin
even in thought. Likewise the Donatists, who dreamed themselves to be so
perfect as by their perfection to justify other men, as Saint Cyprian tells
us. Also, the Pelagians, and Family of Love; for they were of opinion, that
they were so free from sin, as that they needed not, neither would they
vouchsafe to say that Petition in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses,
(as Saint Austine testifyeth, lib. 2. cont. Petil. c. 14.) Moreover, the
Adamites, who deemed themselves as pure as Adam and Evah were before their
Fall, (as Epiphanius averreth.) And the damnable Carpocratiant, who
blasphemously belched out of their black mouths and sulpherous breaths, that
they were as holy as Christ Jesus himself, (as Ireneus affirms, lib. 1. c.
24.) I might here point out unto you many more sinful-sinlesse Justitiaries, as
the Novatians, Jovinians, Enthusiasts, Antinomists, Brownists, Barrowists,
Independents, and Millenaries: But, it is not my desire to lead you any longer
in these crooked paths; for whosoever walks in them shall not know peace:
neither will I detain you in the barren wilderness of vain man's
pharisaicall conceits, where you may (doubtless) be scratcht and torn with
thorns and briers: Rather will I bring you into a specious garden where you
may have choice of fragrant flowers for your own utility and consolation.
Seeing then, In many things we offend all.

Vbi debita consideratio? Where is our due consideration? Have all Gods dear
Children their frailties and deviations? Is his Church visible and invisible
possessed with an Ignis fatuus that leads out of the way? Are his chosen,
subject to many aberrations and transgressions? And shall not we, even all we
of England, who were sometimes members of the most glorious, and envied Church
in the Christian World, Search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord our
God? Gather your selves, even gather you, O Nation not worthy to be beloved,
before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe, that passes in a day, and
before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the day of the
Lords anger come upon you, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Let me speak to all the Tribes of
Israel, to all the states and conditions of England; to you of Judah, the
Princes; to you of Benjamin, the Counselors; to you of Assure, the Merchants;
and to you of Levi, the Priests: yea, to you all of what rank or quality
soever. Let me ask you, Have not all of you offended? nay, do not ye still
offend in many things? If not, what means the lowing of the Oxen, and the
bleating of the Sheep? What may we understand by those strong cries which
ascend up to heaven for vengeance to fall down upon us? You that turn Bethel
into Beth-aven, the house of God into a den of Thieves: You, that rob the
Levites of their portion, devouring whole Churches, Steeples and all, and have
the bells jingling at your heels, do not ye offend? You, that cause
judgment, and justice to grow up as hemlock in the furrows of the field, do
not ye offend? You that take darkness for light, and light for darkness;
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: You that have spoken words, swearing
falsely in making a Covenant: You that swore to make your KING glorious, the
richest Prince in Christendom, to be feared abroad and to be loved at home:
You, that declared and protested, that you did not fight against the Power and
Person of the KING, only against his evil Council: You likewise that
declared, [calling heaven and earth to record of your real intentions] that
you would re-inthrone Him and restore Him to His just Rights, have not ye
offended? For, does not he, that provokes him to anger (only) sin against
his own soul? You, who (through ambition) have trod upon the Crown, and
trampled upon the Scepter, and would not be subject to superiority: You, who
(through covetousness) have sequestered, and plundered men's Estates, and (to
fill your unsatiable desires) have been prodigal in shedding your Brethrens
blood: Let me ask (I pray) have not you offended? nay, do not you still
offend? Let me ask you of the Parliament and Assembly; Have not you offended
God, your King, the Church, the Commonwealth, this whole Nation, and your own
Consciences? shall I say in doing no good, or rather, in doing hurt? shall I
doubt, ye have been the Chief Instruments, to bring upon us, and your selves
(through meum and tuum) all the Interjections of woe and lamentation?

Have not Councels erred and offended, even in matters of faith? Was it not
ordained by a Council, that if any man did confess that Jesus was the Christ,
he should be excommunicate? Was there not a Council gathered to suppress
Christ and his Doctrine? Did not a Council consult how they might take Jesus
by subtilty and kill him? Did not a Council seek for false Witness to put him
to Death? Was not Jesus bound, led away, and delivered to Pilate by a Council?
A Council judged our Savior to be both a Deceiver and a Blasphemer. A
Council corrupted the Soldiers, and willed them to tell a lie. Peter and John
were withstood by a Council, and not suffered to preach. And a Council caused
the Apostles to be beaten. Arrianisme was confirmed by the Council of
Ariminum, as Saint Jerome affirms. The Council of Trent made the Traditions
and works of frail sinful Men equivalent to the sacred Scriptures. The
second Council of Nice established the adoration of Images. The Council of
Lateran clipped the wings of the prerogative of Princes to advance the Pope and
Clergy above them. I might mention many more, besides the Councels that have
been of our own Nation in our own Kingdom from time to time: let it suffice,
that the consideration of these things ought to make us believe and embrace
nothing ordained by Men, unless the same be consonant and agreeable to the
word of God. I am sure Saint Hilarie (well weighing the premises) in his
Epistle to Constantine calls the Synod of Mediolane, The Malignant Synagogue:
And Gregory Nazianzen (in his 42 Ep. to Procopius) openly pronounced, that, He
never saw any good end of a Council. They are (ordinarily) like Jeremiah's
figgs, If good, very good; if bad, very bad. Let us therefore, in the towering
thoughts of our own purity and infallibility, look down upon the black feet
of our frailty and infirmity: For, In many things we offend all.

But, does Saint James acknowledge this? Vbi cenfessle nostra? where is our
confession? We decline sin through all the cases, (says one witily:) In the
Nominative, by Pride; in the Genetive, by Luxury; in the Dative, by Simonie; in
the Accusative, by Detraction; in the Vocative, by Adulation; in the Ablative,
by Extortion: And shall we not acknowledge them, in any case? God gave shame
for sin, and boldness for confession; and, when sin is committed, shall
shame be absent? and, when it should be confessed, shall shame be present? Shall
we be like unto the Elephant, who will not drink of clear water in the limpid
fountain, lest he should see his deformity? or, like old Gentle-women grown
out of date, who will not trouble themselves to behold their faces in a glass,
because (they know) they shall see nothing better than hollow eyes, pase
cheeks, and a wrimkled countenance? Do we all offend in many things, and shall
we hide our selves from the light, and say we offend not in any thing? Let God
be True, and every Man a Liar, as it is written. Let us not hide our sins,
either by excusing them, with Aaron, Exodus 32.24. or by coloring them with
fair pretenses and distinctions, as the Jews. Jer. 22.14. or as Saul, 1 Samuel
15.20, 21. Or by translating them from our selves, and laying the blame upon
others, as Adam, Genesis the 3. Or by defending them, or by extenuating them, or
lastly, by denying them, as the Harlot, Prove. 20.30. Let us not say, as those
in Saint Bernard's days, Non feci; si feci, non male feci; si male feci, non
multum male; si multum male, non mala intention; si mala intention, tamen
aliena persuasione. I did it not; if I did it, I did it not ill in doing it; If
I did ill in doing it, not very ill; If very ill, not with an ill intent; If
with an ill intent, it was by another's persuasion. But let us, with David,
ingenuously acknowledge our transgressions, and let our sins be ever before
us: For, there is no remission without confession, but upon our confession God
will forgive. Deus tegat vulnera, noli tu (says Saint Austine, in Psalm. 31.)
Si tu tegere volueris, embescens medicus non curabit, Let God hide thy wounds,
do not thou; if thou will needs hide them, the Surgeon, as one ashamed at
thy folly, will not cure thee. God will not pour in the balm of his mercy
till we let out our corruption by confession. God, with Elisha, demands vessels
empty with confession before he will come in. If we set our sins in order
before our faces, God will cast them behind his back; but, if we cast them
behind our backs, God will set them before his face. If we remember them, God
will forget them: If we forget them, God will remember them. Solvit criminum
nexus, verecunda confessio peccatorum, says Saint Ambrose, lib. 2. de penit.
the knot of our sins is loosed by an humble confession of them. Ipsa agnitio
culpae est impetratio veniae, says Saint Bern. cap. 11. Med. the
acknowledgment of the fault, does impetrate pardon. If we confess our sins
(says Saint John, 1 John 1.9.) God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. It was a very easy
physic which the Man of God prescribed unto Naaman, (2 Kings 9.10.) viz: to go
and wash seven times in the River Jordan, and to be cleansed from his leprosy:
And surely (my Beloved) we may stand and wonder at this, if our leprosy were
not as ill; nay, worse, by how much the soul is better than the body: yet, we
have the same physic prescribed, only confess, and be clean. Yea, (says
David, Psalm. 32.5.) I said I will confess my sin, and thou forgavest the
punishment of my sin. Note, that this speech of the Prophet implies two
things: First, the difficulty of the act of confession; it must not be done
hand over head, but upon due deliberation, and serious consideration. [I said I
will.] Secondly, God's readiness to forgive: I did but say, that I would
confess, and thou forgavest: Nondum pronunciat, sed solum promittit, and Deus
dimittit, etc. says Cassiodore upon the place. As yet he utters not his
confession, but only promises to do it, and God accepts. As yet the word is
not in his mouth that man may hear his confession, but God hears and
receives him into favor. Oh therefore (dear Brethren) let us ascend up into
the Tribunal of our mind, even against our selves, and place our selves guilty
before our selves, that God may place us before him. For, In many things we
offend all.

But, is our condition thus transgressive, and therefore deplorable? Vbi tum
Patientia nostra? Where is then our Patience? When Samuel told Eli from the
mouth of God, that the wickedness of his house should not be purged with
sacrifice, or burntoffering, for ever; he answered both meekly and patiently,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems to him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. When David's
Son, even rebellious Absalom, conspired to take his Fathers Crown from his
head, and his head from his shoulders; David fled from Jerusalem with this
patheticall and patient resolution, (2 Samuel 15.25, 26.) If I shall find favor
in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and the
Tabernacle thereof: But, if he say thus, I have no delight in thee: Behold,
here am I, let him do to me as seems good in his eyes. When Shimei the Son
of Gera came out, and cursed, saying, Come forth, come forth, thou man of
blood, and man of Belial: The Lord has brought upon thee all the blood of the
house of Saul, etc. 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. What said David to Abishai, who would have
cut off this Miscreants head, ver. 11. Behold, my Son, which came of mine
own bowels, seeks my life: then how much more may this Son of Jemini?
Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him: It may be the Lord will
look on my tears, and do me good for his cursing this day. And marvel not to
hear him thus speaking, when you thoroughly weigh that ingenuous
acknowledgement of his (in Psalm the 119.75.) saying, I know thy judgments
are right, and thou have afflicted me justly. Job upon the consideration of
this, in the depth of his misery, would not mount up so high as to plead with
his Maker, and contend with his punishments Inflictour; but laid his hand upon
his mouth, and would not open it, unless to say, Though thou killest me, yet
will I trust in thee: And, I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Our
stripes are not according to our sins; for, if God should beat us with as many
rods, as we have grieved him with sins, he should add yet ten times more to
our greatest afflictions: We go astray like sheep; shall we bark or bleate,
when God sends forth his dog (affliction) to bring us home again? Will the
dutiful Child be outrageous against his loving Father for a slight correction,
when as (for his gross offenses) he deserves an heavy punishment? Will the
skillful Mariner be offended at a boisterous wind, which (notwithstanding) to
him is a favorable gale to bring him to his wished Port? God (yea, our
gracious God) deals with his Children, as Joseph with his Brother Benjamin;
Joseph put his Cup into Benjamin's sack, that he might return again to him:
so God causes his Benjamins (his Children) to drink of the cup of
tribulation, that (when they have offended by riding full speed after their
own vain imaginations) they may make a gentle retreat (through patience) into
the communicative lines of Gods free acceptance. We are empty of goodness; no
marvel then, if God deals with us, as the Gardener with the Buckets of his
Well, who brings them down, that he may fill them: God casts us down by
affliction, that he may raise us up full of the grace of patience. In the time
of prosperity, the regenerate do hold forth the white Rose of innocence; but in
the time of adversity, the red Rose of submissive meekness. Are we (therefore)
in any adversity, distress, or calamity, either in respect of health, wealth,
friends, freedom, good-name, nay, life it self? Let us (I beseech you) say
with the holy Church ( Mic. 7.9.) I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him. Nay, seeing affliction brings us home to
God, let us come home unto, yea, into our selves, and possess our fowls with
patience, which (as Tertullian speaks) is, animarum anima, the soul of
souls; for, as we possess our bodies by our souls, so we possess our souls
by patience: Yea (Beloved) as we all offend in many things, set us all be
obedient in this one thing, viz: To run with patience the race that is set
before us, looking toward Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith: For, In
many things we offend all.

But, is this the height of our terrene perfection, and the summity of our
earthly glory, to have our coat of Or, and our conversation Sable; to be
graced with the Title of Saints, and to be disgraced with the Tract of
Malefactors; to be all endowed with integrity, and yet all to be brim-full of
infirmity? Oh then! Qualis imitatio nostra? How should our imitation be
qualified? Greg: Naz: in his panegyricall Oration in the behalf of Saint
Basit, says, that his Parishioners so dearly and truly affected, and so
wonderfully admired him for his virtues, as every one's care and vigilance was
unanimously to imitate whatsoever was in him. And Diodorus Siculus ( lib. 5.)
declares that the Ethiopians would imitate their Princes, even in their
natural defects and mutilations: Would God my fellow subjects of England, that
cry up Christianity so highly (indeed none can do more) would imitate the
virtues, or rather, excellent graces of their unparallelled gracious
Sovereign: Yet know, that Humanum est errare; and, In many things we offend
all. Let us not therefore draw the infirmities and deformities of others in
lively colors, and pourtray their comely feature in dead: Let not others evil
actions become a copy for us to write after; but (as Saint Austin does counsel
us, saying) Si quid boni, a nobis est imitandum; si quid mali, a nobis est
fugiendum: If we see any good in other men, let us imitate them in that; if any
evil, let us shun and avoid them in that. Agreeable hereunto is that counsel
of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye Followers of me (says he) as I am of Christ;
i. e. So far forth as I follow Christ, so far forth do ye follow me, and
no further; for I have my frailties and imperfections; and the best of us, that
are Ministers, are but men, and subject to the like passions with you. If a man
should find a piece of gold covered over with dirt, will he possess himself
of the dirt, and throw away the gold? A Scholar that has a copy set him,
which is well penned, but somewhat defaced with certain blots; in imitating
the copy, will he imitate the blots? As (therefore) the Pilot looks to the
Northern Star to bring him to his wished Part: so let our eyes be set upon
the good actions of our brethren (for our imitation) to bring us to the Haven
of eternal happiness: For, In many things we offend all.

Again, Are all in this sad predicamentall relation? Vbi Timor, and Tremor?
Where is our Fear, and Dread? It is proper to God (says Aristotle) to do
what he will; to man, to do what he can: But now the World is turned
copsy-turvy; God does what he can, and man what he will: Every man will be a
law of liberty unto himself; and that which should be unto him for his wealth
he makes an occasion of falling; yea, of violent rushing into sin, as the
Horse into the battle.

Most men will swear; nay, shall their oaths drop out of their mouths, like
Joab's sword out of his sheath? Rather, they will send them forth like a flock
of birds, hundreds together, because Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh. They
will wallow in the stinking puddle of drunkenness, and sensuality, because
Noah was overtaken with his own Wine. They will rob, and plunder, and level
the estates of their brethren, because the Israelites (though by an especial
warrant from God, for their good service) robbed the Ethnic Egyptians. They
will account uncleanness to be but a venial sin, because David committed
adultery. They say not, we do, but, we will offend: like unto Cesar's jacta
est alea, fall back, fall edge, we will persist in our sins: Or, like
Catiline, who when he had fired the City of Rome with his conspiracies, had no
more grace then to say, Incendium meum ruina extinguam, I will quench the fire
I have kindled with a final ruin; I will add worse to evil, thirst to
drunkenness, and leave the success of my wicked and ungracious actions to the
extremest adventures. Is not this a witting, wilful, and presumptuous
offending? Surely this not a stumbling, and a falling into sin; for, Praeventio
dici non potest (says Saint Jerome) cum quid praemeditato fit: That man cannot
be said to be prevented, who does any thing upon serious premeditation. And
shall we sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. If we go into sin, as
Sisera into Jacl's Tent, it will smite us to the earth. If we allow our selves
any one sin, as taking encouragement from the infirmities of the Saints, God
will blot us out of the Book of life. If we suffer our sins to come one on
the neck of another, like the Messengers of Job, our punishments must needs
follow, like the plagues of Egypt. If we think to please God, in pleasing our
perverse nature, the anger of the Lord will smoke in fury against us therefore.
Let (therefore) the fallings of the Saints be our rising, their sins our
motives to amendment of life, and their transgressions make us more watchful
over our ways, more suspicious of our weakness, and more forward to flee to
God for his assistance in the way to Heaven. If this be done to the green tree,
what to the dry? If to the best, what to the bad? If God suffers his dear
Children to fall into sin, let us look narrowly to our selves, and walk
cautelously and circumspectly in all our ways, and (as much as lies in us)
shun all occasions of evil; yea, let us work out our salvation with fear and
trembling; and pray to our gracious God, with the heart and words of David,
Psalm. 19. Keep thy Servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the
dominion over men so shall I be undefiled and innocent from the great offense:
For, In many things we offend all.

Moreover, are we all found guilty before God's Tribunal of justice? Vbi
fiducia nostra? where is our faith and confidence? Why do not we fly to his
seat of mercy? when we do approach that, with true faith and repentance, we
shall assuredly obtain the free pardon and forgiveness of all our sins. Our
tears of contrition, by the mercies of God through the precious blood and
merits of Jesus Christ, shall wash us thoroughly from our sins. The blood of
Christ will make our scarlet, crimson sins, as white as snow and wool.
Though a man (in persecution) deny Christ, and renounce his Religion; yet he
may be restored and repent, as Peter, Luke 22.32. Although a man be a great
Idolater, Sorcerer, or given to Witchcraft, yet God may receive him into mercy,
as he did Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. Some among the Corinthians were Fornicators,
Adulterers, Wantons, and Buggerers, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Raylers, and
Extortioners; yet, were they washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 11. None are exempted
from pardon, but such as totally and finally deny Christ, Matthew. 10.37. or,
such as are guilty of a universal, total and final Apostasy and Impenitency,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Or, (lastly) such as wilfully and maliciously renounce the
known truth. Let us with comfort assure our selves, there is hope in store for
great and heinous Offenders; (contrary to the gross opinion of the Novatians
and others, who teach that sins committed after a mass conversion are
unpardonable) for, though we offend in many things, we remain God's Children
still: for, In many things we offend all.

Saint Jerome propounds a fit question out of those words of Solomon ( Prove.
24.16.) A just man falls seven times and rises up again, and he answers it
as comfortable, viz: Si justus, quomodo cadit? si cadit, quomodo justus?
Nunquam amittit nomen justititiae, qui resurgit per poenitentiam; If he be a
righteous man, how comes it to pass that he falls? If he falls, how can he
be a righteous man? He never loses (says he) the name of a righteous man,
that rises again by repentance. Who will say that that man's hands are dirty,
who, (but even now) washed them clean? Wherefore, let us not despair of mercy
and forgiveness, and say with Cain, My sin is greater than can be pardoned:
If we do, we deserve Saint Austine's objurgation, Mentiris Cain, mentiris in
gutture, thou lie Cain, thou lie in thy throat, Gods mercies are more than
thy sins, and the Lords compassion greater than thy transgression. It was a
greater sin in Judas (says he) to hang himself, than to betray his Lord and
Master. God has but drops of justice; but floods of mercy, one day for
judgment, but a whole year for pardon. Christ Jesus has fully satisfied the
justice of God, Coloss. 2.14. he has cancelled the bond of our debts, and,
washed us in his precious blood, Revel. 1.5. He was punished that we might be
pardoned, he was condemned that we might be justified: The Lords everflowing
and overflowing fountain, is still set open for sin and for uncleanness,
Zach. 13.1. Where the Spirit and the Spouse say, Come, and let him that is a
thirst, come, and let whosoever will, come, and take of the water of life
freely, Revel. 22.17. Come unto me (says our Savior) all ye that are weary
and heavy laden and I will ease you. Behold, he sweetly invites us, [Come:] he
plainly directs us [to me:] he strongly incites us, [all ye that are weary and
heavy laden:] and he freely promises, [and I will ease you.] O quantum amoris!
Oh what, and how much love! It is mandatum amoris, (says Saint Bernard) a
commadement sugared with love; Dulcis Domini, dulce mandatum, a sweet
commandment, proceeding from a sweet Lord and Master. Let us therefore fly to
this rock of defense, and fountain of consolation, in our most bitter agonies;
yea, when the sorrows of hell and death are coming upon us. It is said of the
Woman in the Gospel, who was troubled with a bloody Issue, that she came behind
Christ and touched the hemme of his garment. Why (says a Father) did she not
come before him, or, on one side of him; but behind him? Because (says he) she
would have Christ between God and her: So, let us get Christ between God and
us, by a true and lively faith, and then we shall be sure to find him unto us a
merciful Mediator, Intercessour, and gracious Redeemer. And let us say
confidently and comfortably with Saint Auselme, Etsi Domine, ego commisi unde
me damnare potes, tu tamen non amisisti unde me salvare potes: O blessed Lord,
though I have committed those transgressions, for which thou may justly damn
me: Yet I know thou have not lost those compassions by which thou may save
me. Thou have mercy for us all, who do not sin through malicious
wickedness. And thy mercies are not a few, but many, because, In many things
we offend all. Have mercy (therefore) upon us (O Lord) after thy great
goodness, according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away our offenses,
etc.

Lastly, (to sum up all in few words, lest I my self should offend too, in
pressing too much upon your patience) are we thus abased, through our own
inherent corruption, and daily transgressing, and shall not we therefore now be
thoroughly abashed? Qualis est regulatio nostra? What manner of Christian
submission do we carry toward the set rule of God, and that lawful
Authority, set up and confirmed by him? What is our carriage and deportment
toward our Maker, and toward Man; toward our heavenly Father, and our
earthly Brethren? May not I ask, Vbi est humilitas, and charitas nostra? Where
is our Humility, and Charity? First, where is our Humility? Do we yield unto
our Inferiors? Do we give place to our Equals? or rather, Do we not insult
over our Betters; our Betters, both in the phrase of the World, and in the
language of Ganaan; our Betters, in riches and honors, and in grace and
goodness? Is not that in our daily practice (touching the Magistracy and
Ministry) for which Korah and his company perished, though they did but utter,
and that but once too, against Mose: and Aaron, saying, Ye take too much upon
you? Number. 16.3. Are not many of us like unto Pompey and Caesar; for, Pompey
could abide no Equal, and Caesar could suffer no Superior? Alas! How vainly
are we puffed up with a strong conceit of our own [crooked] uprightness, and
[sinfull] holiness! How do we vaunt and boast of the good we do, of the
goods we have and of the victories we obtain! Yet, if we would try our selves
by the touchstone of Gods holy word, we should find our selves unprofitable
Servants, and be enforced to acknowledge, that, In many things we offend all.

Dionysius thought his God had blessed him for robbing Aesculapius his Tent;
because he had a favorable and prosperous gale: So, many do wax proud of
their own [nocent] innocence; because they are still prosperous and
successful in all their wicked and unjust designs: As if the success should
infallibly prove the justness of the cause, and the justice of the act.
Surely, if so, the Turk may proudly maintain his Mahometane Religion to be
the true, and his bloody and abominable conversation to be unblamable: For,
(through the Christians divisions) with his bow and shield he has conquered
the greatest part of Christendom. The Laodiceans were proud of their
condition; They said, they were rich, and increased in goods, and had need of
nothing, Revel. 3.17. yet, were they wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. The proud Pharisee would cast up the number of his good
deeds, with, I thank thee that I am not as other men, or as this Publican.
But, (for all that) he was so faulty, and the more for that; that he was
condemned, and the faulty Publican through his humility was justified. It is
(doubtless) far better to be humbly sinful, then proudly holy; for, to be
poor in spirit, is to be rich in soul. I beseech you therefore (my dear
Brethren) Be not many Masters, knowing, that we shall receive the greater
condemnation, Jam. 3.1. for, (consider) (...), In many things we offend all.

It is as lawful to be Masters, as to be Fathers; but, we must not be
ambitious, vainglorious, intruding, usurping Masters, such as do go before
they are sent; such as, without a lawful call, rule, or warrant, do take upon
them (like proud temerarious Phaeton) to guide the Chariot of the
Commonwealth, and Church. Saint Austine, the Ordinary Gloss, Bid, Luther,
etc. do understand by these Masters, such as do take upon them to teach
others, when as they themselves are so ignorant, as that they need to be
taught. Saint James wrote this Epistle to his Countrymen that were converted
and dispersed, who though they were in some measure Proficients in Christ's
School; yet, would be dehort them from too much forwardness in undertaking
the instructing of others: And that because this their ambition would bring
upon them the greater condemnation; and he does illustrate, how, for, says he,
In many things we offend all.

All of us deserve condemnation, or judgment, for our many offenses: but, they
who sin in this high nature, do deserve and shall assuredly receive the
greater judgment, or condemnation.

Let not then the Shrub think it self as good as the Cedar: Let not the feet
stand in the place of the head: Let every one be content with that calling or
condition of life which God has bestowed on him: Let him not be a Bishop in
another man's Diocese; but let every man move in his own Orb. If thou be
a Mechanic, or Tradesman, do not take upon thee to be a Divine: If thou
find thy self furnished with spiritual gifts, use them to the edification
of thy family: Insult not, intrude not, usurp not over, nor into the
Ministry: Be not many Masters; nay, be not any Masters, in this sense: But let
us be clothed with humility, and in lowliness of mind, think another man's
gifts better than our own: Let us not be high-minded, but fear; and walk
humbly with our God, and he will exalt us; he will give us his grace here, and
glory hereafter. But if we will be ambitious, and go beyond the bounds and
limits that God has set us, we shall have Lucifer's doom, and receive the
greater condemnation: For, In many things we offend all.

Again, Vbi Charitas nostra? Where is our Charity? What is become of those
noble pair of Lovers David and Jonathan, who had but one heart? Pilades and
Orestes, who had but one life (the one being dead, the other died also?) Ruth
and Naomi, who could not be parted? Basil and Nazianzen, of whom it is said,
Anima una erat inclusa in duobus corporibus, One soul was included in two
bodies? They are dead, and (in truth) so is our love. In the Primitive times
there was so much love amongst the Christians, that it was, ad stuporem
Gentilium, to the astonishment of the Heathen; insomuch that they would point
with the finger, with an Ecce ^t invicem se diligunt! See, fee, oh how entirely
do the Christians love one another! But, in these days there is so little love
amongst us, that it is, ad pudorem Christianorum, to the shame of Christians;
for (as learned Zanchy speaks) Ecce ut invicem se oderunt; Behold, how they
hate one another, revile, persecute, and murder one another.

May not I truly complain (with Saint Chrysostom) and say; (...),

O the cruelty! O the savagenesse! O the inhumanity of us Christians! We show
our selves to be borne in Thebes, and not in Athens, and to be of the true
Cadmean brood, because we take so much delight in killing and destroying one
another. That Poet both wittily and truly divided the World into four ages,
viz: the golden, the silver, the leaden, and the iron age: And surely, if ever
any people lived in this last age, we of England (especially) do at this time;
for, if we look for mercy, behold cruelty; if for justice, behold oppression;
if for righteousness, behold a cry; if for love and charity, behold envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness; from which, yea, from all which
(it shall be my daily Letanie to say) Good Lord deliver us.

Shall not we that are Christians, consider one another, to provoke unto Love?
Shall not we lay to heart our own erring condition, that we may the more
commiserate those that do sin against us? Be not many Masters (says Saint
James) i.e. (as Piscator and Pareus, etc.) do not over-strictly mark, and
then severely censure, and rashly condemn the words and actions of your
brethren, and afterward them for those; backbite not, detract not, defame not,
slander not, nor insult over them for their transgressions; for, In many things
we offend all. Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall; and let him
remember, That there shall be judgment merciless, to him that will show no
mercy: And, Nihil ad misericordiam sic inclinat (says Saint Austin) quantum
proprii periculi consideratio: Nothing does make a man so inclinable to mercy
and compassion, as the consideration of the danger himself is in continually,
and what he has already justly deserved at Gods hand. The sight of the eye
(says Aristotle) has no color, that so it may discern all colors: So if we
were not guilty of sin our selves, it might be more tolerable for us to pry
into the lives and conversations of others, and to show them no pity, who will
make themselves so filthy: But far be it from us to throw stones at others,
when as we deserve to be stoned our selves: Let us not be so nasty, as to lay
our filthy unclean hands on the freckled faces of our brethren. Brethren,
says Saint Paul, Gal. 6.1. if a man be fallen by occasion, into any fault, ye
which are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, ((...),
do unto him, as a Chyrurgion unto his Patient, who has a leg or an arm
dislocated, use him tenderly and gently) considering thy self, lest thou also
be tempted. Such a construction Saint Bernard made of the fall of his Brother;
for he wept bitterly, using these words, Ille hodie, and ego cras; he has
fallen this day, and I not unlikely to fall to morrow: So when we see others
fall into sin, let us exhort and admonish, reprove gently, direct wisely, and
comfort without flattery: However, let us mourn, and pray for them. Whosoever
walks according to these rules, peace shall be upon him, and mercy, and upon
the Israel of God: For, In many things we offend all.

Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace, good will toward men. Amen, Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 24. for sight, read site. Page 6. lin. 6. for Sentius, r.
Sextius. Page 6. lin. 18. for c. 7. r. etc. If thou find any more litterall
faults, I pray thee pass by, or amend them.

FINIS.

