REPROBATION ASSERTED: OR, The Doctrine Of Eternal Election and Reprobation
Promiscuously handled, In Eleven Chapters.

WHEREIN The most material Objections made by the Opposers of this Doctrine,
are fully Answered; several Doubts Removed, and sundry Cases of Conscience
Resolved.

By John Bunyan of Bedford, a Lover of Peace and Truth.

ROMANS 11.7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for: But
the Election has obtained it, and the Rest were blinded.

LONDON, Printed for G. L. and are to be sold in Turn-Stile-Alley in Holbourn.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. That there is a Reprobation. CHAP. II. What Reprobation is. CHAP.
III. Of the Antiquity of Reprobation. CHAP. IV. Of the Causes of Reprobation.
CHAP. V. Of the Unchangableness of Eternal Reprobation. CHAP. VI. Whether to be
Reprobated, be the same with being appointed beforehand unto eternal
Condemnation? If not, how do they differ? Also whether Reprobation be the cause
of Condemnation? CHAP. VII. Whether any under eternal Reprobation have just
cause to quarrel with God for not Electing of them? CHAP. VIII. Whether eternal
Reprobation in its self, or in its Doctrine, be in very deed an hindrance to
any man in seeking the salvation of his Soul? CHAP. IX. Whether God would
indeed and in truth, that the Gospel, with the Grace thereof, should be tendered
to those that yet he has bound up under eternal Reprobation? Answered in the
Affirmative. CHAP. X. Seeing then that the Grace of God in the Gospel, is by
that to be proffered to Sinners, as Sinners; as well to the Reprobate as the
Elect; Is it possible for those who indeed are not Elect, to receive it, and be
saved? Answered in the Negative. CHAP. XI. Seeing it is not possible that the
Reprobate should receive this Grace and live, and also seeing this is
infallibly foreseen of God; and again, seeing God has fore-determined to
suffer it so to be; Why does he yet will and command that the Gospel, and so
Grace in the general Tenders thereof, should be proffered unto them? Answered,
and cleared by five Reasons, and the Removing of three Objections.
The Doctrine of Eternal Election and Reprobation Promiscuously handled.
CHAP. I. That there is a Reprobation.
IN my Discourse upon this subject, I shall study as much brevity as Clearness
and Edification will allow me; not adding words to make the Volumn swell, but
contracting my self within the bounds of few Lines, for the profit and
commodity of those that shall take the pains to read my Labors. And though I
might abundantly multiply Arguments for the evincing and vindicating this
Conclusion, yet I shall content my self with some few Scripture-Demonstrations:
The first of which I shall gather out of the Ninth of the Romans, from that
discourse of the Apostle's, touching the Children of the Flesh, and the
Children of the Promise.

1. At the beginning of this Chapter, we find the Apostle grievously lamenting
and bemoaning of the Jews, at the consideration of their miserable state: I say
the truth in Christ, says he, and lie not, my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in
my heart; for I could wish my self accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my
kinsmen according to the Flesh. Poor hearts, says he, they will perish; they
are a miserable sad and helpless People; their eyes are darkened that they may
not see, Romans 11.10.
and their back is bowed down always: Wherefore? Have they not the means of
Grace? Yes verily, and that in goodly measure: First they are Israelites, to
whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving
of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises; whose are the Fathers,
and of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever, Amen. What then should be the reason? Why says he, though they be
the Children of Abraham according to the flesh, yet they are the Children of
Abraham BUT according to the Flesh: For they are not all Israel (in the best
sense) that are of Israel; neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are
they Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. That is, They that are
the Children of the Flesh, they are not the Children of God; but the Children
of the Promise shall be counted for the Seed. So then, here you see that they
that are only the Children of the Flesh (as the greatest part of Israel were)
they are those that are neither counted for the Seed, the Children of Promise,
nor the Children of God; but are rejected, and of the Reprobation. This
therefore shall at this time serve for the first Scripture-Demonstration.

2. Another Scripture you have in the Eleventh Chapter of this Epistle, from
these words, Romans 11.7.
The Election have obtained it, and the REST were blinded. These words are
shedding words, they fever between men and men; the Election, the Rest; the
Chosen, the Left; the Embraced, the Refused: The Election have obtained it, and
the REST were blinded. By Rest here, must needs be understood those not Elect,
because set one in opposition to the other; and if not Elect, what then but
Reprobate?

3. A third Scripture is that in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 13.48. Isa.
1.9. and 10.22, 23. Romans 9.27.
And as many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed. And as many; by these
words, as by the former, you may see how the holy Ghost distinguishes or
divides between men and men; the Sons, and the Sons of Adam. As many as were
ordained to eternal Life, believed: If by many here, we are to understand every
individual, then not only the whole World must at least believe the Gospel, of
which we see the most fall short, but they must be ordained to eternal Life;
which other Scriptures contradict: for there is the Rest, besides the Elect;
the Stubble and Chaff, as well as Wheat: Many therefore must here include but
some; for though Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a REMNANT shall be saved.

I might here multiply many other Texts, but in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses shall every word be established: Let these therefore for this,
suffice to prove that there is a Reprobation. For this I say, Though the
Children of the Flesh, the Rest besides the Election, and the like, were not
mentioned in the Word; yet seeing there is such a thing as the Children of the
Promise, the Seed, the Children of God, and the like, and that too under
several other phrases, as Predestined, Foreknown, Chosen in Christ, and
written in the Book of Life, and appointed unto Life, with many others: I say
seeing these things are thus apparent, it is without doubt, that there is such
a thing as a Reprobation also. Romans 8. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. 1 These. 5.9.

Nay further, From the very word Election, it follows unavoidably; for
whether you take it as relating to this, of distinguishing between Persons as
touching the world to come, or with reference to Gods Acts of choosing this or
that man to this or that Office, Work, or Employment in this World, it still
signifies such a choosing, as that but some are therein concerned, and that
therefore some are thence excluded. Are all the Elect, the Seed, the Saved, the
Vessels of Mercy, the Chosen and Peculiar? Are not some (yea the most) the
Children of the Flesh, the Rest, the Lost, the Vessels of Wrath, of Dishonor,
and the Children of Perdition? Romans 11.9. 1 Pet. 2.8, 9. Mat. 10.16. 2 Samuel
6.21. Psalm. 78.67, 68. John 15.16. 2 Cor. 4.3. Romans 9.21, 22. John 17.12.

CHAP. II. What REPROBATION is.
HAving thus showed you that there is such a thing as a Reprobation, I come now
to show you what it is: Which that I may do to your edification, I shall first
show you what this word Reprobation signifies in the general, as it concerns
Persons temporary and visibly reprobate: Secondly more particular, as it
concerns Persons that are eternally and invisibly reprobate.

First generally, As it concerns Persons temporary and visibly reprobate,
thus: To be reprobate, is to be disapproved, void of Judgment, and rejected,
etc. To be disapproved, that is, when the Word condemns them, either as
touching the Faith or the Holiness of the Gospel; the which they must needs be,
that are void of spiritual and heavenly Judgment in the Mysteries of the
Kingdom; a manifest token they are rejected. And hence it is that they are said
to be reprobate or void of Judgment concerning the Faith; reprobate or void of
Judgment touching every good work; having a reprobate mind, to do those things
that are not convenient, either as to faith or manners. And hence it is again,
that they are also said to be rejected of God, cast away, and the like. 2 Cor.
13.6, 7. 2 Timothy 3.8. Tit. 1.16. Romans 1.28. Jer. 6.30. 1 Cor. 9.

I call this temporary visible Reprobation, because these appear, and are
detected by the Word as such, that are found under the abovenamed Errors, and
so adjudged without the grace of God. Yet it is possible for some of these
(however for the present disapproved) through the blessed acts and dispensations
of Grace, not only to become visible Saints, but also saved for ever. Who
doubts but that he who now by examining himself, concerning Faith, does find
himself, though under Profession, graceless, may after that, he seeing his
woeful state, not only cry to God for Mercy, but find Grace, and obtain Mercy
to help in time of need? though it is true, that for the most part the contrary
is fulfilled on them.

But to pass this, and more particularly to touch the eternal invisible
Reprobation; which I shall thus hold forth: It is to be passed by in, or left
out of, Gods Election; yet so, as considered Upright. In which Position, you
have these four things considerable: First, The Act of Gods Election. Secondly,
The Negative of that Act. Thirdly, The Persons reached by that Negative. And,
Fourthly, Their qualification when thus reached by it.


For the first. *This Act of God in Electing, it is a choosing or
fore-appointing of some infallibly unto eternal Life, which he also has
determined shall be brought to pass by the means that should be made manifest
and efficacious to that very end. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Secondly, Now the Negative of this Act, is, a passing by, or a leaving of
those not concerned in this Act; a leaving of them, I say, without the bounds,
and so the saving Privileges, of this Act: as it follows by natural
consequence, that because a man chooses but some, therefore he chooses not all,
but leaves, as the Negative of that Act, all others whatsoever. Wherefore, as
I said before, those not contained within this blessed Act, are called the Rest
besides the Election: The Election has obtained it, and the REST were blinded.

Thirdly, The Persons then that are contained under the Negative of this Act,
they are those (and those only) that pass through this wicked World without
the saving grace of Gods Elect; those, I say, that miss the most holy Faith,
which they in time are blessed withal, who are fore-appointed unto Glory.

And now for the qualification they were considered under, when this Act of
Reprobation laid dold upon them, to wit, They were considered Upright.

This is evident,

First, From this Consideration, That Reprobation is Gods act, even the
Negative of his Choosing or Electing; and none of the acts of God make any man
a sinner.

Secondly, It is further evident by the similitude that is taken from the
carriage of the Potter Romans 9.21.
in his making of his Pots; for by this comparison the God of heaven is pleased
to show unto us the nature of his determining in the act of Reprobation: Has
not the Potter power over the Clay of the same lump? etc. Consider a little,
and you shall see that these three things do necessarily fall in, to complete
the Potters action in every Pot he makes:

1. A determination in his own mind what Pot to make of this or that piece of
Clay; a determination, I say, precedent to the fashion of the Pot: the which is
true in the highest degree, in him that is excellent in working; he determines
the end, before the beginning is perfected: For this very purpose have I raised
thee up. Isa. 41.22. and 46.10. Exodus 9.16.

2. The next thing considerable in the Potter, it is the [so] making of the
Pot, even as he determined; a Vessel to Honor, or a Vessel to Dishonor. There
is no confusion or disappointment under the hand of this Eternal God, his work
is perfect, and every way does answer to what he has determined. Deuteronomy. 32.4.

3. Observe again, That whether the Vessel be to honor or to dishonor, yet
the Potter makes it good, sound, and fit for service; his fore-determining to
make this a Vessel to dishonor, has no persuasion at all with him to break or
mar the Pot: Which very thing does well resemble the state of man as under the
Act of eternal Reprobation, for God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29.

From these Conclusions then, consider,

1. That the simple act of Reprobation, it is a leaving or passing by, not a
cursing of the Creature.

2. Neither does this act alienate the heart of God from the Reprobate, nor tie
him up from loving, favoring, or blessing of him; no, not from blessing of him
with the gift of Christ, of Faith, of Hope, and many other benefits: It only
denies them that benefit that will infallibly bring them to eternal Life, and
that in despite of all opposition; it only denies so to bless them as the
Elect themselves are blessed. Abraham loved all the Children he had by all his
Wives, and gave them portions also; but his choice Blessing, as the fruit of
his chiefest Love, he reserved for Chosen Isaac, Genesis 25.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Lastly, The act of Reprobation does harm to no man, neither means him any;
nay, it rather decrees him upright, lets him be made upright, and so be turned
into the World.

CHAP. III. Of the Antiquity of REPROBATION.
HAving now proceeded so far as to show you what Reprobation is, it will not be
amiss if in this place I briefly show you its Antiquity, even when it began its
rise; the which you may gather by these following particulars.

I. Reprobation is before the Person comes into the World, or has done good
or evil: This is evident by that of Paul to the Romans, Romans 9.11. Genesis 15.4,
5. and 16.4, 5, 16. and 17.25. and 21.5.
For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil,
that the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand, it was said unto
Rebeka, The Elder shall serve the Younger. Here you find twain in their Mothers
Womb, and both receiving their destiny, not only before they had done good or
evil, but before they were in a capacity to do it, they being yet unborn; their
destiny, I say, the one unto, the other not unto the Blessing of Eternal Life;
the one Chose, the other Refused; the one Elect, the other Reprobate. The same
also might be said of Ishmael and his Brother Isaac, both which did also
receive their destiny before they came into the world: for the Promise that
this Isaac should be the Heir, it was also before Ishmael was born, though he
was elder by fourteen years, or more, then his Brother. And it is yet further
evident,

1. Because Election is an Act of Grace; There is a Remnant, according to the
Election of Grace Romans 11.5.
: Which Act of Grace saw no way so fit to discover its purity and independancy,
as by fastening on the Object before it came into the World; that being the
state in which, at least, no good were done, either to procure good from God,
or to eclipse and darken this precious Act of Grace: For though it is true, that
no good thing that we have done before Conversion, can obtain the Grace of
Election; yet the Grace of Election then appears most, when it prevents our
doing good, that we might be loved therefore: wherefore he says again, That
the purpose of God according to Election, might stand, not of Works, but of him
that calls; it was said unto her, The Elder shall serve the Younger.

2. This is most agreeable to the nature of the Promise of giving seed to
Abraham; which Promise, as it was made before the Child was conceived, so it
was fulfilled at the best time, for the discovery of the Act of Grace, that
could have been pitched upon: At this time will I come, faith God, and Sarah
shall have a Son: Which Promise, because it carried in its Bowels the very
Grace of Electing Love, therefore it left out Ishmael, with the Children of
Keturah; For in Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Romans 4.16, 17, 18, 19. and 9.9.

3. This was the best and fittest way for the Decrees to receive sound bottom,
even for God both to choose and refuse, before the Creature had done good or
evil, and so before they came into the World: That the purpose of God according
to Election, might stand, says he; therefore before the Children were yet
born, or had done any good or evil, it was said unto her, etc. Gods Decree
would for ever want foundation, should it depend at all upon the goodness and
holiness either of Men or Angels; especially if it were to stand upon that good
that is wrought before Conversion, yea or after Conversion either: We find by
daily experience how hard and difficult it is, for even the holiest in the
world, to bear up, and maintain their faith and love to God; yet so hard, as
not at all to do it, without continual supplies from Heaven: How then is it
possible for any so to carry it before God, as to lay by this his Holiness a
foundation for Election, as to maintain that foundation, and thereby to procure
all those Graces that infallibly saves the Sinner? But now the choice, I say,
being a choice of Grace, as is manifest, it being acted before the Creatures
birth; here Grace has laid the Cornerstone, and determined the means to bring
the work to perfection. Thus the Foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, The Lord knows who are his 2 Timothy 2.18, 19, 20.
: that is, who he has chosen, having excluded Works both good and bad, and
founded all in an Unchangable Act of Grace; the Negative whereof, is this
harmless Reprobation.

II. But secondly, To step a little backward, and so to make all sure: This Act
of Reprobation was before the world began; which therefore must needs confirm
that which was said but now, that they were before they were born, both
destinated before they had done good or evil. This is manifest by that of Paul
to the Ephesians, at the beginning of his Epistle; where speaking of Election,
whose Negative is Reprobation, he says, God has chosen us in Christ, before
the Foundation of the World. Nay further, if you please, consider, That as
Christ was ordained to suffer before the foundation of the world, and as we
that are Elected were chosen in him before the foundation of the world; so it
was also ordained we should know him, before the foundation of the world;
ordained that we should be holy before him in love, before the foundation of
the world; and that we in time should be created in him to good works, and
ordained before that we should walk in them. Wherefore Reprobation also, it
being the Negative of Electing Love; that is, because God Elected but Some,
therefore he Left the Rest: these Rest therefore must needs be of as ancient
standing under Reprobation, as the Chosen are under Election; both which, it is
also evident, was before the world began. Which serves yet further to prove
that Reprobation could not be with respect to this or the other sin, it being
only a leaving them, and that before the world, out of that free Choice which
he was pleased to bless the other with. Even as the Clay with which the
dishonorable Vessel is made, did not provoke the Potter, for the sake of this
or that impediment, therefore to make it so; but the Potter of his own will, of
the Clay of the same lump, of the Clay that is full as good as that of which he
has made the Vessel to Honor, did make this and the other a Vessel of
Dishonor, etc. 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.10.

CHAP. IV. Of the Causes of REPROBATION.
HAving thus in a word or two showed the Antiquity of Reprobation, I now come
in this place to show you the Cause thereof; for doubtless this must stand a
truth, That what ever God does, there is sufficient ground therefore, whether
by us apprehended, or else without our reach.

First then, It is caused from the very Nature of God. There are two things in
God, from which, or by the virtue of which, all things have their rise, to wit,
the Eternity of God in general, and the eternal Perfection of every one of his
Attributes in particular: for as by the first, he must needs be before all
things; so by virtue of the second must all things consist. And as he is before
all things, they having consistence by him; so also is he before all states, or
their Causes, be they either good or bad, of continuance or otherwise, he being
the first without beginning, etc. whereas all other things, with their causes,
have rise, dependence, or toleration of being from him. Col. 1.17.

Hence it follows, that nothing, either Person or Cause, etc. can by any means
have a being, but first he knows thereof, allows thereof, and decrees it shall
be so: Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it
not? Now then, because that Reprobation, as well as Election, are subordinate
to God; his Will also, which is eternally perfect, being most immediately
herein concerned; it was impossible that any should be Reprobate, before God
had both willed and decreed it should be so. It is not the being of a thing
that administers matter of knowledge or foresight thereof to God, but the
perfection of his Knowledge, Wisdom and Power, etc. that gives the thing its
being: God did not fore-decree there should be a World, because he foresaw
there would be one; but there must be one, because he had before decreed there
should be one. The same is true as touching the case in hand: For this very
purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show in thee my power. Lam. 3.37.
Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17.

Secondly, A second Cause of Eternal Reprobation, Is the exercise of Gods
Sovereignty; for if this is true, That there is nothing either visible or
invisible, whether in Heaven or Earth, but has its being from him; then it
must most reasonably follow, that he is therefore Sovereign Lord, etc. and may
also according to his own will, as he pleases himself, both exercise and
manifest the same, being every whit absolute, and can do and may do whatsoever
his Soul desires: and indeed, good reason, for he has not only made them
all, but for his pleasure they both were and are created. Now the very exercise
of this Sovereignty produces Reprobation: Therefore has he mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth: Has not the Potter power over
the Clay of the same lump? And does he not make his Pots according to his
pleasure? Here therefore the Mercy, Justice, Wisdom and Power of God, take
liberty to do what they will; Saying, My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my Pleasure. Job 23.13. Dan. 4.35. Rev. 4.11. Romans 9.18. Isa. 43.13. and 46.11.

Thirdly, Another Cause of Eternal Reprobation, Is the act and working of
Distinguishing Love, and Everlasting Grace: God has universal Love, and
particular Love; general Love, and distinguishing Love; and so accordingly does
decree, purpose, and determine: from general Love, the extension of general
Grace and Mercy; but from that Love that is distinguishing, peculiar Grace and
Mercy: Was not Esau Jacobs Brother? Yet I loved Jacob, says the Lord. [Yet I
loved Jacob;] that is, with a better Love, or a Love that is more
distinguishing: As he farther makes appear in his answer to our Father Abraham,
when he praid to God for Ishmael: As for Ishmael, says he, I have heard thee;
behold, I have blessed him, and will also make him fruitful: but my Covenant
will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee. Touching which
words, there are these things observable: Mal. 1.2. Genesis 17.18, 19, etc.

1. That God had better Love for Isaac, than he had for his Brother Ishmael.
Yet,

2. Not because Isaac had done more worthy and goodly deeds, for Isaac was yet
unborn.

3. This choice Blessing could not be denied to Ishmael because he had
disinherited himself by sin; for this Blessing was intailed to Isaac, before
Ishmael had a being also. Romans 4.16, 17, 18, 19. Genesis 15.4, 5. Genesis 16.

4. These things therefore must needs fall out through the working of
distinguishing Love and Mercy, which had so cast the business, that the purpose
of God according to Election might stand.

Further, Should not God decree to show distinguishing Love and Mercy, as well
as that which is general and common, he must not discover his best Love at all
to the Sons of Men. Again, If he should reveal and extend his best Love to all
the World in general, then there would not be such a thing as Love that does
distinguish; for distinguishing Love appears in separating between Isaac and
Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, the many called, and the few chosen. Thus by virtue of
distinguishing Love, some must be Reprobate: For distinguishing Love must leave
some, both of the Angels in Heaven, and the Inhabitants of the Earth; wherefore
the Decree also that does establish it, must needs leave some.

Fourthly, Another Cause of Reprobation, Is Gods willingness to show his wrath,
and to make his power known. This is one of those Arguments that the holy
Apostle sets against the most knotty and strong Objection that ever was
framed against the Doctrine of Eternal Reprobation: Thou will say then (says
he) Why does he yet find fault? for if it be his will that some should be
rejected, hardened, and perish, why then is he offended that any sin against
him; for who has resisted his will? Hold, says the Apostle; stay a little
here; first remember this, Is it meet to say unto God, what do thou? Shall
the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has
not the Potter power over the Clay of the same lump, etc. Besides, when you
have thought your worst, to wit, that the effects of Reprobation must needs be
consummate in the eternal perdition of the Creature; yet again consider, What
if God be willing to show his Wrath, as well as Grace and Mercy? And what if
he, that he may so do, exclude some from having share in that Grace that would
infallibly, against all resistance, bring us safe unto eternal Life? What then?
Is he therefore the Author of your perishing, or his eternal Reprobation
either? Do you not know that he may refuse to Elect who he will, without
abusing of them? Also that he may deny to give them that Grace that would
preserve them from sin, without being guilty of their Damnation? May he not, to
show his wrath, suffer with much long-suffering all that are the Vessels of
Wrath, by their own voluntary will, to fit themselves for wrath and for
destruction? Yea, might he not even in the act of Reprobation, conclude also to
suffer them thus left, to fall from the state he left them in, that is, as they
were considered upright; and when fallen, to bind them fast in Chains of
Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day, but he must needs be charged
foolishly? You shall see in that day what a Harmony and what a Glory there will
be found in all Gods Judgments in the overthrow of the Sinner; also how clear
the Lord will show himself of having any working hand in that which causes
eternal ruin; notwithstanding he has reprobated such, does suffer them to
sin, and that too that he might show his wrath on the vessels of his wrath; the
which I also after this next Chapter, shall further clear up to you. As the
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, without approving of
their miscarriages; so he also knows how to reserve the ungodly unto the day
of Judgment to be punished, yet never to deserve the least of blame for his so
reserving of them: though none herein can see his way, for he alone knows how
to do it. Romans 9.19. 2 Pet. 2.9.

CHAP. V. Of the Unchangableness of Eternal Reprobation?
MAny Opinions have passed through the hearts of the Sons of men concerning
Reprobation; most of them endeavoring so to hold it forth, as therewith they
might, if not heal their Conscience slightly, yet maintain their own Opinion,
in their Judgment, of other things; still wringing, now the Word this way, and
anon again that, for their purpose: also framing within their Soul such an
imagination of God and his acts in Eternity, as would suit with such Opinions,
and so present all to the world. And the rather they have with greatest labor
strained unweariedly at this above many other Truths, because of the grim and
dreadful face it carries in most men's apprehensions. But none of these things,
however they may please the Creature, can by any means in any measure, either
cause God to undo, unsay, or undetermine what he has concerning this decreed
and established.

First, Because they suit not with his nature, especially in these
Foundation-acts: The Foundation of God stands sure, even touching
Reprobation, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand. I know
(says Solomon) that whatsoever the Lord does, it abides for ever; nothing can
be put unto it, nor anything taken from it, etc. Has he said it, and shall he
not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not bring it to pass? His Decrees are
composed according to his eternal Wisdom, established upon his unchangable
Will, governed by his Knowledge, Prudence, Power, Justice, and Mercy, and are
brought to conclusion (on his part) in perfect holiness, through the abiding of
his most blessed Truth and Faithfulness: He is a Rock, his way is perfect, for
all his works are Judgment: A God of Truth, and without iniquity, just and
right is he. 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. Romans 9.11. Eccles. 3.14. Numb. 23.19. Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Secondly, This Decree is made sure by the number, measure, and bounds of
Election; for Election and Reprobation do enclose all reasonable Creatures;
that is, either the one or the other; Election, those that are set apart for
Glory; and Reprobation, those left out of this Choice.

Now as touching the Elect, they are by this Decree confined to that limited
number of Persons that must amount to the complete making up the fullness of the
mystical Body of Christ; yea so confined by this eternal purpose, that nothing
can be diminished from or added thereunto: and hence it is that they are called
his Body and Members in particular, the fullness of him that fills all in all,
and the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; which Body,
considering him as the Head thereof, in conclusion makes up one perfect man,
and holy Temple for the Lord: these are called, Christ's Substance, Inheritance
and Lot; and are said to be booked, marked, and sealed with Gods most excellent
knowledge, approbation and liking. As Christ said to his Father, Thine eyes did
see my Substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy Book are all my Members
written, which in continuance were finished, when yet there was none of them.
This being thus, I say, it is in the first place impossible that any of those
Members should miscarry, for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? and because they are as to number every way sufficient, being his Body,
and so by their completing to be made a perfect man: therefore all others are
rejected, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand. Besides,
it would not only argue weakness in the Decree, but monstrousness in the Body,
if after this, any appointed should miscarry, or any besides them be added to
them. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and 4.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 16. 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. Psalm.
139.16. Mat. 24.24. Romans 8.33. Romans 9.11.

Thirdly, Nay further, that all may see how punctual, exact, and to a tittle
this Decree of Election is, God has not only as to number and quantity
confined the persons, but also determined and measured, and that before the
World, the number of the Gifts and Graces that are to be bestowed on these
Members in general; and also what Graces and Gifts to be bestowed on this or
that Member in particular: He has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in
Christ, according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
World; and bestows them in time upon us, according to the eternal purpose
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. He has given to the Eye, the Grace
that belongs to the Eye; and to the hand that which he also has appointed
for it: And so to every other Member of the Body Elect, he does deal out to
them their determined measure of Grace and Gifts most fit for their Place and
Office. Thus is the Decree established, both of the Saved, and also the
Non-Elect. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. and 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 12.3. Ephesians. 4.16. Col.
2.19. Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

Fourthly, But again, Another thing that does establish this Decree of Eternal
Reprobation, Is the weakness that Sin in the Fall, and since, has brought all
Reprobates into: For though it be most true, that Sin is no Cause of eternal
Reprobation; yet seeing Sin has seized on the Reprobate, it cannot be but
thereby the Decree must needs be the faster fixed. If the King, for this or the
other weighty Reason, does decree not to give this or that man (who yet did
never offend him) a place in his Privy Chamber; if this man after this shall be
infected with the Plague, this rather fastens then losens the Kings Decree. As
the Angels that were left out of Gods Election, by reason of the sin they
committed after, are so far off from being by that received into Gods Decree,
that they are therefore bound for it in Chains of everlasting Darkness, to the
Judgment of the Great Day.

CHAP. VI. Whether to be Reprobated, be the same with being appointed
beforehand unto eternal Condemnation? If not, how do they differ? Also whether
Reprobation be the cause of Condemnation?
IT has been the custom of ignorant men much to quarrel at eternal
Reprobation, concluding (for want of knowledge in the Mystery of Gods Will)
that if he reprobate any from Eternity, he had as good have said, I will make
this man to damn him; I will decree this man, without any consideration, to the
everlasting Pains of Hell. When in very deed, for God to reprobate, and to
appoint beforehand to eternal Condemnation, are two distinct things, properly
relating to two distinct Attributes, arising from two distinct Causes.

First, They are two distinct things: Reprobation, a simple leaving of the
Creature out of the bounds of Gods Election; but to appoint to Condemnation, is
to bind them over to everlasting punishment. Now there is a great difference
between my refusing to make of such a Tree a Pillar in my House, and of
condemning it unto the fire to be burned.

Secondly, As to the Attributes; Reprobation respects Gods Sovereignty; but to
appoint to Condemnation, his Justice. Romans 9.18. Genesis 18.25.

Thirdly, As to the Causes; Sovereignty being according to the Will of God, but
Justice according to the Sin of Man. For God, though he be the only Sovereign
Lord, and that to the height of perfection; yet he appoints no man to the
pains of everlasting fire, merely from Sovereignty, but by the Rule of Justice:
God damneth not the man because he is a man, but a Sinner; and fore-appoints
him to that place and state, by foreseeing of him wicked. Romans 1.18, 19. Col.
3.6.

Again, As Reprobation is not the same with fore-appointing to eternal
Condemnation; so neither is it the Cause thereof.

If it be the Cause, then it must either, 1. Leave him infirm. Or, 2. Infuse
sin into him. Or, 3. Take from him something that otherwise would keep him
upright. 4. Or both license Satan to tempt, and the Reprobate to close in with
the temptation. But it does none of these; therefore it is not the Cause of the
Condemnation of the Creature.


That it is not the Cause of Sin, it is evident, 1. Because the Elect are as
much involved therein, as those that are passed by. 2. It leaves him not
infirm; for he is by an after-Act, to wit, of Creation, formed perfectly
upright. 3. That Reprobation infuseth no sin, appears, because it is the Act
of God. 4. That it takes nothing (that good is) from him, is also manifest, it
being only a leaving of him. 5. And that it is not by this Act that Satan is
permitted to tempt, or the Reprobate to sin, is manifest; because as Christ was
tempted, so the Elect fall as much into the temptation, at least many of them,
as many of those that are Reprobate: Whereas if these things came by
Reprobation, then the Reprobate would be only concerned therein. All which
will be further handled in these questions yet behind.


Object. From what has been said, there is concluded this at least, That God
has infallibly determined, and that before the World, the infallible damnation
of some of his Creatures: for if God has before the World bound some over to
eternal punishment, and that as you say, for sin; then this determination must
either be fallible or infallible; not fallible, for then your other position of
the certainty of the number of Gods Elect, is shaken; unless you hold that
there may be a number that shall neither go to Heaven nor Hell. Well then, if
God has indeed determined, fore-determined, that some must infallibly perish;
does not this his Determination lay a necessity on the Reprobate to sin, that
he may be damned; for, No sin, no damnation; that is your own Argument.

Answ. That God has ordained Jude 4.
the damnation of some of his Creatures, it is evident; but whether this his
Determination be positive and absolute, there is the question: For the better
understanding whereof, I shall open unto you the variety of Gods
Determinations, and their nature, as also rise.

The Determinations of God touching the destruction of the Creature, they are
either ordinary or extraordinary: Those I count ordinary that were commonly
pronounced by the Prophets and Apostles, etc. in their ordinary way of
preaching, to the end men might be affected with the love of their own
Salvation; now these either bound or loosed but as the condition or
qualification was answered by the Creature under Sentence; and no otherwise. 1 Samuel 12.25. Isa. 1.20. Mat. 18.3. Luke 13.1, 2, 3. Romans 2.8, 9. Romans 8.13. Romans
11.13. 1 Cor. 6.9.

Again, Those extraordinary, though they respect the same conditions, yet they
are not grounded immediately upon them, but upon the infallible foreknowledge
and foresight of God, and are thus distinguished: First the ordinary
determination, it stands but at best upon a supposition that the Creature may
continue in Sin, and admits of a possibility that it may not; but the
extraordinary stands upon an infallible foresight that the Creature will
continue in sin; wherefore this must needs be positive, and as infallible as
God himself.

Again, These two Determinations are also distinguished thus: The ordinary is
applicable to the Elect as well as to the Reprobate, but the other to the
Reprobate only: It is proper to say even to the Elect themselves, He that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned; but not to
say to them, These are appointed to UTTER destruction, or that they shall
UTTERLY perish in their own Corruptions; or that for them is RESERVED the
blackness of darkness FOR EVER. 1 King. 20.42. 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude 13.

So then, though God by these determinations does not lay some under
irrecoverable condemnation, yet by one of them he does; as is further made out
thus: 1. God most perfectly fore-seeth the final impenitency of those that so
die, from the beginning to the end of the World. Prove. 15.11. Psalm. 139.2. Isa.
46.10. 2. Now from this infallible fore sight, it is most easy and rational to
conclude, and that positively, the infallible overthrow of every such creature.
Did I infallibly foresee that this or that man would cut cut his heart in the
morning, I might infallibly determine his death before night.


Object. But still the Question is, Whether God by this his determination does
not lay a necessity on the Creature to sin? For, No Sin, no Condemnation: This
is true by your own Assertion.

Answ. No, by no means: For, 1. Though it be true, that Sin must of absolute
necessity go before the infallible condemnation and overthrow of the Sinner;
and that it must also be pre-considered by God; yet it needs not lay a
necessity upon him to sin: for let him but alone to do what he will, and the
Determination cannot be more infallible then the Sin, which is the cause of its
Execution. 2. As it needs not, so it does not; for this positive Determination
is not grounded upon what God will effect, but on what the Creature will; and
that not through the instiga^ion of God, but the instigation of the Devil. What?
might not I, if I most undoubtedly foresaw that such a Tree in my Garden would
only cumber the ground (notwithstanding reasonable means) might not I, I say,
from hence determine (seven years before) to cut it down, and burn it in the
fire, but I must, by so determining, necessitate this Tree to be fruitless? The
case in hand is the very same. God therefore may most positively determine the
infallible damnation of his Creature, and yet not at all necessitate the
Creature to sin, that he might be damned.


Object. But how is this similitude pertinent? For God did not only foresee
sin would be the destruction of the Creature, but let it come into the world,
and so destroy the Creature. If you, as you foresee the fruitlesness of your
Tree, should withal see that which makes it so, and that too before it makes it
so, and yet let the imp^diment come and make it so; are not you now the cause
of the unfruitfulness of that Tree which you have before condemned to the sue
to be burned? For God might have chose whether he would have let Adam sin, and
so sin to have got into the world by him.

Answ. Similitudes never answer every way; if they be pertinent to that for
which they are intended, it is enough; and to that it answers well, being
brought to prove no more but the natural consequence of a true and infallible
foresight. And now as to what is objected further, As that God might have
chose whether Sin should have come into the World by Adam, to the destruction
of so many: To that I shall answer, 1. That Sin could not have come into the
World without Gods permission, it is evident, both from the perfection of his
foresight and power. 2. Therefore all the means, motives, and inducements
thereunto, must also by him be not only foreseen, but permitted. 3. Yet so,
that God will have the timing, proceeding, bounding and ordering thereof, at
his dispose: Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of
wrath shall thou restrain. 1 Kings 22.20, 21, 22. John 8.20. Luke 22.51, 52.
Psalm. 76.10. 4. Therefore it must needs come into the world, not without, but
by the knowledge of God; not in despite of him, but by his suffering of it.


Object. But how then is he clear from having a hand in the death of him that
perishes?

Answ. Nothing is more sure then that God could have kept Sin out of the world,
if it had been his will; and this is also as true, that it never came into the
world with his liking and compliance: And for this, you must consider that Sin
came into the world by two steps: 1. By being offered. 2. By prevailing.


Touching the first of these, God without the least injury to any Creature in
Heaven or Earth, might not only suffer it, but so far countenance the same:
that is, so far forth as for trial only: As it is said of Abraham; God tempted
Abraham to slay his only Son, and led Christ by the Spirit into the Wilderness
to be tempted of the Devil. This is done without any harm at all; nay, it
rather produces good; for it tends to discover Sincerity, to exercise Faith
in, and Love to his Creator; also to put him in mind of the continual need he
has of depending on his God for the continuation of help and strength, and to
provoke to Prayers to God, when ever so engaged. Genesis 22.1, 2. Mark 1.12. Luke
4.1 Deuteronomy. 8.1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. Heb. 5.7. Matthew. 26.41.

Object. But God did not only admit that Sin should be offered for trial, and
there to stay; but did suffer it to prevail, and overcome the World.

Answ. Well, this is granted: But yet consider, 1. God did neither suffer it,
nor yet consent it should, but under this consideration; If Adam, upright Adam,
gave way thereto, by forsaking his Command, In the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die: Which Adam did, not because God did compel him or
persuade him to it, but voluntarily of his own mind, contrary to his God's
Command: So then, God by suffering sin to break into the World, did it rather
in Judgment, as disliking Adam's Act, and as a punishment to man for listening
to the Tempter; and as a discovery of his anger at man's disobedience; then to
prove that he is guilty of the misery of his Creature. Genesis 2.17. and 3.3. 2.
Consider also, that when God permitted Sin for trial, it was, when offered
first, to them only who were upright, and had sufficient strength to resist
it. 3. They were by Gods Command to the contrary, driven to no strait to tempt
them to incline to Satan: Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat,
says God; only let this alone. 4. As touching the beauty and goodness that
was in the Object unto which they were allured; What was it? Was it better then
God? Yea, was it better then the Tree of Life? for from that they were not
exempted till after they had sinned. Did not God know best what was best to do
them good? 5. Touching him that persuaded them to do this wicked Act; Was his
word more to be valued for truth, more to be ventured on for safety, or more to
be honored for the worthiness of him that spoke, then was his that had forbad
it? The one being the Devil, with a Lie, and to kill them; the other being God,
with his Truth, and to preserve them safe.


Quest. But was not Adam unexpectedly suprized? Had he notice beforehand, and
warning of the danger? for God foresaw the business.

Answ. Doubtless God was fair and faithful to his Creature in this thing also;
as clearly does appear from these considerations: 1. The very Commandment that
God gave him, fore-bespake him well to look about him; and did indeed insinuate
that he was likely to be tempted. 2. It is yet more evident, because God does
even tell him of the danger; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die. 3. Nay God by speaking to him of the very Tree that was to be forborne,
telling him also where it stood, that he might the better know it; did in
effect expressly say unto him, Adam, If thou be tempted, it will be about that
Tree, and the fruit thereof; wherefore if thou find the Tempter there, then
beware thy life.


To conclude then: Though Sin did not come into the World without Gods
sufferance, yet it did without his liking: God suffered also Cain to kill his
Brother, and Ishmael to mock at Isaac, but he did not like the same. Genesis 4.9,
10, 11. Gal. 4.30.

Secondly, Therefore though God was first in concluding Sin should be offered
to the World; yet man was the first that consented to a being overcome thereby.

Thirdly then, Though God did fore-determine that Sin should enter, yet it was
not but with respect to certain terms and conditions, which yet was not to be
enforced by virtue of the determination, but permitted to be completed by the
voluntary inclination of a perfect and upright man. And in that the
determination was most perfectly infallible, it was through the foresight of the
undoubted inclination of this good and Upright Person.

Quest. But might not God have kept Adam from inclining, if he would?

Answ. What more certain? But yet consider, 1. Adam being now an upright man,
he was able to have kept himself, had he but looked to it as he should and
might. 2. This being so, if God had here stepped in, he had either added that
which had been needless, and so had not obtained thankfulness; or else had made
the strength of Adam useless, yea his own workmanship in so creating him,
superfluous; or else by consequence imperfect. 3. If he had done so, he had
taken Adam from his duty, which was to trust and believe his Maker; he had also
made void the end of the Commandment, which was to persuade to watchfulness,
diligence, sobriety, and contentedness; yea, and by so doing would not only
himself have tempted Adam to transgression, even to lay aside the exercise of
that strength that God had already given him; but should have become the
Pattern, or the first Father to all looseness, idleness, and neglect of duty.
Which would also not only have been an ill example to Adam to continue to
neglect so reasonable and wholesome Duties, but would have been to himself an
Argument of defense to retort upon his God, when he had come at another time to
reckon with him for his misdemeanors.


Many other weighty Reasons might here be further added for Gods vindication in
this particular, but at this time let these suffice.

CHAP. VII. Whether any under eternal Reprobation have just cause to quarrel
with God for not Electing of them?
THat the Answer to this Question may be to edification, recall again what I
have before asserted; to wit, That for a man to be left out of Gods Election,
and to be made a Sinner, is two things; and again, For a man to be not Elect,
and to be condemned to Hell fire, is two things also: Now I say, if
non-Election makes no man a Sinner, and if it appoints no man to Condemnation
neither, then what ground has any Reprobate to quarrel with God for not
Electing of him? Nay, further, Reprobation considers him upright, leaves him
upright, and so turns him into the World; what wrong does God do him, though
he has not elected him? What reason has he that is left in this case to
quarrel against his Maker?

If thou say, Because God has not chosen them, as well as chosen others: I
answer, Nay but O man; who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Behold, as the
Clay is in the hand of the Potter, so are ye in my hand, O House of Israel,
says the Lord God. So then, if I should say no more but that God is the only
Lord and Creator, and that by his Sovereignty he has power to dispose of them
according to his pleasure, either to choose or to refuse, according to the
counsel of his own Will, who could object against him and be guiltless? He
gives no account of any of his ways, and what his Soul desires, that does he.
Romans 9.20, 21. Jer. 18.6. Job 23.13. and 33.13.

Again, God is wiser then man, and therefore can show a reason for what he acts
and does, both when and where at present thou see none: Shall God the only
wise, be arraigned at the Bar of thy blind Reason, and there be judged and
condemned for his Acts done in Eternity? Who has directed the Spirit of the
Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Do you not know that he is far more
above us, then we are above our Horse or Mule that is without understanding?
Great things does he, that we cannot comprehend; great things and unsearchable,
and mavelous things without number. Romans 11.34, 35. Job 5.9. and 37.5.

But I say, Should we take it well if our Beast should call us to account for
this and the other righteous Act, and judge us unrighteous, and our Acts
ridiculous, and all because it sees no reason for our so doing? Why we are as
Beasts before God, Psalm. 73.22.

But again, To come yet more close to the point: The Reprobate quarrels with
God, because he has not elected him; well, but is not God the Master of his
own Love? And is not his Will the only Rule of his Mercy? And may he not,
without he give offense to thee, lay hold by electing Love and Mercy on whom
himself pleases? Must thy Reason, nay, thy Lust, be the Ruler, Orderer, and
Disposer of his Grace? May I not do what I will with mine own, says he? Is
thine eye evil, because mine is good? Matthew. 20.15.

Further, What harm does God to any Reprobate, by not Electing of him? He was,
as has been said, considered Upright, so formed in the Act of Creation, and so
turned into the World: Indeed he was not Elected, but has that taken any thing
from him? No verily, but leaves him in good condition: There is good, and
better, and best of all; he that is in a good estate (though others through
free Grace are in a far better) has not any cause to murmur either with him
that gave him such a place, or at him that is placed above him. In a word,
Reprobation makes no man personally a Sinner, neither does Election make any
man personally Righteous: It is the consenting to sin that makes a man a
Sinner, and the imputation of Grace and Righteousness that makes gospelly and
personally Just and Holy.

But again, Seeing it is Gods Act to leave some out of the bounds of his
Election, it must needs be [therefore] positively good: Is that then which is
good in it self, made sin unto thee? God forbid: God does not evil by leaving
this or that man out of his Electing Grace, though he choose others to Eternal
Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherefore there is not a Reprobate that
has any Cause, and therefore no just Cause, to quarrel with his Maker, for not
electing of him.

And that, besides what has been spoken, if you consider, 1. For God to Elect,
is an Act of Sovereign Grace; but to pass by, or to refuse so to do, is an Act
of Sovereign Power, not of Injustice. 2. God might therefore have chose whether
he would have Elected any, or so many or few; and also which and where he
would. 3. Seeing then that all things are at his dispose, he may fasten
Electing Mercy where he pleases; and other Mercy, if he will, to whom and when
he will. 4. Seeing also that the least of Mercies are not deserved by the best
of Sinners; men, instead of quarreling against the God of Grace, because they
have not what they list, should acknowledge they are unworthy of their breath;
and also should confess that God may give Mercy where he pleases, and that
too, both which or what, as also to whom and when he will; and yet be good, and
just, and very gracious still: Nay, Job says, He takes away, who can hinder
him? Or who will say unto him, What do thou? Job 9.12.


The Will of God is the Rule of all Righteousness, neither knows he any other
way by which he governs and orders any of his Actions. Whatsoever God does,
it is good because he does it; whether it be to give Grace, or to detain it;
whether in choosing or refusing. The consideration of this, made the holy men of
old ascribe Righteousness to their Maker, even then when yet they could not see
the reason of his Actions: They would rather stand amazed, and wonder at the
heights and depths of his unsearchable Judgments, then quarrel at the strange
and most obscure of them. Job 34.10, 11, 12. and 30.3. Jer. 12.1. Job 37.23.
Romans 11.33.

God did not intend that all that ever he would do, should be known to every
man, no nor yet to the Wise and Prudent: It is as much a duty sometimes to stay
our selves and wonder, and to confess our ignorance in many things of God, as
it is to do other things that are duty without dispute. So then, let poor Dust
and Ashes forbear to condemn the Lord, because he goes beyond them; and also
they should beware they speak not wickedly for him, though it be, as they
think, to justify his Actions. The Lord is righteous in all his Ways, and holy
in all his Works. Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 2.8. Job 13.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 145.17.

CHAP. VIII. Whether eternal Reprobation in its self, or in its Doctrine, be in
very deed an hindrance to any man in seeking the salvation of his Soul?
IN my Discourse upon this Question, I must entreat the Reader to mind well
what is premised in the beginning of the former Chapter, which is, That
Reprobation makes no man a Sinner, appoints no man to Condemnation, but leaves
him upright after all. So then, though God does leave the most of men without
the bounds of his Election, his so doing is neither in it self, nor yet its
Doctrine (in very deed) an hindrance to any man in seeking the salvation of his
Soul.

I. It hinders not in its self, as is clear by the ensuing Considerations:

1. That which hinders him, is the weakness that came upon him by reason of
Sin: Now God only made the Man, but man's listening to Satan made him a Sinner;
which is the Cause of all his weakness: This therefore is it that hinders
him, and that also dis-inableth him in seeking the salvation of his Soul. Let
no men say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted
of evil, neither tempts he any man. God made man upright, but he has sought
out many inventions. Ezekiel. 16.30. Jam. 1.10. Eccles. 7.29. Hos. 13.9. and 14.1.
Genesis 3.8, 9, 10, 11.

2. It hinders not in it self, for it takes not any thing from a man that
would help him, might it continue with him; it takes not away the least part of
his Strength, Wisdom, Courage, Innocence, or Will to good; all these were lost
by the fall, in that day when he died the death. Nay, Reprobation under some
consideration did rather establish all these upon the Reprobate; for as it
decrees him left, so left upright: Wherefore man's hindrance comes on him from
other means, even by the Fall, Genesis 3.
and not by the simple Act of Eternal Reprobation.

3. As Reprobation hinders not either of these two ways, so neither is it
from this simple Act that Satan is permitted either to tempt them, that they
might be tried, or that they might be over-thrown.

1. It is not by this Act that Satan is permitted to tempt them that they might
be tried; because then the Son of God himself must be reached by this
Reprobation; he being tempted by the Devil as much, if not more then any: Yea,
and then must every one of the Elect be under Eternal Reprobation; for they
also, and that after their Conversion, are greatly assaulted by him: Many are
the troubles of the Righteous, etc. Mat. 4.1, 2. Mark 1.12. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.

2. Neither is it from the Act of Reprobation that sin has entered the World,
no more then from Election; because those under the Power of Election did not
only fall at first, but do still generally as foully, before Conversion, as the
Reprobate himself. Whereas, if either the Temptation, or the Fall, were by
virtue of Reprobation, then the Reprobates, and they only, should have been
tempted, and have fallen. The Temptation then, and the Fall, does come from
other means, and so the hindrance of the Reprobate, than from Eternal
Reprobation. For the Temptation, the Fall and Hindrance being universal, but
the Act of Reprobation particular, the hindrance must needs come from such a
Cause as takes hold on all men, which indeed is the Fall; the Cause of which,
was neither Election nor Reprobation, but man's voluntary listening to the
Tempter. Romans 3.9.

3. It is yet far more evident that Reprobation hinders no man from seeking
the Salvation of his Soul; because notwithstanding all that Reprobation does,
yet God gives to diverse of the Reprobates great encouragements thereto; to
wit, the Tenders of the Gospel in general, not excluding any; great Light also
to understand it, with many a sweet taste of the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come; he makes them sometimes also to be partakers of
the holy Ghost, and admits many of them into fellowship with his Elect; yea,
some of them to be Rulers, Teachers and Governors in his House: All which
without doubt both are and ought to be great encouragements even to the
Reprobates themselves, to seek the Salvation of their Souls. Mat. 11.28. Rev.
22.17. Heb. 6.4, 5. Mat. 25.1, 2. Act. 1.16, 17.

II. As it hinders not in its self, so it hinders not by its Doctrine: For,
All that this Doctrine says, is, That some are left out of Gods Election, as
considered upright. Now this Doctrine cannot hinder any man: for,

1. No man still stands upright.

2. Though it says some are left, yet it points at no man, it names no man,
it binds all faces in secret: So then, if it hinder, it hinders all, even the
Elect as well as Reprobate; for the Reprobate has as much ground to judge
himself Elect, as the very Elect himself has, before he be converted, being
both alike in a state of Nature and Unbelief, and both alike visibly liable to
the Curse, for the breach of the Commandment. Again, As they are equals here,
so also have they ground alike to close in with Christ, and live; even the
open, free, and full Invitation of the Gospel, and Promise of Life and
Salvation, by the Faith of Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. Romans 3.9. Joh. 3.16. 2
Cor. 5.19, 20, 21, 22, Rev. 21.6. and 22.17.

3. It is evident also by experience, that this Doctrine does not (in deed)
neither can it hinder any (this Doctrine I mean, when both rightly stated, and
rightly used:) Because many who have been greatly afflicted about this matter,
have yet at last had Comfort; which Comfort, when they have received it, has
been to them as an argument that the thing they feared before, was not because
of Reprobation rightly stated; but its Doctrine much abused, was the Cause of
their Affliction. And had they had the same Light at first, they received
afterward, their troubles then would soon have fled, as also now they do.
Wherefore discouragement comes from want of Light, because they are not skilful
in the Word of Righteousness: for had the discouragement at first been true,
(which yet it could not be, unless the person knew by name himself under
eternal Reprobation, which is indeed impossible) then his Light would have
pinched him harder; Light would rather have fastened this his fear, then at all
have rid him of it. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.

Indeed the Scripture says, the Word is to some the savor of Death unto
Death, when to others the savor of Life unto Life: But mark, it is not this
Doctrine in particular, if so much as some other, that does destroy the
Reprobate: It was Respit at which Pharaoh hardened his heart, and the Grace of
God that the Reprobates of old did turn into Lasciviousness: Yea, Christ the
Savior of the World, is a Stumbling Block unto some, and a Rock of Offense
unto others. But yet again, Consider that neither He, nor any of Gods
Doctrines, are so simply, and in their own true natural force and drift: for
They beget no unbelief, They provoke to no wantonness, neither do They in the
least in courage to impenitency; all this comes from that Ignorance and
Wickedness that came by the Fall: Wherefore it is by reason of That also, that
they stumble, and fall, and grow weak, and are discouraged, and split
themselves, either at the Doctrine of Reprobation, or at any other Truth of
God. Exodus 8.15. Jude 4. 1 Pet. 2.

Lastly, To conclude as I began, There is no man while in this World, that does
certainly know that he is left out of the Electing Love of the great God;
neither has he any word in the whole Bible, to persuade him so to conclude and
believe; for the Scriptures hold forth Salvation to the greatest of Sinners:
Wherefore though the Act of Reprobation were far more harsh, and its Doctrine
also more sharp and severe, yet it cannot properly be said to hinder any. It is
a foolish thing in any to be troubled with those things which they have no
ground to believe concerns themselves; especially when the latitude of their
discouragement is touching their own persons only. The secret things belong
unto the Lord our God. Indeed every one of the Words of God ought to put us
upon examination, and into a serious inquiry of our present state and
condition, and how we now do stand for Eternity; to wit, whether we are ready
to meet the Lord, or how it is with us: Yet when search is fully made, and the
worst come unto the worst, the party can find himself no more then the chief of
Sinners, not excluded from the Grace of God tendered in the Gospel; not from an
Invitation, nay a Promise, to be embraced and blessed, if he comes to Jesus
Christ. Wherefore he has no ground to be discouraged by the Doctrine of
Reprobation. 1 Timothy 15. Act. 19.19. 2 Chronicles. 33. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Joh. 7.37. and
6.37. Mark 2.17.

CHAP. IX. Whether God would indeed and in truth, that the Gospel, with the
Grace thereof, should be tendered to those that yet he has bound up under
eternal Reprobation?
TO this Question I shall Answer,

First, In the Language of our Lord, Go preach the Gospel unto every Creature:
and again, Look unto me, all ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved: And
whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. And the reason is,
because Christ died for all, tasted death for every man; is the Savior of the
World, and the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World. Mark. 16.15. Isa.
45.22. Rev. 22.17. Hebr. 2.9. 2 Cor. 5.15. 1 John 4.14. and 2.1, 2, 3.

Secondly, I gather it from those several censures that even every one goes
under, that does not receive Christ, when offered in the general Tenders of the
Gospel; He that believes not, shall be damned; He that believes not, makes
God a Liar, because he believes not the Record that God has given of his Son:
and, Woe unto thee Capernaum, woe unto thee Coraxin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; with
many other sayings: All which words, with many other of the same nature, carry
in them a very great argument to this very purpose: For if those that perish in
the days of the Gospel, shall have, at least, their damnation heightened,
because they have neglected and refused to receive the Gospel, it must needs be
that the Gospel was with all faithfulness to be tendered unto them; the which it
could not be, unless the death of Christ did extend it self unto them: for the
offer of the Gospel cannot, with Gods allowance, be offered any further then
the death of Jesus Christ does go; because if that be taken away, there is
indeed no Gospel, nor Grace to be extended. Besides, if by every Creature, and
the like, should be meant only the Elect, then are all the persuasions of the
Gospel to no effect at all: for still the Unconverted, who are here condemned
for refusing of it, they return it as fast again: I do not know I am Elect, and
therefore dare not come to Jesus Christ; for if the Death of Jesus Christ, and
so the general Tender of the Gospel, concern the Elect alone; I, not knowing my
self to be one of that number, am at a mighty plunge; nor know I whether is the
greater sin, to Believe, or to Despair: for I say again, If Christ died only
for the Elect, etc. then, I not knowing my self to be one of that number, dare
not believe the Gospel, that holds forth his Blood to save me; nay, I think
with safety may not, until I first do know I am Elect of God, and appointed
thereunto. Joh. 3.16. Mark 16.16. 1 John 5.8, 9, 10. Matthew. 11.21, 22. Heb. 2.3.

Thirdly, God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, would have all men
whatever, invited by the Gospel to lay hold of Life by Christ, whether Elect or
Reprobate: for though it be true, that there is such a thing as Election and
Reprobation, yet God by the Tenders of the Gospel in the Ministry of his Word,
looks upon men under another Consideration, to wit, as Sinners; and as Sinners
invites them to believe, lay hold of, and embrace the same. He says not to his
Ministers, Go preach to the Elect, because they are Elect; and shut out others,
because they are not so: But, Go preach the Gospel to Sinners as Sinners; and
as they are such, Go bid them come to me and live. And it must needs be so,
otherwise the Preacher could neither speak in faith, nor the People hear in
faith: first, the Preacher could not speak in faith, because he knows not the
Elect from the Reprobate; nor they again hear in faith, because, as
unconverted, they would be always ignorant of that also: So then, the Minister
neither knowing whom he should offer Life unto, nor yet the People which of
them are to receive it; how could the Word now be preached in faith with power?
And how could the People believe and embrace it? But now the Preacher offering
mercy in the Gospel to Sinners, as they are Sinners, here is way made for the
Word to be spoke in faith, because his Hearers are Sinners; yea, and
encouragement also for the People to receive and close therewith, they
understanding they are Sinners: Christ Jesus came into the World to save
Sinners. Luke 24.46, 47.

Fourthly, The Gospel must be preached to Sinners as they are Sinners, without
distinction of Elector Reprobate; because neither the one not yet the other (as
considered under these simple Acts) are fit subjects to embrace the Gospel: for
neither the one Act, nor yet the other, does make either of them Sinners; but
the Gospel is to be tendered to men as they are Sinners, and personally under
the curse of God for sin: Wherefore to profer Grace to the Elect because they
are Elect, it is to profer Grace and Mercy to them, as not considering them as
Sinners. And, I say, to deny it to the Reprobate, because he is not Elected, it
is not only a denial of Grace to them that have no need thereof, but also
before occasion is given on their part, for such a Dispensation. And I say
again, therefore, to offer Christ and Grace to man Elect, as simply so
considered, this administers to him no comfort at all, he being here no Sinner;
and so engages not the heart at all to Jesus Christ; for that comes in, and is
effected on them as they are Sinners. Yea, to deny the Gospel also to the
Reprobate, because he is not Elect, it will not trouble him at all; for says
he, So I am not a Sinner, and so do not need a Savior. But now, because the
Elect have no need of Grace in Christ by the Gospel, but as they are Sinners,
nor the Reprobates cause to refuse it as they are Sinners; therefore Christ by
the Word of the Gospel, is to be proffered to both, without considering Elect or
Reprobate, even as they are Sinners. The whole have no need of the Physician,
but those that are sick. I came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Luke 7.46, 47. Mark 2.17.

Thus you see the Gospel is to be tendered to all in general, as well to the
Reprobate as to the Elect, to Sinners as Sinners; and so are they to receive
it, and to close with the Tenders thereof.

CHAP. X. Seeing then that the Grace of God in the Gospel, is by that to be
proffered to Sinners, as Sinners; as well to the Reprobate as the Elect; Is it
possible for those who indeed are not Elect, to receive it, and be saved?
TO this Question I shall answer several things: But first I shall show you
what that Grace is, that is tendered in the Gospel; and secondly, what it is to
receive it and be saved.

First then, The Grace that is offered to Sinners as Sinners, without respect
to this or that Person, it is a sufficiency of Righteousness, pardoning Grace,
and Life, laid up in the Person of Christ, held forth in the Exhortation and
Word of the Gospel, and promised to be theirs that receive it; yea, I say, in
so universal a Tender, that not one is by it excluded or checked in the least,
but rather encouraged, if he has the least desire to Life; yea, it is held
forth to beget both Desires and Longings after the Life thus laid up in Christ,
and held forth by the Gospel. Joh. 1.16. Col. 1.19. 1 John 5.11, 12. Act.
13.38, 39. Col. 1.23. Romans 10.12, 13, 14, and 16.25, 26.

Secondly, To receive this Grace thus tendered by the Gospel, it is, 1. To
believe it is true. 2. To receive it heartily and unfeignedly through Faith.
And 3. To let it have its natural sway, course and authority in the Soul, and
that in that measure, as to bring forth the fruits of good living in Heart,
Word, and Life, both before God and Man.


Now then to the Question:

Is it possible that this Tender, thus offered to the Reprobate, should by him
be thus received and embraced, and he live thereby?

To which I answer in the Negative, Nor yet for the Elect themselves, I mean as
considered dead in trespasses and sins, which is the state of all men, Elect as
well as Reprobate. So then, though there be a sufficiency of Life and
Righteousness laid up in Christ for all men, and this tendered by the Gospel to
them without exception; yet sin coming in between the Soul and the Tender of
this Grace, it has in truth disabled all men, and so, notwithstanding this
Tender, they continue to be dead. For the Gospel, I say, coming in word only,
saves no man, because of man's impediment; wherefore those that indeed are
saved by this Gospel, the Word comes not to them in word only, but also in
power, and in the holy Ghost, is mixed with Faith, even with the Faith of the
operation of God, by whose exceeding great and mighty Power, they are raised
from this death of sin, and enabled to embrace the Gospel. Doubtless, all men
being dead in trespasses and sins, and so captivated under the power of the
Devil, the Curse of the Law, and shut up in unbelief; it must be the Power of
God, yea the exceeding greatness of that Power, that raises the Soul from this
condition, to receive the holy Gospel. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6. Col.
2.12. Heb. 4.1, 2. Ephesians. 1.18, 19, etc.

For man by nature (consider him at best) can see no more, nor do no more then
what the Principles of Nature understands and helps to do; which Nature being
below the discerning of things truly, spiritually, and savingly good, it must
needs fall short of receiving, loving and delighting in them. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Now I
say, If the natural man at best (for the Elect before Conversion are no more,
if quite so much) cannot do this, how shall they attain thereto, being now not
only corrupted and infected, but depraved, bewitched and dead; swallowed up of
unbelief, ignorance, confusion, hardness of heart, hatred of God, and the like?
When a Thorn by nature bears Grapes, and a Thistle bears Figs, then may
this thing be. To lay hold of and receive the Gospel by a true and saving
Faith, it is an Act of the Soul as made a New Creature, which is the
workmanship of God: Now he that has wrought us for the self-same thing, is
God. For a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin? 1 Cor. 2.11, 14. Mat. 7.16, 17, 18. Luke 6.43, 44, 45. Jer. 13.23.

But yet the Cause of this impossibility, 1. Lies not in Reprobation, the
Elect themselves being as much unable to receive it as the other. 2. Neither is
it because the Reprobate is excluded in the Tender, for that is universal. 3.
Neither is it because there wants Arguments in the Tenders of the Gospel, for
there is not only plenty, but such as be persuasive, clear, and full of
Rationality. 4. Neither is it because these Creatures have no need thereof, for
they have broke the Law. 5. Wherefore it is, because indeed they are by sin
dead, captivated, mad, self-opposers, blind, alienated in their minds, and
haters of the Lord. Behold the Ruins that Sin has made!


Wherefore whoever receives the Grace that is tendered in the Gospel, they
must be quickened by the Power of God, their Eyes must be opened, their
Understandings illuminated, their Ears unstopped, their Hearts circumcised,
their Wills also rectified, and the Son of God revealed in them. Yet as I said,
Not because there wants Argument in these Tenders, but because men are dead,
and blind, and cannot hear the Word. Why do you not understand my speech? says
Christ: Even because you cannot hear my word. Act. 9.15. and 26.9, 10. Psalm.
110.3. Gal. 1.15. Mat. 11.27. John 8.43.

For otherwise, as I said but now, There is, 1. Rationality enough in the
Tenders of the Gospel. 2. Persuasions of weight enough to provoke to Faith.
And, 3. Arguments enough to persuade to continue therein.


First, Is it not reasonable that man should believe God in the profer of the
Gospel, and Life by it?

Secondly, Is there not reason, I say, both from the Truth and Faithfulness of
God, from the sufficiency of the Merits of Christ, as also from the freeness
and fullness of the Promise? What unreasonable thing does the Gospel bid thee
credit? Or what falsehood does it command thee to receive for truth? Indeed in
many points the Gospel is above Reason, but yet in never a one against it;
especially in those things wherein it begins with the Sinner, in order to
Eternal Life.

Again, Touching its Persuasions to provoke to Faith: First, With how many
Signs and Wonders, Miracles and mighty Deeds, has it been once and again
confirmed, and that to this very end? Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 14.22. Heb. 6.18.
Act. 13.32. Secondly, With how many Oaths, Declarations, Attestations, and
Proclamations, is it avouched, confirmed and established? Thirdly, And why
should not credence be given to that Gospel that is confirmed by Blood, the
Blood of the Son of God himself? Yea, that Gospel that did never yet fail any
that in truth have cast themselves upon it, since the foundation of the World.
Jer. 3.12. Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.16, 17, 18. and 12.1, 2, 3.


Again, As there is Rationality enough, and Persuasions sufficient, so there is
also Argument most prevalent to persuade to continue therein, and that too
heartily, cheerfully, and unfeignedly unto the end: Did not, as I have said,
blindness, madness, deadness, and wilful Rebellion, carry them away in the
vanity of their minds, and overcome them. Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19.

For, First, if they could but consider how they have sinned, how they have
provoked God, etc. if they could but consider what a dismal state the state of
the damned is, and also that in a moment their condition is like to be the
same, would they not cleave to the Gospel, and live?

Secondly, The enjoyment of God, and Christ, and Saints, and Angels, being the
sweetest; the pleasures of Heaven the most comfortable; and to live always in
the height of Light, Life, Joy, Gladness imaginable, one would think were
enough to persuade the very Damned now in Hell.

There is no man then perishes for want of sufficient Reason in the Tenders of
the Gospel, nor any for want of Persuasions to Faith; nor yet because there
wants Arguments to provoke to continue therein. But the Truth is, the Gospel
in this has to do with unreasonable Creatures; with such as will not believe
it, and that because it is Truth: And because I tell you the Truth, says
Christ, (therefore) you believe me not, John 8.45.

Quest. Well, but if this in truth be thus, how then comes it to pass that some
^eceive it and live for ever? for you have said before, That the Elect are as
dead as the Reprobate, and full as unable as they (as men) to close with these
Tenders, and live.

Answ. Doubtless this is true, and were the Elect left to themselves, they,
through the wickedness of their heart, would perish as do others. Neither could
all the reasonable persuasive prevalent Arguments of the Gospel of God in
Christ, prevail to make any receive it, and live. Wherefore here you must
consider, that as there is Mercy proclaimed in the general Tenders of the
Gospel; so there is also the Grace of Election; which Grace kindly over-ruleth
and wins the Spirit of the Chosen, working in them that unfeigned closing
therewith, that makes it effectual to their undoubted Salvation; which indeed
is the cause that not only in other Ages, but also to this day, there is a
Remnant that receive this Grace; they being appointed, I say, thereto, before
the world began; preserved in time from that which would undo them, and enabled
to embrace the glorious Gospel of Grace, and Peace, and Life. 1 King. 19.18.
Romans 11.5, 2 Thessalonians. 5.9.

Now there is a great difference between the Grace of Election, and of the
Grace that is wrapped up in the general Tenders of the Gospel; a difference, I
say, and that both as to its timing, latituding, and working.

1. Touching its timing; it is before, yea long before, there was either Tender
of the Grace wrapped up in the Gospel to any, or any need of such a Tender.
Ephesians. 1.4, 5. 2. They also differ in latitude; the Tenders of Grace in the
Gospel are common and universal to all, but the extention of that of Election
special and peculiar to some. There is a Remnant according to the Election of
Grace, Romans 11.5. 3. Touching the working of the Grace of Election; it differs
much in some things from the working of the Grace that is offered in the
general Tenders of the Gospel. As is manifest in these particulars: 1. The
Grace that is offered in the general Tenders of the Gospel, calls for Faith
to lay hold upon, and accept thereof; but the special Grace of Election,
works that Faith which does lay hold thereof. Act. 16.31. and 13.48. Phil.
1.29. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. 2. The Grace that is offered in the general Tenders of the
Gospel, calls for Faith as a condition in us, without which there is no Life;
but the special Grace of Election works Faith in us without any such
Condition. Mark 16.15, 16. Romans 11.5, 6. 3. The Grace that is offered in the
general Tenders of the Gospel, promises Happiness upon the condition of
persevering in the Faith only; but the special Grace of Election causes this
Perseverance. Col. 1.23. Ephesians. 2.10. Romans 11.7. 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. 4. The Grace
offered in the general Tenders of the Gospel, when it sparkleth most, leaves
the greatest part of men behind it; but the special Grace of Election, when it
shines least, does infallibly bring every Soul therein concerned to
everlasting Life. Romans 10.16. and 8.33, 34, 35. 5. A man may overcome and put
out all the Light and Life that is begotten in him by the general Tenders of
the Gospel; but none shall overcome, or make void, or frustrate the Grace of
Election. Jude 4. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Mat. 24.24. Romans 11.1, 2, 3: etc. 6. The
general Tenders of the Gospel, considered without a concurrance of the Grace of
Election, helps not the Elect himself, when sadly fallen. Wherefore when I say,
The Grace that is offered in the general Tenders of the Gospel, I mean that
Grace when offered, as not being accompanied with a special operation of Gods
eternal Love, by way of conjunction therewith. Otherwise the Grace that is
tendered in the general offers of the Gospel, is that which saves the Sinner
now, and that brings him to everlasting Life; that is, when conjoined with that
Grace that blesses and makes this general Tender effectually efficacious. The
Grace of Election works not without, but by these Tenders generally; neither
does the Grace thus tendered, effectually work, but by and with the Grace of
Election: As many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed: The Word being
then effectual to Life, when the hand of the Lord is effectually therewith to
that end. They spoke (says the Text) unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord
Jesus; and the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and
turned unto the Lord. Acts 13.48. Mark 16.20. Act. 11.21.

We must always put difference between the Word of the Gospel, and the Power
that manageth that Word; we must put difference between the common and more
special operations of that Power also; even as there is evidently a difference
to be put between those words of Christ that were effectual to do what was
said, and of those words of his which were but words only, or at least not
[so] accompanied with Power. As for instance; That same Jesus that said to the
Leper, Say nothing to any man, said also to Lazarus, Come forth; yet the one
obeyed, the other did not; though he that obeyed was least in a capacity to do
it, he being now dead, and stunk in his Grave. Indeed unbelief has hindered
Christ much, yet not when he puts forth himself as Almighty, but when he
does suffer himself by them to be abused who are to be dealt with by ordinary
means: Otherwise legions of Devils, with ten thousand impediments, must fall
down before him, and give way unto him. There is a speaking, and a [so]
speaking: They [so] spoke, that a great multitude, both of the Jews, and also
of the Greeks, believed. Even as I have hinted already, there is a difference
between the coming of the Word when it is in Power, and when it is in Word
only. So then, the blessed Grace of Election chooses this man to good, not
because he is good; it chooses him to believe, not because he does believe: it
chooses him to persevere, not because he does so; it fore-ordains that this man
shall be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, not if a man will create
himself thereto. Acts 14.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Ephesians. 2.10.

What shall we say then? Is the fault in God, if any perish? Doubtless no; nor
yet in his Act of eternal Reprobation neither: It is Grace that saves the
Elect, but Sin that damns the Rest: It is super-abundant Grace that causes the
Elect to close with the Tenders of Life, and live; and it is the aboundings of
Sin that holds off the Reprobate from the rational necessary and absolute
Tenders of Grace. To conclude then; The Gospel calls for Credence as a
Condition, and that both from the Elect and Reprobate; but because none of them
both, as dead in sin, will close therewith, and live; therefore Grace, by
virtue of Electing Love, puts forth it self to work and do for some beyond
Reason; and Justice cuts off others, for slighting so good, so gracious, and
necessary a means of Salvation, so full both of Kindness, Mercy and Reason.

CHAP. XI. Seeing it is not possible that the Reprobate should receive this
Grace and live, and also seeing this is infallibly foreseen of God; and again,
seeing God has fore-determined to suffer it so to be; Why does he yet will and
command that the Gospel, and so Grace in the general Tenders thereof, should be
proffered unto them?
WHy then is the Gospel offered them? Well, That there is such a thing as
eternal Reprobation, I have showed you; also what this eternal Reprobation is,
I have opened unto you: And shall now show you also, That though these
Reprobates will infallibly perish, which God not only foresaw, but
fore-determined to suffer them most assuredly so to do; yet there is reason,
great reason, why the Gospel, and so the Grace of God thereby, should be
tendered, and that in general terms, to them as well as others.

But before I come to lay the Reasons before you, I must mind you afresh of
these particulars:

1. That eternal Reprobation makes no man a Sinner.

2. That the foreknowledge of God that the Reprobate would perish, makes no
man a sinner.

3. That Gods infallible determining upon the damnation of him that perishes,
makes no man a sinner.

4. Gods patience and long-suffering, and forbearance, until the Reprobate fits
himself for eternal destruction, makes no man a sinner.

So then, God may reprobate, may suffer the Reprobate to sin, may
fore-determine his infallible damnation, through the pre-consideration of him
in sin, and may also forbear to work that effectual work in his Soul that would
infallibly bring him out of this condition, and yet neither be the Author,
Contriver, nor means of man's sin and misery.

Again, God may infallibly foresee that this Reprobate, when he has sinned,
will be an unreasonable opposer of his own salvation; and may also determine to
suffer him to sin, and be thus unreasonable to the end, yet be gracious, yea
very gracious, if he offer him Life, and that only upon reasonable terms,
which yet he denies to close with. Isa. 1.18. and 55.12.

The Reasons are,

1. Because not God, but sin, has made him unreasonable; without which,
reasonable terms had done his work for him: for reasonable terms are the most
equal and righteous terms that can be propounded between parties at difference;
yea the terms that most suiteth and agrees with a reasonable Creature, such as
Man. Nay, reasonable terms are, for terms, the most apt to work with that man
whose Reason is brought into and held captive by very sense it self. Ezekiel. 18.
and 33.

2. God goes yet further, he adds Promises of Mercy, as those that are
inseparable to the terms he offers, even to pour forth his Spirit unto them;
Turn at my Reproof, and behold I will pour forth of my Spirit unto you, and
incline your ear; come unto me, hear and your soul shall live. Prove. 1.21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

Now then to the Question it self, to wit, That seeing it is impossible the
Reprobate should be saved; seeing also this is infallibly foreseen of God, and
seeing also that God has beforehand determined to suffer it so to be; yet I
shall show you it is requisite, yea very requisite, that he should both will
and command that the Gospel, and so Grace in the general Tenders thereof,
should be proffered unto them.

The First REASON.
And that first, To show that this Reprobation does not in its self make any
man absolutely incapable of salvation: for if God had intended that by the Act
of Reprobation, the persons therein concerned should also by that only Act have
been made incapable of everlasting Life, then this Act must also have tied up
all the means from them, that tends to that end; or at least have debarred
the Gospels being offered to them by Gods Command, for that intent; otherwise
who is there but would have charged the Holy One as guilty of guile, and worthy
of blame, for commanding that the Gospel of Grace and Salvation should be
offered unto this or that man, whom yet he has made incapable to receive it,
by his Act of Reprobation. Wherefore this very thing, to wit, that the Gospel
is yet to be tendered to those eternally reprobated, shows that it is not
simply the Act of Gods Reprobation, but Sin, that incapacitateth the Creature
of Life everlasting. Which Sin is no branch of this Reprobation, as is evident,
because the Elect and Reprobate are both alike defiled therewith.

The Second REASON.
Secondly, God also shows by this, that the Reprobate does not perish for
want of the offers of Salvation (though he has offended God) and that upon
most righteous terms; according to what is written, As I live, says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, but that the wicked turn
from his wicked way, and live. Turn unto me, says the Lord of Hosts; and I
will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts. So then, here lies the point
between God and the Reprobate, (I mean the Reprobate since he has sinned) God
is willing to save him upon reasonable terms, but not not upon terms above
reason; but no reasonable terms will down with the Reprobate, therefore he must
perish for his unreasonableness. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. and 33.10. Zech. 1.3.

That God is willing to save even those that perish for ever, is apparent, both
from the consideration of the goodness of his Nature, of Man's being his
Creature, and indeed in a miserable state. But I say, as I have also said
already, there is a great difference between his being willing to save them,
through their complying with these his reasonable terms, and his being resolved
to save them, whether they, as men, will close therewith, or no: So only he
saves the Elect themselves, even according to the riches of his G(...) even
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus; working effectua^^^ (...)
them, what the Gospel, as a condition, calls for from them. A(...)nce it is
that he is said to give Faith, (yea the most holy Faith, for th^^ is the Faith
of Gods Elect) to give Repentance, to give a new Heart, to give his Fear, even
that Fear that may keep them for ever from everlasting Ruin; still engaging
his Mercy and Goodness to follow them all the days of their lives, that they
may dwell in the House of the Lord for ever: And as another Scripture says,
Now he that has wrought (...) the self-same thing, is God. Psalm. 145.9. Job
14.15. Joh. 3.16. Ephesians. 1.4, 7. Phil. 1.29. and 4.19. Act. 5.30, 31. Ezekiel.
36.26, 27, Jer. 32, 40. Psalm. 23.6. Romans 8.26, etc. 2 Cor. 5.5, etc.

But I say, His denying to do thus for every man in the World, cannot properly
be said to be because he is not heartily willing they should close with the
Tenders of the Grace held forth in the Gospel, and live. Wherefore you must
consider that there is a distinction to be put between God's denying Grace on
reasonable terms, and denying it absolutely; and also that there is a
difference between his withholding further Grace, and of hindering men from
closing with the Grace at present offered; also that God may withold much,
when he takes away nothing; yea, take away much, when once abused, and yet be
just and righteous still. Further, God may deny to do this or that absolutely,
when yet he has promised to do, not only that, but more, conditionally. Which
things considered, you may with ease conclude, that he may be willing to save
those not Elect, upon reasonable terms, though not without them.

It is no unrighteousness in God to offer Grace unto the World, though but on
those terms only, that they are also foreseen by him infallibly to reject;
both because to reject it is unreasonable, especially the terms being so
reasonable as to believe the truth and live; and also because it is Grace and
Mercy in God, so much as once to offer means of Reconciliation to a Sinner, he
being the offender; but the Lord, the God offended; they being but Dust and
Ashes, He the Heavenly Majesty. If God, when man had broke the Law, had yet
with all severity kept the World to the utmost condition of it, had he then
been unjust? had he injured man at all? Was not every tittle of the Law
reasonable, both in the first and second Table? How much more then is he
merciful and gracious, even in but mentioning terms of Reconciliation?
Especially seeing he is also willing so to condescend, if they will believe his
Word, and receive the love of the Truth. Though the Reprobate then does
voluntarily, and against all strength of reason, fun himself upon the Rocks of
eternal Misery, and split himself thereon, he perishes in his own corruption,
by rejecting terms of Life. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 2 Pet. 2.12, 13.

Object. 1. But the Reprobate is not now in a capacity to fulfill these
reasonable terms.

Answ. But I say, suppose it should be granted, is it because Reprobation made
him incapable, or Sin? Not Reprobation, but Sin: If Sin, then before he
quarrel, let him consider the case aright, where in the result, he will find
Sin, being consented to by his voluntary mind, has thus disabled him: And
because, I say, it was Sin by his voluntary consent that did it, let him
quarrel with himself for consenting, so as to make himself incapable to close
with reasonable terms; yea, with those terms because reasonable, therefore most
suitable (as terms) for him notwithstanding his wickedness. And I say again,
Forasmuch as these reasonable terms have annexed unto them, as their
inseparable companions, such wonderful Mercy and Grace as indeed there is, let
even them that perish, yet justify God; yea cry, His goodness endures for
ever; though they, through the wretchedness of their hearts, get no benefit by
it.

The Third REASON.
Thirdly, God may will and command that his Gospel, and so the Grace thereof,
be tendered to those that shall never be saved, (besides what has been said)
to show to all Spectators what an Enemy Sin, being once embraced, is to the
Salvation of Man: Sin without the Tenders of the Grace of the Gospel, could
never have appeared so exceeding sinful, as by that it both has and does. If I
had not come and spoken unto them, says Christ, they had not had sin; but now
they have no cloak for their sin. As sins that oppose the Law, are discovered
by the Law, that is, by the goodness, and justness, and holiness of the Law; so
the sins that oppose the Gospel, are made manifect by that, even by the Love,
and Mercy, and Forgiveness of the Gospel: [ If he that despised Moses Law, died
without mercy; of how much sorer pun^shment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God?] Who could have thought
that Sin would have opposed that which is just, but especially Mercy and Grace,
had we not seen it with our eyes? And how could we have seen it to purpose, had
not God left some to themselves? Here indeed is sin made manifest: For all he
had done so many miracles amongst them (to wit, to persuade them to mercy) yet
they believed him not. Sin, where it reigns, is a mortal Enemy to the Soul;
it blinds the Eyes, holds the Hands, ties the Legs, and stops the Ears, and
makes the Heart implacable to resist the Savior of Souls. That man will
neither obey the Law nor the Gospel, who is left unto his Sin: Which also God
is willing should be discovered and made manifest, though it cost the damnation
of some: For this very purpose, says God to Pharaoh, have I raised thee up,
that I might show in thee my Power, and that my Name might be declared in all
the Earth. For God by raising up Pharaoh to his Kingdom, and suffering him to
walk to the height, according as his Sin did prompt him forward, showed unto
all beholders what a dreadful thing Sin is; and that without the special
assistance of his holy Spirit, Sin would neither be charmed by Law nor Gospel.
This Reason, though it be no profit unto those that are damned; yet it is for
the honor of God, and the good of those he has chosen. Joh. 15.22. Romans 7.
Heb. 10.27, 28, 29. Joh. 12.37. Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17.

It is for the honor of God, even for the honor of his Power and Mercy: for
his Power is now discovered indeed, when nothing can tame Sin but that; and his
Mercy is here seen indeed; because that does engage him to do it. Read Romans
9.22, 23.

The Fourth REASON.
Fourthly, God commands that the Tender of the Gospel, and the Grace thereof,
be in general offered to all, that Means thereby might be sufficiently provided
for the Elect, both to beget them to faith, and to maintain it in them to the
end, in what place, or state, or condition soever they are. God, through the
operation of his manifold Wisdom, has an end and an end in his Acts and Doings
amongst the Children of Men: And, so in that he commands that his Gospel be
tendered to all, an end, I say, to leave the Damned without excuse, and to
provide sufficiency of means for the gathering all his Elect. O that God would
speak, says Zophar, and open his mouth against thee, and show thee the secrets
of Wisdom, that they are double to that which is. For though God works with
and upon the Elect, otherwise then with and upon the Reprobate; yet he works
with and upon the Elect, with and by the same Word he commands should be held
forth and offered to the Reprobate. Now the Text thus running in most free and
universal terms, the Elect then hearing thereof, do through the mighty Power of
God close in with the Tenders therein held forth, and are saved. Thus that word
that was offered to the reprobate Jews, and by them most fiercely rejected,
even that word became yet effectual to the Chosen, and they were saved thereby.
They gladly received the Word, and as many as were ordained to eternal Life,
believed. Not as though the Word of God had taken none effect; God has not
cast away his People whom he fore-knew. The Word shall accomplish the thing for
which God has sent it, even the salvation of the few that are chosen, when
tendered to all; though rejected by most, through the rebellion of their hearts.
Ephesians. 1. Job 11.5, 6. Act. 13.44. to 48. and 28.28. Heb. 4.1, 2, 3. Romans 9.6.
and 11.12.

Object. 2. But if God has elected, as you have said, what need he lay a
Foundation so general for the begetting faith in his chosen Particulars, seeing
the same Spirit that works in them by such means, could also work in them by
other, even by a word, excluding the most in the first Tenders thereof, amongst
men?

Answ. I told you before, that though this be a principal Reason of the general
Tenders of the Grace of the Gospel, yet it is not all the reason why the Tender
should be so general, as the three former Reasons show.

But again, In the Bowels of Gods Decree of Election, is contained the means
that are also ordained for the effectual bringing of those Elected to that
Glory for which they were fore-appointed; even to gather together in one, all
the Children of God: Whereunto he called you, says Paul, by our Gospel, to the
obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. God's Decree of Election then,
destroys not the means which his wisdom has prepared, it rather
establishes, yea ordains and establishes it; and makes that means which in
the outward sound is indefinite and general, effectual to this and that man,
through a special and particular application: Thus that Christ that in general
was offered to all, is by a special Act of Faith applied to Paul in particular;
He loved me, and gave himself for me. Joh. 11.51, 52.2 These. 2.13, 14. Gal.
2.20, 21, 22.

Further, As the design of the Heavenly Majesty is to bring his Elect to glory
by means, so by the means thus universal and general, as most behooful and fit;
if we consider not only the Way it does please him to work with some of his
Chosen, in order to this their glory, but also the trials, temptations, and
other calamities they must go through thereto.

1. Touching his working with some, how invisible is it to those in whose Souls
it is yet begun? How is the Word buried under the Clods of their Hearts for
months, yea years together? Only thus much is discovered thereof, it shows
the Soul its Sin, the which it does also so aggravate and apply to the
Conscience (Jesus still refraining, like Joseph, to make himself known to his
Brethren) that were there not general Tenders of Mercy, and that to the worst
of Sinners, they would soon miscarry and perish, as do the Sons of perdition.
But by these the Lord upholdeth and helps them, that they stand, when others
fall for ever. Psalm. 119.49.

2. And so likewise for their trials, temptations, and other calamities,
because God will not bring them to Heaven without, but by them; therefore he
has also provided a Word so large, as to lie fair for the support of the Soul
in all conditions, that it may not die for thirst.

3. I might add also in this place, their imperfect state after grace
received, does call for such a Word; yea, many other things which might be
named: Which God only wise has thought fit should accompany us to the Ship,
yea in the Sea, to our desired Haven.

The Fifth REASON.
Fifthly, God wills and commands the Gospel should be offered to all, that
thereby distinguishing Love, as to an inward and spiritual work, might the more
appear to be indeed the fruit of special and peculiar Love. For in that the
Gospel is tendered to all in general, when yet but some do receive it; yea, and
seeing these some are as unable, unwilling, and by nature as much averse
thereto, as those that refuse it, and perish; it is evident that something more
of Heaven and the operation of the Spirit of God does accompany the Word thus
tendered for their Life and Salvation that enjoy it; not now as a Word barely
tendered, but backed by the strength of Heaven: Behold what manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Children of God!
even we who believe according to the working of his mighty Power which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. This provokes to
distinguishing admiration, yea and also to a love like that which has fastened
on the Called, the Preserved, and the Glorified: He has not dealt so with any
Nation; and as for his Judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the
Lord. Now are the Sacrifices bound even to the Horns of the Altar, with a, Lord
how is it, that thou should manifest thy self to us, and not unto the World!
He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many Waters, he delivered me
from my strong Enemy, and from them that hated me, for they were too strong for
me. 1 These. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 John 3.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 147.20. Joh. 14.22. 2 Samuel
22.17. Psalm. 18.16.

For thus the Elect considers: Though we all came alike into the World, and
are the Children of Wrath by Nature; yea, though we have alike so weakened our
selves by sin, that the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint, being
altogether gone out of the way, and every one become altogether unprofitable,
both to God and our selves; Yet that God should open mine Eyes, convert my
Soul, give me Faith, forgive my Sins; raise me, when I fall; fetch me again,
when I am gone astray; this is wonderful! Yea, that he should prepare eternal
Mansions for me, and also keep me by his blessed and mighty Power for that; and
that in a way of believing, which without his assistance I am no way able to
perform! That he should do this notwithstanding my Sins, though I had no
Righteousness! Yea, that he should do it according to the Riches of his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ our Lord! Even according to an
everlasting Covenant of Grace, which yet the greatest part of the World are
void of, and will for ever miss and fall short off! Besides, that he should
mollify my Heart! break it, and then delight in it; put his Fear in it, and
then look to me, and keep me as the Apple of his Eye; yea, resolve to guide me
with his Counsel, and then receive me to Glory! Further, that all this should
be the effect of unthought-of, undeserved, and undesired Love! That the Lord
should think on this before he made the World, and sufficiently ordain the
means before he had laid the foundation of the Hills! For this he is worthy to
be praised: Yea, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord; Praise ye
the Lord. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Romans 3.9. Isa. 1.5. Romans 3.12. Psalm. 23.6. and
37.23. 2 Cor. 5.5. Deuteronomy. 9.5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 16.60, 61, 62, 63. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Mal.
1.2. Psalm. 51.17. Jer. 32.4. Isa. 66.2. Psalm. 138.6. Jer. 31.3. 1 Cor. 2.9.

Object. 3. But you have said before, That the Reprobate is also blessed with
many Gospel. Mercies, as with the Knowledge of Christ, Faith, Light, the Gift
of the holy Ghost, and the tastes or relish of the Powers of the World to
come: if so, then what should be the reason that yet he perishes? Is it
because the Grace that he receives differs from the Grace that the Elect are
saved by? If they differ, where lies the difference? Whether in the nature, or
in the degree, or in the management thereof?

Answ. To this Objection I might answer many things; but, for brevity, take
this Reply:

1. That the Non-Elect may travel very far both in the Knowledge, Faith, Light,
and sweetness of Jesus Christ, and may also attain to the partaking of the holy
Ghost; yea, and by the very operation of these things also, escape the
Polutions of the World, and become a visible Saint, join in Church Communion,
and be as chief amongst the very Elect themselves. This the Scriptures every
where do show us.

The Question then is, Whether the Elect and Reprobate receive a differing
Grace? To which I answer, Yes in some respects, both as to the nature thereof,
and also the degree.

To begin then with the nature of it:

1. The faith that the Chosen are blessed with, it goes under another name
then any faith besides, even the Faith of Gods Elect, as of a faith belonging
to them only, of which none others do partake; which faith also, for the
nature of it, is called Faith most holy; to show it goes beyond all other, and
can be fitly matched no where else, but with their most blessed faith who
infallibly attain eternal glory: even like precious Faith with us, says Peter,
with his Elect Companions. And so of other things. For if this be true, that
they differ in their faith, they must needs therewith differ in other things:
for Faith being the Mother Grace, produces all the rest according to its own
nature, to wit, Love that abounds, that never fails, and that is never
contented till it attain the Resurrection of the dead, etc. Tit. 1.1. Jude 20.
2 Pet. 1.1, 2 These. 1.3. 1 Cor. 13.8. Phillip. 3.

2. They differ as to the nature, in this; the Faith, and Hope, and Love that
the Chosen receive, it is that which flows from Election it self; He has
blessed us according as he has chosen us, even with those Graces he set apart
for us, when he in Eternity did appoint us to Life before the foundation of the
World: Which Graces, because the Decree in it self is most absolute and
infallible, they also, that they may completely answer the end, will do the
work infallibly likewise, still through the management of Christ: I have prayed
that thy Faith fail not. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Luke 2.32.

But secondly, As they differ in nature, they differ also in degree: for though
it be true that the Reprobate is blessed with Grace, yet this is also as true,
that the Elect are blessed with more Grace: It is the Privilege only of those
that are Chosen, to be blessed with [ALL] spiritual Blessings, and to have
[ALL] the good pleasure of the goodness of God fulfilled in and upon them.
Those who are blessed with [all] spiritual Blessings, must needs be blessed
with Eternal Life; and those in whom the Lord, not only works all his good
pleasure, but fulfilleth a^l the good pleasure of his goodness upon them, they
must needs be preserved to his Heavenly Kingdom: But none of the Non-Elect have
these things conferred upon them; therefore the Grace bestowed upon the one,
does differ both in nature and degree from the other. Ephesians. 1.4, 5 1 These.
1.11.

Thirdly, There is a difference as to the management also: The Reprobate is
principal for the management of the Grace he receives, but Jesus Christ is
principal for the management of the Grace the Elect receives: When I say
principal, I mean chief; for though the Reprobate is to have the greatest hand
in the management of what Mercy and Goodness the Lord bestows on him, yet not
so as that the Lord will not help him at all; nay contrariwise he will, if
first the Reprobate do truly the duty that lies on him: If thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? but if not well, behold Sin lies at the door. Thus it
was also with Saul, who was rejected of God upon this account. And I say as to
the Elect themselves, though Jesus Christ our blessed Savior be chief, as to
the management of the Grace bestowed on his Chosen, yet not so as that he quite
excludes them from striving according to his working which works in them
mightily: nay contrariwise, if those who in truth are Elect, shall yet he
remiss, and do wickedly, they shall feel the stroke of Gods Rod, it may be till
their Bones do break: But because the work does not lie at their door to manage
as chief, but at Christ's, therefore though he may perform his work with much
bitterness and grief to them; yet he being engaged as the Principal, will
perform that which concerns them, even until the day (the coming) of Jesus
Christ. Genesis 4.7. 1 Samuel 13.11, 12, 13, 14. and 15 26. Col. 1.29. Psalm. 138.8.
Phil. 1.6.

Fom what has been said, there arises this Conclusion:

The Elect are always under Eternal Mercy, but those not Elect always under
Eternal Justice: For you must consider this, There is eternal Mercy and eternal
Justice, and there is present Mercy and present Justice: So then, for a man to
be in a state of Mercy, it may be either a state of Mercy present, or both
present and eternal also. And so again for a man to be in a state under
Justice, it may be understood either of present Ju^^ice only, or of both
p^esent and eternal also.

That this may yet further be opened, I shall somewhat enlarge.

I begin with present Mercy and present Justice. That which I call present
Mercy, is that Faith, Light, Knowledge, and taste of the good Word of God,
that a man may have, and perish. This is called in Scripture, Believing for a
while, during for a while, and rejoicing in the Light for a season. Now I call
this Mercy, both because none (as men) can deserve it, and also because the
proper end thereof is to do good to those that have it. But I call it present
Mercy, because those that are only blessed with that, may sin it away, and
perish; as did some of the Galatians, Hebrews, Alexandrians, with the Asians,
and others. But yet observe again, I do not call this present Mercy because God
has determined it shall last but a while absolutely; but because it is
possible for man to lose it, yea determined he shall, conditional^y. Heb. 6.4,
5. 2 Pet. 2.20. Mat. 13.22. Luke 8.13. Joh. 5.35 1 Cor. 12.7. Gal. 5.4. Heb.
12.15, 16. 1 Timothy 1 20. 2 Timothy 2.18. and 1.15. Heb. 12.25.

Again, As to present Justice, it is that which lasts but a while also: and
as present Mercy is properly the portion of those left out of Gods Election, so
present Justice chiefly has to do with Gods Beloved; who yet at that time are
also under eternal Mercy. This is that Justice that afflicted Job, David,
Heman, and the godly, who notwithstanding do infallibly attain, by virtue of
this mercy, eternal Life and Glory. I call this Justice, because in some sense
God deals with his Chil^ren according to the quality of their transgressions;
and I call it also present Justice, because though the hand of God for the
present be never so heavy on those that are his by Election, yet it lasts but
a while; wherefore though this indeed be called Wrath, yet is but a little
wrath, wrath for a moment, time or season. In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer. Job 6.4. Psalm. 88. and 38.3. Amos 3.2, 1 Cor.
11.30, 31. Isa. 54.7, 8. Psalm. 30.5. and 103.9. 1 Pet. 1.6.

Thus you see there is present Mercy and present Justice; also that the Elect
may be under present Justice, when the Rest may be under present Mercy.

Again, As there is present Mercy and present Justice, so there is eternal
Mercy and eternal Justice: and I say, As the Elect may be under present
Justice, when the Non-Elect may be under present Mercy; so the Elect at that
time are also under eternal Mercy, but the other under eternal Justice.

That the Elect are under eternal Mercy, and that when under present Justice,
is evident from what has been said before, namely from their being chosen in
Christ before the foundation of the world; as also from the consideration of
their sound conversion, and safe preservation quite through this wicked world,
even safe unto eternal Life; as he also says by the Prophet Jeremiah, Yea I
have loved thee with an everlasting Love, therefore with loving kindness have I
dra^n thee: And hence it is that he calls the Elect his Sheep, his Children,
and People, and that before Conversion; for though none of them as yet were his
Children by Calling, yet were they his according to Election. Jer 31.3. Joh.
10.16. and 11.52. Act 18.9, 10.

Now the Elect being under this eternal Grace and Mercy, they must needs be
under it both before present Justice seizes upon them, while it seizes them,
and also continues with them longer then present Justice can, it being from
everlasting to everlasting. This being so, here is the reason why no sin, nor
yet temptation of the Enemy, with any other evil, can hurt or destroy those
thus Elect of God: Yea this is that which makes even those things that in
themselves are the very bane of men, yet prove very much for good to those
within this purpose; and as David says, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted: and again, For when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened,
that we should not be condemned with the World. Now Afflictions, etc. in
themselves are not only fruitless and unprofitable, but, being unsanctified,
are destructive; I smote him, and he went on frowardly: But now eternal Mercy
working with this or that affliction, makes it profitable to the Chosen; I have
seen his ways, and will heal him, and will restore comfort to him and to his
Mourners: as he says in another place, Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest, and teach out of thy Law. For eternal Mercy does not look on
those who are the Elect and Chosen of God, as poor sinful creatures only, but
also as the Generation whom the Lord has blessed, in whom he has designed to
magnify his mercy to the utmost, by pardoning the transgressions of the
remnant of his Heritage; Having predestined us to the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, wherein also he has made us accepted in the Beloved.
Wherefore I say, the Elect, as they do also receive that Grace and Mercy that
may be sinned away, so they have that Grace and Mercy which cannot be lost, and
that sin cannot deprive them of, even mercy that abounds, and goes beyond all
sin; such mercy as has engaged the power of God, the intercession of Christ,
and the communication of the blessed Spirit of Adoption, which Spirit also
engages the heart, directs it into the love of God, that it may not depart
from God after that rate as the Reprobates do. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, says God, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but will put my fear in their heart, that they shall not depart from me.
Romans 8.28. Psalm. 119.71. 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. Isa. 57.17, 18. Psalm 94.12. 1 Pet.
2.9. Mic. 7.18, 19. Ephesians 1.5, 6, and 5 29, 30. Jer. 32 40.

But now I say, Gods dealing with the Non-Elect, is far otherwise, they being
under the consideration of eternal Justice, even then when in the enjoyment of
present Grace and Mercy. And hence it is that as to their standing before the
God of Heaven, they are counted Dogs, and Sows, and Devils, even then when
before the Elect of God themselves they are counted Saints and Brethren: The
Dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire. And the reason is, because notwithstanding all their
show before the world, their old nature and corruptions do still bear sway
Within, which in time also, according to the ord^nary Judgment of God, is
suffered so to show it self, that they are visible to Saints that are Elect, as
was the case of Simon Magus, and that wicked Apostate Judas, who went out from
us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they should no doubt
have continued with us; but they went out from us, that it might be manifest
they were not all of us: They were not Elect as we, nor were they sanctified as
the Elect of God themselves; wherefore eternal Justice counts them the sons of
Perdition, when under their Profession. And I say they being un\der this
Eternal Justice, it must needs have to do with them in the midst of their
Profession; and because also it is much offended with them for conniving with
their lusts, it takes away from them, and that most righteously, those Gifts
and Graces, and Benefits and Privileges that present Mercy gave them; and not
only so, but cuts them off for their iniquity, and lays them under wrath for
ever. They have forsaken the right way, says God; they have followed the way
of Balaam the son of Bosor; these are Wells without Water, Clouds that are
carried with a tempest, Trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead,
plucked up by the roots, for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever. 1 John 2.19. Joh. 17.12. Mat. 13.12, and 25.29. Mark 4.25 Luk 8.18. 2 Pet
2.5, 16, 17. Jude 11, 12, 13.

These things thus considered, you see, 1. That there is present Grace and
present Mercy, eternal Grace and eternal Mercy. 2. That the Elect are under
eternal Mercy, and that when under present Justice; and that the Reprobate is
under eternal Justice, and that when under present Mercy. 3. Thus you ^ee
again, that the Non Elect per^sh by reason of SIN, notwithstanding present
Mercy, because of eternal Justice; and that the Elect are preserved from the
death (though they sin, and are obnoxious to the strokes of present Justice) by
reason of eternal MERCY. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with
God? God forbid: He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and compassion on
whom he will have compassion.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. iine 23. for finished, when yet; read fashioned, when as yet.


