The Barren Fig Tree: OR, The Doom and Downfall of the Fruitless Professor.

Showing, That the Day of Grace may be past with him long before his Life is
ended.

The Signs also by which such miserable Mortals my be known.

By JOHN BVNYAN. -- who being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11. 4.

To which is added, His Exhortation to Peace and Unity among all that fear God.

LONDON; Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1688.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have written to thee now about the Barren Fig Tree, or how it will fare with
the Fruitless Professor that stands in the Vineyard of God.

Of what Complexion thou art, I cannot certainly divine, but the Parable tells
thee, that the Cumber-ground must be cut down.

A Cumber-ground Professor, is not only a provocation to God, a stumbling block
to the World, and a blemish to Religion, but a snare to his own Soul also.
Though his Excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his Head reach unto the
Clouds, yet he shall perish for ever, like his own dung, they that have seen
him, shall say, Where is he? Job 20. 6.

Now they count it pleasure to riot in the daytime, 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14. but what
will they do when the Ax is fetched out?

The Tree whose Fruit withers, is reckoned a Tree without Fruit, a Tree twice
dead, one that must be plucked up by the Roots, Jude 12.

O thou Cumber-ground, God expects Fruit, God will come seeking Fruit shortly.

My Exhortation therefore is to Professors, that they look to it, that they
take heed.

The Barren Fig Tree in the Vineyard, and the Bramble in the Wood, are both
prepared for the Fire.

Profession is not a Covert to hide from the Eye of God; nor will it palliate
the revengeful Threatening of his Justice, he will command to cut it down
shortly.

The Church and a Profession, are the best of places for the Upright, but the
worst in the World for the Cumber-ground: He must be cast, as profane, out of
the Mount of God; Cast, I say, over the Wall of the Vineyard, there to wither;
thence to be gathered and burned. It had been better for them that they had not
known the Way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 21. And yet if they had not, they had
been damned; but it is better to go to Hell without, than in, or from under a
Profession: These shall receive greater Damnation, Luke 20. 47.

If thou be a Professor, read and tremble; If thou be Profane, do so likewise.
For if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and Sinners
appear? Cumber-ground, Take heed of the Ax; Barren Fig Tree, beware of the Fire.

But I will keep thee no longer out of the Book; Christ Jesus, the Dresser of
the Vineyard, take care of thee, dig about thee, and dung thee, that thou
may bear Fruit: That when the Lord of the Vineyard comes with his Ax to seek
for Fruit, or pronounce the Sentence of Damnation on the Barren Fig Tree, thou
may escape that judgment. The Cumber-ground must to the Wood-pile, and
thence to the Fire.

Farewell. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus in Sincerity. Amen.
J. Bunyan.

The Barren Fig Tree: OR, The Doom and Downfall of the fruitless Professor.
Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. A certain Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and
he came and sought Fruit thereon, and found none. Then said he to the Dresser
of his Vineyard, Behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit on this
Fig Tree, and find none: cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? And he
answering, said, Lord, let it alone this Year also, until I shall dig about it,
and dung it: and if it bear Fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shall
cut it down.
AT the beginning of this Chapter we read, how some of the Jews came to Jesus
Christ, to tell him of the cruelty of Pontius Pilate, in mingling the Blood of
the Galileans with their Sacrifices. An heathenish and prodigious Act: for
therein he showed, not only his Malice against the Jewish Nation, but also
against their Worship, and consequently their God. An Action, I say, not only
Heathenish, but prodigious also; for the Lord Jesus paraphrasing upon this Fact
of his, teaches the Jews, that without Repentance, they should all Likewise
perish. Likewise, that is, by the Hand and Rage of the Roman Empire: Neither
should they be more able to avoid the Stroke, than were those eighteen upon
whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, Luke 19. 42, 43, 44. The
fulfilling of which Prophecy, for their hardness of Heart, and Impenitency, was
in the days of Titus Son of Vespasian, about forty Years after the Death of
Christ. Then, I say, were these Jews, and their City both, environed round on
every side, wherein both they and it, to amazement, were miserably overthrown.
God gave them Sword, and Famine, Pestilence, and Blood, for their outrage
against the Son of his Love: So Wrath came on them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 16.

Now to prevent their old and foolish Salvo, which they always had in readiness
against such Prophecies and Denunciations of Judgment, the Lord Jesus presents
them with this Parable, in which he emphatically shows them, that their cry of
being the Temple of the Lord, and of their being the Children of Abraham, etc.
and their being the Church of God, would not stand them in any stead. As who
should say, It may be you think to help your selves against this my Prophecy,
of your utter and unavoidable overthrow, by the Interest which you have in your
outward Privileges: But all these will fail you; for what think you, A certain
Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came and sought Fruit
thereon, and found none. This is your Case, The Jewish Land is God's Vineyard,
I know it; and I know also, that you are the Fig Trees. But behold, there
wants the main thing, Fruit; for the sake, and in expectation of which, he
set this Vineyard with Trees. Now, seeing the Fruit is not found amongst you;
the Fruit, I say, for the sake of which he did at first plant this Vineyard;
what remains, but that in Justice he command to cut you down, as those that
cumber the Ground, that he may plant himself another Vineyard. Then said he to
the Dresser of his Vineyard, Behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit on
this Fig Tree, and find none; cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? This
therefore must be your End, although you are planted in the Garden of God, for the
barrenness and unfruitfulness of your Hearts and Lives, you must be cut off,
yea, rooted up, and cast out of the Vineyard.

In Parables there are two Things to be taken notice of, and to be enquired
into of them that read.

First, The Metaphors made use of.

Secondly, The Doctrine, or Mysteries couched under such Metaphors.

The Metaphors in this Parable are; (1.) A certain Man. (2.) A Vineyard. (3.) A
Fig Tree, barren or fruitless. (4.) A Dresser. (5.) Three Years. (6.) Digging
and Dunging, etc.

The Doctrine, or Mystery, couched under these words, is to show us, What is
like to become of a fruitless or formal Professor. For,

1. By the Man in the Parable, (Luke 15. 11.) is meant God the Father.

2. By the Vineyard, (Isa. 5. 7.) his Church.

3. By the Fig Tree, a Professor.

4. By the Dresser, the Lord Jesus.

5. By the Fig-tree's barrenness, the Professor's fruitlesness.

6. By the three Years, the Patience of God, that for a time he extends to
barren Professors.

7. This calling to the Dresser of the Vineyard to cut it down, is to show, the
outcries of Justice against fruitless Professors.

8. The Dresser' s interceding, is to show, how the Lord Jesus steps in, and
takes hold of the Head of his Father's Ax, to stop, or at least to defer
present execution a barren Fig Tree.

9. The Dresser' s desire to try to make the Fig Tree fruitful, is to show you,
How unwilling he is that ever a barren Fig Tree, should yet be barren, and
perish.

10. His digging about it, and dunging of it, is to show his willingness to
apply Gospel-helps to this barren Professor, if happily he may be fruitful.

11. The Supposition that the Fig Tree may yet continue fruitless, is to show,
that when Christ Jesus has done all, There are some Professors will abide
barren and fruitless.

12. The Determination upon this Supposition, at last to cut it down, is a
certain prediction of such Professors unavoidable and eternal Damnation.

But to take this Parable into pieces, and to discourse more particularly, tho
with all brevity, upon all the parts thereof.

A certain Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard.]
The Man, I told you, is to present us with God the Father, by which Similitude
He is often set out in the New Testament.

Observe then, That it is no new thing, if you find in God's Church, barren
Fig Trees, fruitless Professors; even as here you see is a Tree, a fruitless
Tree, a fruitless Fig Tree in the Vineyard. Fruit is not so easily brought
forth, as a Profession is got into; it is easy for a Man to cloth himself with
a fair show in the flesh, to word it, and say, Be thou warmed and filled with
the best. It Is no hard thing to do these with other things; but to be fruitful,
to bring forth fruit to God, this does not every tree; No not every Fig Tree,
that stands in the Vineyard of God. Them words also, Joh. 15. 2. [Every branch
in me that bears not fruit, he takes away,] assert the same thing. There are
branches in Christ, in Christ's Body mystical, (which is his Church, his
Vineyard) that bear not Fruit, wherefore the Hand of God is to take them away.
I looked for Grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes, Isa. 5. 4. that is, no
fruit at all that was acceptable with God. Again, Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an
empty Vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself, none to God; he is without
Fruit to God. All these, with many more, show us the truth of the Observation,
and that God's Church may be cumbered with fruitless Fig Trees, with barren
Professors.

Had a [Fig-tree.]
Although there be in God's Church that be barren and fruitless; yet, as I
said, to see to, they are like the rest of the Trees, even a Fig Tree: 'Twas
not an Oak, nor a Willow, nor a Thorn, nor a Bramble, but a Fig Tree. Ezekiel. 33.
31. They come before thee as the people comes. Isa. 58. 2, 3, 4. They delight
to know my Ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the
Ordinances of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take
delight in approaching to God; and yet but barren, fruitless, and unprofitable
Professors. Judas also was one of the twelve, a Disciple, an Apostle, a
Preacher, an Officer, yea, and such an one as none of the Eleven mistrusted,
but preferred before themselves, each one crying out, Is it I? is it I? Mar.
14. 19. none of them, as we read of, (Joh. 6. 70.) mistrusting Judas, yet he in
Christ's Eye was the barren Fig Tree, a Devil, a fruitless Professor. The
foolish Virgins also went forth of the World with the other, had Lamps, and
Light, and were awakened with the other; yea, had boldness to go forth when the
midnight Cry was made with the other; and thought that they could have looked
Christ in the Face, when he sat upon the Throne of Judgment with the other; and
yet but foolish, but barren Fig Trees, but fruitless Professors: Mat. 7. 22,
23. Many, says Christ, will say unto me in that day, this and that, and will
also talk of many wonderful Works; yet, behold, he finds nothing in them, but
the Fruits of Unrighteousness: they were altogether barren and fruitless
Professors.

Had a Fig Tree [planted].
This word [planted] does also reach far; it supposes one taken out of its
natural Soil, or removed from the place it grew in once; one that seemed to be
called, awakened; and not only so, but by strong hand carried from the World to
the Church; from Nature, to Grace; from Sin, to Godliness. Psalm. 80. 8. Thou
broughtest a Vine out of Egypt; thou did cast out the Heathen and plant it.
Of some of the Branches of this Vine, were there unfruitful Professors.

It must be concluded therefore, That this Professor (that remains
notwithstanding fruitless) is, as to the view and judgment of the Church,
rightly brought in thither; to wit, by Confession of Faith, of Sin, and a show
of Repentance and Regeneration, (thus false Brethren creep in unawares). All
these things this word, Planted, intimates; yea, further, that the Church is
satisfied with them, consents they should abide in the Garden, and counts
them sound as the rest. But before God, in the sight of God, they are graceless
Professors, barren and fruitless Fig Trees.

Therefore it is one thing to be IN the Church, or in a Profession; and another
to be OF the Church, and to belong to that Kingdom, that is prepared for the
Saint, that is so indeed. Otherwise, being planted, shall it prosper, shall it
not utterly wither, when the East Wind touches it? It shall wither in the
Furrows where where it grew, Ezekiel. 17. 10.

Had a Fig Tree planted in [his] Vineyard.
In [his] Vineyard. Hypocrites, with rotten Hearts, are not afraid to come
before God in Sion. These words therefore suggest unto us, a prodigious kind of
boldness and hardened Fearlessness: For what presumption higher, and what
attempt more desperate, than for a Man that wants Grace, and the true
Knowledge of God, to crowd himself (in that condition) into the House, or Church
of God; or to make profession of, and desire that the name of God should be
called upon him?

For the Man that makes a Profession of the Religion of Jesus Christ, that Man
has, as it were, put the Name of God upon himself, and is called and reckoned
now, (how fruitless soever before God, or Men) the Man that has to do with
God, the Man that God owneth, and will stand for. This Man, I say, by his
Profession suggesteth this to all that know him, to be such a Professor. Men
merely natural, I mean, Men that have not got the devilish art of Hypocrisy,
are afraid to think of doing thus. And of the rest durst no Man join himself to
them, but the people magnified them. Act. 5. 13. And indeed it displeases God,
They have brought, says he, Men uncircumcised into my Sanctuary. And again,
(Isa. 1. 12.) When you come to appear before me, who has required this at your
hand, to tread my Courts? says God. They have therefore learnt this boldness
of none in the visible World, they only took it of the Devil; for he, and he
only (with these his Disciples) attempt to present themselves in the Church
before God. The Tares are the Children of the Wicked One; the Tares, that is,
the Hypocrites that are Satan's Brood, the Generation of Vipers, that cannot
escape the Damnation of Hell.

[Had] a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard.
He does not say, He planted a Fig Tree, but there Was a Fig Tree there, he
Had, or found, a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard.

The great God will not acknowledge the barren Fig Tree, or barren Professor, to
be His Workmanship, or a Tree of his bringing in; only the Text says, He Had
one there. This is much like that in Matthew, Chap. 15. 13. Every Plant which
my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Here again are Plants
in his Vineyard, which God will not acknowledge to be of his planting: and he
seems to suggest, that in his Vineyard are many such -- Every Plant, or all
those Plants, or Professors that are got into the Assembly of the Saints, or
into the Profession of their Religion, without God and his Grace, shall be
rooted up.

And when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw there a Man that had not
on a Wedding Garment; and he said unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither,
not having on a Wedding Garment? Matthew. 22. 11, 12. Here is one so cunning and
crafty, that he beguiled all the Guests; he got and kept in the Church, even
until the King himself came in to see the Guests. But his subtilty got him
nothing; it did not blind the Eyes of the King; it did not prevert the Judgment
of the Righteous. Friend, how came thou in hither? did overtake him at last,
even a public rejection; the King discovered him in the face of all there
present. How came thou in hither? My Father did not bring thee hither, I did
not bring thee hither, My Spirit did not bring thee hither, thou art not of the
Heavenly Father's planting, How came thou in hither?

John 10. 1. He that comes not in by the Door, but climbeth up some other way,
the same is a Thief and a Robber. This Text also is full, and plain to our
purpose; for this Man came not in by the Door, yet got into the Church, he got
in by climbing; he broke in at the Windows, he got something of the Light and
Glory of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in his Head; and so (hardy Wretch
that he was) he presumed to crowd himself among the Children. But how is this
resented? what says the King of him? Why this is his Sign, The same is a Thief
and a Robber. See ye here also, if all they be owned as the planting of God,
that get into his Church, or Profession of his Name.

Had a Fig tree, had one without a Wedding Garment, had a thief in his Garden,
at his Wedding, in his House. These climbed up Some other way. There are many
ways to get into the Church of God, and Profession of his Name, besides, and
without an entering by the door.

1. There is the way of lying and dissembling, and at this gap the Gibeonites
got in; Josh. 9. 3, 4, etc.

2. There is sometimes falsness amongst some Pastors, either for the sake of
carnal Relations, or the like; at this hole, Tobiah the enemy of God got in;
Nehem. 13. 4, 5, 6.

3. There is sometimes negligence, and too much uncircumspectness in the whole
Church, thus the Uncircumcised got in; Ezekiel. 44. 7, 9.

4. Sometimes again, let the Church be never so circumspect, yet these have so
much help from the Devil, that they beguile them all, and so get in. These are
of that sort of Thieves that Paul complains of; false Brethren brought in
unawares, Gal. 2. 3, 4. Jude also cries out of these, Certain Men crept in
unawares, Jude 4. Crept in! What, were they so lowly! A voluntary humility,
(Col. 2. 22, 23.) a neglecting of the Body, not in any humor. Oh, how seemingly
self-denying are some of these creeping things, that yet are to be held, (as we
shall know them) an abomination to Israel, Lev. 11. 43, 44.

But in a great House, there are not only Vessels of Gold, and of Silver, but
also of Wood, and of Earth; and some to Honor, and some to Dishonor; 2 Timothy
2. 20. By these words the Apostle seems to take it for granted, that as there
has been, so there still will be, these kind of Fig Trees, these barren
Professors in the house, when all Men have done what they can; Even as in a
great house there, are always Vessels to Dishonor, as well as those to Honor
and Glory; Vessels of Wood, and of Earth, as well as of Silver and Gold* So
then there must be wooden Professors in the Garden of God, there must be
earthy, earthen Professors in his Vineyard; but that methinks is the biting
word, and some to Dishonor. That to the Romans is dreadful, (Romans 9. 21, 22.)
but this seems to go beyond it; That speaks but of the Reprobate in general,
but this of such and such in particular. That speaks of their hardening but in
the common way; But this, that they must be suffered to creep into the Church;
There to fit themselves for their place, their own place, Act. 1. 25. the place
prepared for them of this sort only. As the Lord Jesus said once of the
Pharisees, These shall receive greater damnation, Luke 20. 47.

Barren Fig Tree, fruitless Professor, have thou heard all these things? Have
thou considered that this Fig Tree is not ackdowledged of God to be his, but is
denied to be of his planting, and of his bringing unto his Wedding? Do not
thou see that thou art called a Thief, and a Robber, that have either climbed
up to, or crept in at another place than the Door? Do thou not hear, that
there will be in God's House, wooden and earthly Professors, and that no place
will serve to fit those for Hell, but the House, Church, the Vineyard of God!
Barren Fig Tree! fruitless Christian! do not thine Ears tingle?

And [He] came and sought Fruit thereon.
When a Man has got a Profession, and is crowded into the Church and House of
God; the Question is not now, Has he Life, has he right Principles; but has
he Fruit, He came seeking Fruit thereon. It mattereth not who brought thee in
hither, whether God or the Devil, or thine own vainglorious Heart; But have
thou Fruit? do thou bring forth Fruit unto God? And, let every one that
names the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
He does not say, and let every one that has Grace, or let those that have the
Spirit of God; but let every one that names the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
depart from Iniquity.

What do Men meddle with Religion for? Why do they call themselves by the Name
of the Lord Jesus, if they have not the Grace of God, if they have not the
Spirit of Christ? God therefore expects Fruit: What do they do in the
Vineyard? Let them work, or get them out, the Vineyard must have Laborers in
it: Son, go work to day in my Vineyard, Mat. 21. 28. Wherefore, want of Grace,
and want of Spirit, will not keep God from seeking Fruit; And He came and
sought Fruit thereon, Luke 8. 8. He requires that which He seems to have:
Every Man in the Vineyard, and House of God, promises himself, professes to
others, and would have all Men take it for granted, that an Heavenly Principle
is in him; Why then should not God seek Fruit?

As for them therefore, that will retain the Name of Christians, fearing God,
and yet make no Conscience of bringing forth Fruit to him: He says to such,
Away! As for you, Go ye, serve every one his Idols, and hereafter also, if ye
will not hearken unto me, etc. Ezekiel. 20. 39. Barren Fig Tree, do thou hear?
God expects Fruit, God calls for Fruit; yea, God will shortly come seeking
Fruit on this Barren Fig Tree. Barren Fig Tree! either bear Fruit, or go out of
the Vineyard, (and yet then thy Case will be unspeakably damnable). Yea, let
me add, If thou shall neither bear Fruit, nor depart, God will take his Name
out of thy Mouth, Jer. 44. 26. He will have Fruit. And I say further, If thou will do neither, yet God in Justice and Righteousness will still come for
Fruit. And it will be in vain for thee to count this Austerity; He will reap
where he has not sowed, and gather where he has not strewed, Matthew. 25. 24,
25, 26. Barren Fig Tree, do thou hear? Q. What if a Man have no Grace?

A. Yes, seeing he has a Profession.



And he came and sought Fruit [thereon].
A Church then, and a Profession, are not places where the workers of Iniquity
may hide themselves, and Sins, from God. Some of old thought, that because they
could cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that therefore they
were delivered, or had a Dispensation to do the Abominations which they
committed; as some in our days. For, who (say they) have a right to the
Creatures if not Christians, if not Professors, if not Church Members? And from
this Conclusion, let go the Reigns of their inordinate Affections after Pride,
Ambition, Gluttony, pampering themselves without fear, Jude 12. daubing
themselves with the Lust provoking Fashions of the Times; to walk with
stretched-out Necks, naked Breasts, frizled Fore-tops, wanton Gestures, in
gorgeous Apparel, mixed with Gold and Pearl, and costly Array. I will not here
make inspection into their Lives, their Carriages at Home, in their Corners,
and secret Holes; But certainly; Persons thus spirited, thus principled, and
thus inclined, have but empty Boughs, Boughs that want the Fruit that God
expects, and that God will come down to seek.

Barren Fig Tree, thou art not licensed by thy Profession, nor by the Lord of
the Vineyard, to bear these Clusters of Gomorrah* neither shall the Vineyard,
nor thy being crowded among the Trees there, shelter thee from the sight of the
Eye of God. Many make Religion their Cloak, and Christ their Stalking-horse,
and by that means cover themselves, and hide their own wickedness from Men: But
God sees their Hearts, has his print upon the heels of their feet, and
pondereth all their goings: and at last, when their iniquity is found to be
hateful, He will either smite them with hardness of Heart, and so leave them,
or awaken them to bring forth fruit. Fruit he looks for, seeks and expects,
barren Fig Tree.

But what! Come into the Presence of God to sin. What, Come into the Presence
of God to hide thy Sin, Alas Man! The Church is God's Garden, and Christ Jesus
is the great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession. What come into the
House that is called by my Name* into the place where mine Honor dwells!
Psalm. 26. 8. where mine Eyes and Heart are continually! 1 King. 9. 3. What,
come there to sin, to hide thy Sin, to cloak thy Sin! His Plants are an Orchard
with pleasant Fruits, Song 4. 13, 14, 15. And every time he goes into his
Garden, it is to see the Fruits of the Valley; and to see if the Vine flourish,
and if the Pomegranates bud.

Yea, says he, He came seeking Fruit on This Fig Tree. The Church is the place
of God's Delight; where he ever desires to be, there he is night and day. He is
there to seek for Fruit; to seek for Fruit of all, and every Tree in the
Garden. Wherefore assure thy self, O fruitless one, that thy ways must needs
be open before the Eyes of the Lord. One black sheep is soon espied, although
in company with many; that is taken with the first cast of the eye; its
different color still betrays it. I say, therefore a Church and a Profession
are not places where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves from God, that
seeks for Fruit; My Vineyard, says God, which is mine, is before me, Song. 8.
12.

And he came and sought Fruit thereon [and sound none].
Barren Fig Tree, hearken; The continual non-bearing of Fruit, is a dreadful
sign, that thou art to come to a dreadful End, as the winding up of this
Parable concludes.

And found none.] None at all, or none to God's liking: For when he says, He
came seeking Fruit thereon, he means Fruit meet for God, (Heb. 6.) pleasant
Fruit, Fruit good and sweet.

Alas, it is not any Fruit will serve; bad Fruit is counted none. Every Tree
that brings not forth Good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire,
Matthew. 3. 10.

1. There is a Fruit among Professors that withers, and so never comes to be
ripe, a Fruit that is smitten in the growth, and comes not to maturity, and
this is reckoned no Fruit. This Fruit those Professors bear, that have many
fair beginnings, or blossoms: That make many fair offers of Repentance and
Amendment; that begin to pray, to resolve, and to break off their Sins by
Righteousness; but stop at those beginnings, and bring no Fruit forth to
perfection. This Man's Fruit is withered, wrinkled, smitten Fruit, and is in
effect no Fruit at all.

2. There is an hasty Fruit, such as is the Corn upon the House top, Psalm. 129.
or that which springs up on the Dunghill, that runs up suddenly, violently, with
great stalks, and big show, and yet at last proves empty of Kernel. This Fruit
is to be found in those Professors, that on a sudden are so awakened, so
convinced, and so affected with their Condition, that they shake the whole
Family, the End-ship, the whole Town. For a while they cry hastily, vehemently,
dolefully, mournfully, and yet all is but a Pang, an Agony, a Fit, they bring
not forth Fruit with Patience. These are called those hasty Fruits, that shall
be as a fading flower, Isa. 28. 4.

3. There is a Fruit that is vile, and ill-tasted, Jer. 24. how long soever it
be in growing; the Root is dried, and cannot convey a sufficiency of Sap to the
Branches to ripen the Fruit. These are the Fruit of such Professors, whose
Heart is estranged from Communion with the Holy Ghost, whose Fruit grows from
themselves, from their Parts, Gifts, strength of Wit, natural or moral
Principles. These, notwithstanding they bring forth Fruit, are called empty
Vines; such as bring not forth Fruit to God.

Their Root is dried up, they shall bear no Fruit; yea, though they bring
forth, yet will I slay even the beloved Fruit of their Womb, Hos. 9. 16.

4. There is a Fruit that is Wild; I looked for Grapes, and it brought forth
Wild Grapes, Isa. 5. 4. I observe, That as there are Trees and Herbs that are
wholly right, and noble, sit indeed for the Vineyard: So there are also their
Semblance, but wild; not right, but ignoble. There is the Grape, and the wild
Grape; the Vine, and the wild-Vine; the Rose, and canker-Rose; Flowers, and
wild-Flowers; the Apple, and the wild-Apple, which we call the Crab. Now Fruit
from these wild things, however they may please the Children to play with, yet
the Prudent and Grave count them of little or no value. There are also in the
World a Generation of Professors, that notwithstanding their Profession, are
wild by Nature; yea, such as were never cut out, or off, from the wild
Olive Tree, nor never yet planted into the good Olive Tree. Now these can bring
nothing forth but wild Olive-berries, they cannot bring forth Fruit unto God.
Such are all those that have lightly taken up a Profession, and crept into the
Vineyard without a new birth, and the blessing of Regeneration.

5. There is also untimely Fruit; Even as a Fig Tree casts her untimely Figs,
Rev. 6. 13. Fruit out of Season, and so no Fruit to God's liking.

There are two sorts of Professors subject to bring forth untimely Fruit.

First, They that bring forth [Fruit] too soon.

Secondly, They that bring forth [Fruit] too late.

First, They that bring forth too soon. They are such as at present receive the
Word with Joy; and anon, before they have Root downwards, they thrust forth
upwards; but having not root, when the Sun arises they are smitten, and
miserably die without Fruit. These Professors are those light and inconsiderate
Ones, that think nothing but Peace will attend the Gospel; and so anon rejoice
at the Tidings, without foreseeing the Evil: Wherefore when the Evil comes,
being unarmed, and so not able to stand any longer, they die, and are withered,
and bring forth no Fruit. He that received the Seed into stony places, the same
is he that hears the Word, and anon with joy receives it: yet has he not
root in himself, but dureth for a while; for when Tribulation or Persecution
arises because of the Word, by and by they are offended, Mat. 13. 20, 21.
There is in Isa. 28. mention made of some, Whose glorius Beauty shall be a
fading Flower, Isa. 28. 4. because it is Fruit before Summer. Both these are
untimely Fruit.

Secondly, They also bring forth untimely Fruit, that stay till the Season is
over. God will have his Fruit in His Season; I say, he will receive them of
such Men as shall render them to him in Their Seasons, Matthew. 21. 41. The
missing of the season is dangerous, staying till the Door is shut is dangerous,
Mat. 25. 10, 11. Many there be that come not till the Flood of God's Anger is
raised, and too deep for them to wade through; Surely in the Floods of great
Waters, they shall not come nigh unto him, Psalm. 32. 6. Esau' s [afterward] is
fearful: For ye know how that afterward when he would have inherited the
Blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of Repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12. 16, 17.

So the Children of Israel, they brought to God the Fruits of Obedience too
late; their Lo, we be here, (Numb. 14. 40, 41, 42) came too late; Their, We
will go up (verse. 21, 22, 23.) came too late. The Lord had sworn, Mat. 25. 10.
and 27. 3. before, that they should not possess the Land. All these are such as
bring forth untimely Fruit, Heb. 12. 17. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27. It is the hard
hap of the Reprobate to do all things too late; to be sensible of his want of
Grace too late; to be sorry for Sin too late; to seek Repentance too late; to
ask for Mercy, and to desire to go to Glory, too late.

1. Thus you see that Fruit smitten in the growth, that withers, and that
comes not to maturity, is no Fruit.

2. That hasty Fruit, such as the Corn upon the House top, Psalm. 129. 6.
withers also before it grows up, and is no Fruit.

3. That the Fruit that is vile and ill tasted, is no Fruit.

4. That wild Fruit, wild grapes, Rev. 6. are no Fruit.

5. That untimely Fruit, such as comes to soon, or that comes too late; such as
come not in their Season, are no Fruit.

And he came and sought Fruit thereon, and found none.]
Nothing will do but Fruit: Mat. 21. 34. He looked for Grapes; when the time of
Fruit drew near, he sent his Servants to the husbandmen that they might receive
the Fruit of it.

Quest. But what Fruit does God expect?

A. Good Fruit. Every tree that brings not forth Good Fruit, is hewn do on,
Mat. 7. 19. Now before the Fruit can be good the Tree must be good, for good
Fruit makes not a good Tree, but a good Tree brings forth good Fruit; Do Men
gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? A Man must be good, else he can
bring forth no good Fruit; he must have righteousness imputed, that he may
stand good in God's sight from the curse of his Law. He must have a Principle
of Righteousness in his Soul, else how should he bring forth good Fruits; and
hence it is, that a Christians fruits are called, Gal. 5. 22, 23. The fruits of
the Spirit, the fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.
11. The Fruits of the Spirit, therefore the Spirit must be there: the Fruits of
Righteousness, therefore righteousness must first be there; but to
particularize in a few things briefly.

First, God expects Fruit that will answer, and be worthy of the Repentance,
which thou feignest thy self to have. Every one in a Profession, and that has
crowded into the Vineyard, pretends to Repentance; now of every such Soul,
God expects that the Fruits of Repentance be found to attend them. Mat. 3. 8.
Bring forth Fruits therefore meet for Repentance, or answerable to thy
profession of the Doctrine of Repentance. Barren Fig Tree, seeing thou art a
Professor, and art got into the Vineyard: thou stand before the Lord of the
Vineyard, as one of the Trees of the Garden: Wherefore He looks for Fruit
from thee, as from the rest of the Trees in the Vineyard; Fruits, I say, and
such as may declare thee in Heart and Life, one that has made sound Profession
of Repentance. By thy Profession thou have said, I am sensible of the evil of
Sin: Now then, live such a Life, as declares that thou art sensible of the Evil
of Sin. By thy Profession thou have said, I am sorry for my Sin: Why then, live
such a life as may declare This Sorrow. By thy Profession thou have said, I am
ashamed of my Sin, Psalm. 38. 18. yea, but live such a Life, that Men by that
may see thy shame for Sin, Jer. 31. 19. By thy Profession thou say, I have
turned from, left off, and am become an enemy to every appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Ah! but does thy Life and Conversation declare thee to be such an
one? Take heed, barren Fig Tree, lest thy Life should give thy Profession the
lie. I say again, Take heed for God himself will come for Fruit; And he sought
Fruit thereon.

You have some Professors, that are only Saints before Men, when they are
abroad; but are Devils and Vipers at home; Saints by Profession, but Devils by
Practice; Saints in Word, but Sinners in Heart and Life. These Men may have the
Profession, but they want the Fruits that become Repentance.

Barren Fig Tree! Can it be imagined that those that paint themselves, did ever
repent of their Pride? or that those that pursue this World, did ever repent of
their Covetousness? or that those that walk with wanton eyes, did ever repent
of their fleshly Lusts? Where, barren Fig Tree, is the Fruit of these Peoples
Repentance? Nay, do they not rather declare to the World, that they have
repented of their Profession? Their fruits look as if they had. Their Pride
says, they have repented of their Humility: Their Covetousness declares, that
they are weary of depending upon God; and does not thy wanton actions declare,
that thou abhorrest Chastity? Where is thy Fruit, Barren Fig Tree? Repentance
is not only a sorrow, and a shame for, but a turning from Sin to God, Heb. 6.
it is called Repentance from dead works. Have thou that Godly Sorrow that
works Repentance to Salvation, never to be repented of? 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. How
do thou show thy carefulness, and clearing of thy self; thy indignation
against Sin; thy fear of offending; thy vehement desire to walk with God; thy
zeal for his Name, and Glory in the World; and what revenge have thou in thy
Heart against every thought of Disobedience?

But where is the Fruit of this Repentance? Where is thy Watching, thy Fasting,
thy Praying against the remainders of Corruption? Where is thy Self-abhorrence;
thy blushing before God, for the Sin that is yet behind? Where is thy
tenderness of the Name of God and his Ways? Where is thy Self-denial and
Contentment? How do thou show before Men the truth of thy turning to God?
Have thou renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness?
2* Cor. 4. 2. Can thou commend thy self to every Man's conscience in the
sight of God?

And he sought Fruit thereon.]
Secondly, God expects Fruits that shall answer that Faith which thou make
Profession of. The Professor that is got into the Vineyard of God, does feign
that he has the Faith, the Faith most holy, the Faith of God's Elect, Ah! But
where are thy Fruits, Barren Fig Tree? The Faith of the Romans was spoken of
throughout the whole World, Romans 1. 8. and the Thessalonians Faith grew
exceedingly, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

Thou professest to believe thou have a share in another World; Have thou let
go this, barren Fig Tree? Thou professest thou believe in Christ; is he thy
Joy, and the Life of thy Soul? Yea, what conformity unto Him, to his Sorrows
and Suffering? What resemblance has his Crying, and Groaning, and Bleeding,
and Dying wrought in thee? do thou bear about in thy body the dying of the
Lord Jesus? and is also the Life of Jesus made manifest in thy mortal body? 2
Cor. 4. 10, 11. Barren Fig Tree, Show me thy Faith by thy Works. Show out of a
good Conversation thy Works with meekness of wisdom, Jam. 2. 18. and 3. 13.

What Fruit, barren Fig Tree, what degree of Heart-Holiness: for Faith purifies
the Heart, Act. 15. 19. What love to the Lord Jesus? for Faith works by Love,
Gal. 5. 6.

Thirdly, God expects Fruits, according to the Seasons of Grace thou art
under, according to the rain that comes upon thee. Perhaps thou art planted in
a good Soil, by great Waters, that thou might bring forth Branches, and bear
Fruit; that thou might be a goodly Vine or Fig Tree: Shall he not therefore
seek for Fruit, for Fruit answerable to the means? Barren Fig Tree, God expects
it, and will find it too, if ever He bless thee. For the Earth which drinks
in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for him by
whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God; but that which hears thorns
and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned;
Heb. 6. 7, 8.

Barren Soul! How many showers of Grace, how many dews from Heaven, how many
times have the Silver Streams of the City of God, run gliding by thy Roots, to
cause thee to bring forth Fruit! These Showers, and Streams, and the Drops that
hang upon thy Boughs, will all be accounted for; And will they not testify
against thee, that thou ought of right to be burned? Hear, and tremble, O
thou barren Professor! Fruits that become thy profession of the Gospel, the God
of Heaven expects. The Gospel has in it the Forgiveness of Sins, the Kingdom
of Heaven, and Eternal Life: But what Fruit has thy Profession of a belief of
these things put forth in thy Heart and Life? Have thou given thy self to the
Lord; and is all that thou have to be ventured for his Name in this World? Do
thou walk like one that is bought with a price, Even the price of precious
Blood?

Fourthly, The Fruit that God expects is such, As is meet for himself, Fruit
that may glorify God; God's Trees are Trees of Righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, that He may be glorified; Fruit that tastes of Heaven, abundance of
such Fruit: For herein, says Christ, is my Father glorified, that ye bring
forth much Fruit, John 15. 8. Fruits of all kinds, new and old; the Fruits of
the Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth. Fruits before the
World, Fruits before the Saints, Fruits before God, Fruits before Angels.

O, my Brethren, What manner of Persons ought we to be, who have subscribed to
the Lord, and have called our selves by the Name of Israel? One shall say, I am
the Lords; and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob; and another
shall subscribe with his Hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the Name of
Israel, Isa* 44. 5. Barren Fig Tree, have thou subscribed, have thou called thy
self by the Name of Jacob? and surnamed thy self by the Name of Israel? All
this thou pretendest to, who art got into the Vineyard, who art placed among
the Trees of the Garden of God: God does therefore look for such Fruit as is
worthy of his Name, as is meet for Him; as the Apostle says, We should walk
worthy of God; that is, so as we may show in every place, that the presence of
God is with us, his Fear in us, and his Majesty and Authority upon our Actions.
Fruits meet for him, such a dependence upon him, such trust in his Word, such
satisfaction in his Presence, such a trusting of him with all my Concerns, and
such delight in the enjoyment of him, that may demonstrate that his Fear is in
my Heart, that my Soul is wrapped up in his Things, and that my Body, and Soul,
and Estate, and All, are in Truth, through his Grace, at his dispose, Fruit
meet for him* Hearty thanks, and blessing God for Jesus Christ, for his good
Word, for his Free Grace, for the discovery of himself in Christ to the Soul,
secret longing after another World, Fruit meet for him. Liberality to the poor
Saints, to the poor World; a Life, in Word and Deed exemplary; a patient and
quiet enduring of all things, till I have done and suffered the whole Will of
God, which he has appointed for me. That on the good Ground are they, which in
an honest and good Heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth Fruit
with patience, Luke 8. 15. This is bringing forth Fruit unto God; Having our
Fruit unto Holiness, and our End everlasting Life, Romans 7. 4. and 6. 22. and
14. 8.

Fifthly, The Lord expects Fruit be coming the Vineyard of God. The Vineyard,
says he, Isa. 5. 1. is a very fruitful Hill; witness the Fruit brought forth
in all Ages* The most barren Trees that ever grew in the Wood of this World;
when planted in this Vineyard by the God of Heaven, what Fruit to Godward have
they brought forth? Abel offered the more excellent Sacrifice, Heb. 11. 4.
Enoch walked with God three hundred Years, verse. 5. Noah* by his Life of Faith,
condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith,
verse. 7. Abraham left his Country, and went out after God, not knowing whither
he went, verse. 8. (...) left a Kingdom, and ran the hazard of the Wrath of the
King, for the Love he had to God and Christ. What shall I say of them who had
Tri^l^, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection? Heb. (...) 35, 36, 37. They were stoned, they were (...); were
tempted* (...) They wandered (...) and Goat Skins, being destit^te, (...) left
his Father * Ship and Nets, Mat. 4. ^8, 19* Paul turned off from the feet of
Gamalie^^ Men brought their Goods and Possessions (the price of them) and cast
it down at the Apostle's Feet, Acts 19. 18, 19, ^0. (...) others brought their
Books together, and burnt them, (...) Books, though they were worth fifty
thousand pieces of Silver. I could add, how many willingly offered themselves
in all Ages, and their all, for the worthy. Name of the Lord Jesus, to be
racked, starved, hanged, burned, drowned, pulled in pieces, and (...) thousand.
Cal^mities. Barren Fig Tree, the Vineyard of God has been a fruitful Place,
What do thou there? What do thou bear? God expects Fruit, according to, or
becoming the Soil of the Vineyard.

Sixthly, The Fruit which God expects is such as becomes God's Husbandry and
Labor. The Vineyard is God's Husbandry, or Tillage, I am the Vine, says
Christ, John 15. ^. and my Father is the Husbandman. And again, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Ye
are God's Husbandry, ye are God's Building. The Vineyard, God fences it, God
gathers ou^ the Stones; God builds the Tower, and the Winep^ess in the midst
thereof. Here is Labor, here is Protection, here is removing of Hindrances,
here is convenient Purgation, and all, that) there might be (...).

Barren Fig Tree, What Fruit have thou? have thou Fruit becoming the Care of
God, the Protection of God, the Wisdom of God, the Patience and Husbandry of
God? It is the Fruit of the Vineyard, that is either the shame or the praise of
the Husbandman. I went by the Field of the slothful, says Solomon, and by the
Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding; and lo, it was grown over with
Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof. Prove. 24. 30, 31, 32.

Barren Fig Tree, If Men should make a judgment of the care, and pains, and
labor of God in his Church by the Fruit that thou bring forth, what might
they say, is he not slothful, is not he careless, is he not without discretion*
O thy Thorns, thy Nettles, thy barren Heart, and barren Life, is a continual
provocation to the eyes of his Glory, as likewise a dishonor to the glory of
his Grace.

Barren Fig Tree, have thou heard all these things, I will add yet one more.

And he came and sought, fruit thereon.]
The question is not now, What thou think of thy self, nor what all the
people of God think of thee? but what thou shall be found in that day, when God
shall search thy boughs for Fruit* When Sodom was to be searched for righteous
Men, God would not, in that matter, trust his faithful servant Abraham, but
still as Abraham interceded, God answered, If I find fifty, or forty and five
there, I will not destroy the City. Genesis 18. 20, 21, 26, 27. Barren Fig Tree,
what say thou? God will come down to see, God will make search for Fruit
himself.

And he came and sought Fruit thereon, and found [none.] Then said he to the
Dresser of the Vineyard, Behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit on this
Fig Tree, and find none; Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?

These words are the effect of God's search into the boughs of a barren
Fig Tree; He sought Fruit, and found none, none to his liking, none pleasant
and good. Therefore, first, he complains of the want thereof to the Dresser,
calls him to come, and see, and take notice of the Tree; then signifies his
pleasure, he will have it removed, taken away, cut down from cumbering the
Ground.

Observe. The barren Fig Tree is the Object of God's displeasure, God cannot
bear with a fruitless Professor.

[Then] said he, etc.
Then, after this provocation; then, after he had sought and found no Fruit,
then. This word [then] does show us a kind of an inward disquietness: as he
says also in another place, upon a like provocation, Then the anger of the
Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against that Man, and all the Curses that
are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
Name from under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20.

Then; It intimates that he was now come to a point, to a resolution what to
do with this Fig Tree. Then said he to the Dresser of this Vineyard, that is,
to Jesus Christ, Behold; as much as to say, come hither, here is a Fig Tree in
my Vineyard, here is a Professor in my Church, that is barren, that bears no
Fruit.

Observe, However the barren Professor thinks of himself on Earth, the Lord
cries out in Heaven against him; Isa. 5. 5. And now go to, I will tell you what
I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up; and I will break down the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

Behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit, etc.
Observe. These three Years. God cries out that his patience is abused, that his
forbearance is abused: Behold, these three Years I have waited, forborne; these
three Years I have deferred mine anger; Therefore will I stretch out mine hand
against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting, Jer. 15. 6.

These three years. Observe, God lays up all the time; I say, a remembrance
of all the time, that a barren Fig Tree, or a fruitless Professor mispendeth in
this World. As he says also of Israel of old, Forty Years long was I grieved
with this generation, Psalm. 95. 10.

These three Years, etc.

These three Seasons; Observe. God remembers how many Seasons thou have misspent:
For these three Years signify so many Seasons. And when the time of Fruit drew
nigh, that is, about the Season they begin to be ripe, or that according to the
Season might so have been. Barren Fig Tree, thou have had Time, Seasons,
Sermons, Ministers, Afflictions, Judgments, Mercies, and what not? and yet have
not been fruitful: thou have had Awakenings, Reproofs, Threatenings, Comforts,
and yet have not been fruitful: Thou have had Patterns, Examples, Citations,
Provocations, and yet have not been fruitful. Well, God has laid up thy three
Years with himself. He remembers every Time, every Season, every Sermon, every
Minister, Affliction, Judgment, Mercy, awakening Pattern, Example, Citation,
Provocation, He remembers all: As he said of Israel of old, They have tempted
me these ten times, and have not hearkened to my Voice, Numb. 14. 22. And again,
I remember all their Wickedness, Hos. 7. 2.

These three Years, etc.
He seeks for the Fruit of every Season: He will not that any of his Sermons,
Ministers, Afflictions, Judgments, or Mercies should be lost, or stand for
insignificant things; he will have according to the benefit bestowed, 2 Chronicles.
32. 24, 25. Ezekiel. 14. 23. He has not done without a Cause all that he has
done, and therefore he looks for Fruit; Look to it, barren Fig Tree.

I came [seeking] Fruit.
Observe. This word [seeking] signifies a narrow search: for when a Man seeks
for Fruit on a Tree, he goes rouud it, and round it, now looking into this
Bough, and then into that, he peeks into the inmost Boughs, and the lowermost
Boughs, if perhaps Fruit may be thereon.

Barren Fig Tree, God will look into all thy Boughs, he will be with thee in
thy Bed-Fruits, thy Midnight-Fruits, thy Closet-Fruits, thy Family-Fruits, thy
Conversation-Fruits, to see if there be any among all these that are fit for,
or worthy of the Name of the God of Heaven. He sees what the Children of Israel
do in the dark, Ezekiel. 8. 12. All things are open unto the Eyes of him with whom
we have to do, Heb. 4. 12, 13.

Seeking Fruit on [this] Fig Tree.
I told you before, that he keeps in remembrance the Times and Seasons that the
barren Professor had wickedly misspent. Now, forasmuch as he also points out
the Fig Tree, This Fig Tree; it shows that the barren Professor, above all
Professors, is a continual odium in the Eyes of God. This Fig Tree, This Man
Coniah, Jer. 22. 28. This People draw nigh me with their Mouth, but have
removed their Hearts far from me. God knows who they are among all the
thousands of Israel, that are the barren and fruitless Professors, his Lot will
fall upon the Head of Achan, though he be hid among six hundred thousand Men.
And he brought his Household, Man by Man, and Achan, the Son of Carmi, the Son
of Zabdi, the Son of Zerah, of the Tribe of Judah, was taken, Josh. 7. 17, 18.
This is the Achan, this is the Fig Tree, this is the barren Professor.

There is a Man has an hundred Trees in his vineyard, and at the time of the
Season, he walks into his Vineyard to see how the Trees flourish; and as he
goes, and views, and pries, and observes how they are hanged with Fruit;
behold, he comes to one where he finds naught but Leaves. Now he makes a
stand, looks upon it again and again, he looks also here and there, above and
below; and if after all this seeking, he finds nothing but Leaves thereon; Then
he begins to cast in his mind, how he may know this Tree next Year, what stands
next it, or how far it is off the Hedge; but if there be nothing there that may
be as a Mark to know it by; then he takes his Hook, and gives it a private
mark, (And, the Lord set a Mark upon Cain, Genesis 4.) saying, Go thy ways,
fruitless Fig Tree, Thou have spent this Season in vain.

Yet does he not cut it down, I will try it another Year; may be this was not a
hitting Season. Therefore he comes again next Year to see if now it have Fruit;
but as he found it before, so he finds it now, barren, barren, every Year
barren; he looks again, but finds no Fruit. Now he begins to have second
thoughts: How! neither hit last Year, nor this. Surely the Barrenness is not in
the Season, sure the fault is in the Tree. However ever I will spare it this
Year also, but will give it a second Mark: And it may be, he touches it with a
hot Iron, because he begins to be angry.

Well, at the third Season he comes again for Fruit, but the third Year is like
the first and second, no Fruit yet; it only cumbereth the Ground. What now must
be done with this Fig Tree? Why, The Lord will lop its Boughs with terror; yea,
the Thickets of those Professors with Iron. I have waited, says God, these
three Years, I have missed of Fruit these three Years: It has been a
cumber-Ground these three Years, cut it down. Precept has been upon Precept,
and Line upon Line, one Year after another, for these three Years, but no Fruit
can be seen, I find none, fetch out the Ax; I am sure this is the Fig Tree, I
know it from the first Year, Barrenness was its sign then, barrenness is its
sign now, make it fit for the Fire. Behold, the Ax is laid to the Root of the
Trees; every Tree therefore that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down,
and cast into the Fire, Matthew. 3. 10.

Observe, my Brethren, God's Heart cannot stand toward a barren Fig Tree. You
know thus it is with your selves: If you have a Tree in your Orchard, or
Vineyard, that does only cumber the Ground, you cannot look upon that Tree with
pleasure, with complacency, and delight: No, if you do but go by it, if you do
but cast your Eye upon it; yea, if you do but think of that Tree, you threaten
it in your Heart, saying, I will hew thee down shortly; I will to the Fire with
thee shortly. And it is in vain for any to think of persuading of you to show
favor to the barren Fig Tree; and if they should persuade, your Answer is
irresistible, It yields me no profit, it takes up room, and does no good, a
better may grow in its room;

Cut it down.
Thus when the godly among the Jews (Jer. 14. 17.) made Prayers, that
rebellious Israel might not be cast out of the Vineyard, what says the Answer
of God? Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet could not my
mind be toward this People; wherefore cast them out of my presence, and let
them go forth.

What a Resolution is here, Moses and Samuel could do almost any thing with God
in Prayer. How many times did Moses by Prayer turn away God's Judgments from
even Pharaoh himself! yea, how many times did he by Prayer preserve Israel,
when in the Wilderness, (Psalm. 106. 23.) from the Anger and Wrath of God?
Samuel is reckoned excellent this way, yea so excellent, that when Israel had
done that fearful thing, as to reject the Lord, and choose them another King, (1 Samuel 12.) he prayed, and the Lord spared, and forgave them: But yet neither
Moses nor Samuel can save a barren Fig Tree. No though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, that is, pleading, arguing, interceding, supplicating, and
beseeching, yet could they not incline mine heart to this People;

Cut it down.
Ay, but Lord it is a Fig Tree, a Fig Tree! if it was a Thorn, or a Bramble, or
a Thistle, the matter would not be much; but it is a Fig Tree, or a Vine: Well,
but mark the answer of God; Ezekiel. 15. 2, 3. Son of Man, what is the Vine-Tree,
more than any Tree, or than a Branch that is among the Trees of the Forest?
shall Wood be taken thereof to do any Work? or will Men take a Pin thereof, to
hang any Vessel thereon? If Trees that are set, or planted for Fruit, bring not
forth that Fruit, there is betwixt them and the Trees of the Forest, no
betterment at all, unless the betterment lies in the Trees of the Wood, for
they are fit to build withal; but a Fig Tree, or a Vine, if they bring not
forth Fruit, yea good Fruit, they are fit for nothing at all, but to be cut
down, and prepared for the fire; and so the Prophet goes on, Behold, it is cast
into the fire for fuel: if it serve not for Fruit, it will serve for fuel, and
so the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the middle of it is burnt.

Ay but, these Fig Trees and Vines are Church Members, Inhabiters of Jerusalem.
So was the Fig Tree mentioned in the Text; But what answer has God prepared
for these Objections? Why, Ver. 6, 7. Thus says the Lord God, As the Vine-tree
among the Trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel; so
will I give the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. And I will set my face against them,
they shall go from one fire, and another fire shall devour them:

Cut it down.
The Woman that delights in her Garden, if she have a Slip there, suppose (if
it was fruitful) she would not take five Pounds for it; Yet if it bear no
Fruit, if it wither, and dwindle, and die, and turn cumber-ground only, it my
not stand in her Garden. Gardens and Vineyards are places for Fruit, for Fruit
according to the nature of the plant or flowers. Suppose such a Slip as I told
you of before, should be in your Garden, and there die: Would you let it abide
in your Garden? No! away with it, away with it. The Woman comes into her garden
toward the Spring, where first she gives it a slight cast with her eye; then
she sets to gathering out the Weeds, and Nettles, and Stones; takes a Beesom
and sweeps the Walks: this done, she falls to prying into her Herbs and Slips,
to see if they live, to see if they are likely to grow: Now, if she comes to
one that is dead, that she is confident will not grow, up she pulls that, and
makes to the heap of rubbish with it, where she despisingly casts it down, and
valueth it no more than a Nettle, or a Weed, or than the dust she has swept
out of her Walks. Yea, if any that see her should say, Why do you so? The
answer is ready, It Is dead, it is dead at Root: If I had let it stand, 'twould
but have cumbered the ground. The strange Slips (and also the Dead ones) they
must be a heap in the Day of Grief, and of desperate Sorrow; Isa. 17. 10, 11.

Cut it down.
There be two manner of cuttings down;

First, When a Man is cast out of the Vineyard.

Secondly, When a Man is cast out of the World.

First, When a Man is cast out of the Vineyard. And that is done two ways.

1. By an immediate hand of God.

2. By the Churches due execution of the Laws and Censures which Christ for
that purpose has left with his Church.

First, God cuts down the Barren Fig Tree by an immediate Hand, smiting his
Roots, blasting his branches, and so takes him away from among his people.
Every Branch, says Christ, that bears not Fruit in me, He (my Father) takes
away, Joh. 15. 2. He takes him out of the Church, He takes him away from the
Godly. There are two things by which God takes the barren Professor from among
the Children of God.

First, Strong Delusions.

Secondly, Open Profaneness.

First, By strong Delusions, such as beguile the Soul with damnable Doctrines,
that swerve from Faith and Godliness; Isa. 66. 3, 4. They have chose their own
Ways, says God, and their Soul delights in their Abominations; I also will
choose their Delusions, and will bring their Fears upon them. I will smite them
with blindness, and hardness of Heart, and failing of Eyes; and will also
suffer the Tempter to tempt and effect his hellish Designs upon them; 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10, 11, 12. God will send them strong Delusions, that they may believe a
Lie* that they all may be damned who believe not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness.

Secondly, Sometimes God takes away a barren Professor by open Profaneness.
There is one has taken up a Profession of that worthy Name, the Lord Jesus
Christ; but this Profession is but a Cloak, he secretly practices Wickedness:
He is a Glutton, a Drunkard, or Covetous, or Unclean. Well, says God, I will
loose the Reins of this Professor, I will give him up to his vile Affections, I
will loose the Reins of his Lusts before him, he shall be entangled with his
beastly Lusts, he shall be overcome of ungodly Company. Thus they that turn
aside to their own crooked ways, Psalm. 125. 5. The Lord shall lead them forth
with the workers of Iniquity. This is God's Hand immediately; God is now
dealing with this Man himself. Barren Fig Tree, hearken, Thou art crowded into
a Profession, art got among the Godly, and there art a scandal to the Holy and
Glorious Gospel; but withal so cunning, that like the Sons of Zerviah, thou art
too hard for the Church; She knows not how to deal with thee. Well, says God,
I will deal with that Man my self: Ezekiel. 14. 7, 8. I will answer that Man by my
self he that sets up his Idols in his Heart, and puts the Stumbling Block of
his Iniquity before his Face, and yet comes and appears before me; I will set
my Face against that Man, and will make him a Sign and a Proverb; and I will
cut him off from the midst of my People; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

But, secondly, God does sometimes cut down the barren Fig Tree by the Church,
by the Churches due execution of the Laws and Censures, which Christ for that
purpose has left with his Church. This is the meaning of that in Mat. 18. 1
Cor. 5. and that in 1 Timothy 1. 20. upon which now I shall not enlarge. But which
way soever God deals with thee, O thou barren Fig Tree, whether by himself
immediately, or by his Church, it amounts to one and the same. For if timely
Repentance prevent not, The end of that Soul is damnation. They are blasted,
and withered, and gathered by Men, God's Enemies; and at last being cast into
the Fire, burning must be their end. That which bears Briars and Thorns, is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 8.

And again, sometimes by cut it down, God means, cast it out of the World: Thus
he cut down Nadab and Abihu, when he burned them up with Fire from Heaven,
Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33. Thus he cut down Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, when he made
the Earth to swallow them up. Thus he cut down Saul, 1 Samuel 31. 4. when he gave
him up to fall upon the edg of his own Sword, and died. Thus he cut down
Ananias with Saphira his Wife, when he struck them down dead in the midst of
the Congregation, Acts 5. 5. 10. I might here also Discourse of Absalom,
Ahithophel and Judas, who were all three hanged: The first by God's revenging
Hand, the other were given up of God to be their own Executioners. These were
barren and unprofifitable Fig Trees, such as God took no pleasure in, therefore
he commanded, to cut them down. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 58. 9. He shall take
them away as with a Whirlwind, both living, and in his Wrath.

Barren Fig Tree, hearken; God calls for the Ax, his Sword, bring it hither*
here is a barren. Professor, Cut him downn, why cumbereth he the Ground?

Why cumbereth it the Ground.]
By these words the Lord suggesteth Reasons of his Displeasure against the
Barren Fig Tree; It cumbereth the Ground. The Holy Ghost does not only take an
Argument from its barrenness, but because it is a Cumber-ground, Therefore cut
it down; wherefore it must needs be a provocation.

1. Because, as much as in him lies, he disappointeth the Design of God in
planting his Vineyard; I looked that it should bring forth Fruit.

2. It has also abused his Patience, his (...) suffering, his three Years,
Patience.

3. It has also abused his Labor, his Pains, his Care, and providence of
Protection and Preservation: for he hedges his Vineyard, and walls it about.
Cumber-ground, all these things thou abusest. He waters his Vineyard, and looks
to it Night and Day, but all these things thou have abused.

Further. There are other Reasons of God's Displeasure; As,

First, A Cumber-ground is a very mock and reproach to Religion, a mock and
reproach to the Ways of God, to the People of God, to the Word of God, and to
the Name of Religion. It is expected of all Hands, that all the Trees in the
Garden of God should be fruitful; God expects Fruit, the Church expects Fruit,
the World, even the World conclude that Professors should be fruitful in good
Works; I say, the very World expects that Professors should be better than
themselves: But, barren Figtree, thou disappointest all: Nay, Have thou not
learned the wicked Ones thy Ways? Have thou not learned them to be more wicked
by thy Example, (but that is by the by): Barren Fig Tree, Thou have disappointed
others, and must be disappointed thy self. Cut it down, why cumbereth it the
Ground?

Secondly, The Barren Fig Tree takes up the room where a better Tree might
stand I say, it takes up the room, it keeps, so long as it stands where it
does, a fruitful Tree out of that place, and therefore it must be cut down.
Barren Fig Tree, Do thou hear? Because the Jews stood fruitless in the
Vineyard; Therefore, said God, Mat. 21. 33-41. The Kingdom of Heaven shall be
taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation that shall render him their
Fruits in their Season. The Jews for their barrenness were cut down, and more
fruitful People put in their room. As Samuel also said to barren Saul, 1 Samuel
15. 28. The Lord has rent the Kingdom from thee, and has given it to thy
Neighbor that is better than thou; the unprofitable Servant must be cast out,
must be cut down, Mat. 25. 27.

Cumber-ground! How many hopeful, ^nclinable, forward People, have thou by thy
fruitless and unprofitable Life, kept out of the Vineyard of God; for thy sake
have the People stumbled at Religion; By thy Life have they been kept from the
Love of their own Salvation. Thou have been also a means of hardening others,
and of quenching, and killing weak beginnings. Well, Barren Figtree! look to
thy self, (thou will not go to Heaven thy self, and them that would, thou
hinderest); Thou must not always Cumber the Ground, nor always hinder the
Salvation of others: Thou shall be Cut down, and another shall be planted in
thy room.

Thirdly, The Cumber-ground is a Sucker, (...) draws away the Heart and
Nourishment from the other Trees. Were the Cumber-ground cut down, the other
would be more fruitful; he draws away that fatness of the Ground to himself,
tha^ would make the other more hearty and fruitful. One Sinner destroys much
good Eccl. 9. 18.

The Cumber-ground is a very Droan i^ the Hive, that eats up the Honey tha^
that should feed the laboring Be; (...) is a Thief in the Candle, that
wastes the Tallow, but gives no Light; he is the unsavory Salt, that is fit
for naught b^^ the Dunghill. Look to it Barren Fig Tree.

And he answering, said unto him, Lord, l^ it alone this Year also, until I
shall d^ about it, and dung it; and if it be^ Fruit, well; and if not, then
after that thou shall cut it down, verse. 8, 9.
THese are the words of the Dresser o^ the Vineyard, who, I told you, (...)
Jesus Christ (for he made intercession for the Transgressors.) And they contain
Petition, presented to an offended Justice, praying that a little more time,
an^ Patience might be exercised toward the barren, cumber-ground Fig Tree.

In this Petition there are Six things considerable;

First, That Justice might be deferred, O that Justice might be deferred. Lord
^et it alone, etc. a while longer.

Secondly, Here is time prefixed, as a space to try if more means will cure a
bar^en Fig Tree. Lord let it alone this Year also.

Thirdly, The means to help it, are propounded, until I shall dig about it, and
dung it.

Fourthly, Here is also an insinuation of a Supposition, that by thus doing,
God's expectation may be answered, And if it bear Fruit, Well.

Fifthly, Here is a Supposition that the barren Figtree may yet abide barren,
when Christ has done what he will unto it, and if it bear Fruit, etc.

Sixthly, Here is at last a Resolution, that if thou continue barren, hewing
Days will come upon thee. And if it bear Fruit, well, And if not, then after
that thou shall cut it down.

But to proceed according to my former Method, by Way of Exposition.

Lord, let it alone this Year also.
Here is astonishing Grace indeed, astonishing Grace! I say, that the Lord
Jesus should concern himself with a barre^ Fig Tree; that He should step in to
stop^ the blow from a barren Fig Tree. True* He stopped the blow but for a time;
Bu^ why did he stop it at all? Why did no^ he fetch out the Ax? Why did he not
do Execution? Why did not he cut it down? Barren Fig Tree! it is well for thee
that there is a Jesus at God's right Hand, a Jesus of that largeness of bowels,
As to have compassion for a barren Fig Tree, else Justice had never let thee
alone to cumber the Ground as thou have done. When Israel also had sinned
against God, down they had gone, But that Moses stood in the breach, Exodus 32.
10. Let me alone, said God to him, that I may consume them in a moment, and I
will make of thee a great Nation. Barren Fig Tree, do thou hear? Thou know
not how often the hand of Divine Justice has been up to strike, and how many
Years since thou had been cut down, had not Jesus caught hold of his Father's
Ax. Let me alone, let me fetch my blow, or cut it down, why cumbereth it the
ground? Will thou not hear yet, Barren Fig Tree? Will thou provoke still! Thou
have wearied Men, and provoked the Justice of God; And will thou weary my God
also? Isa. 7. 13.

Lord, let it alone this Year.]
Lord, a little longer, lets not lose a Soul for want of means; I will try, I
will see if I can make it fruitful, I will not beg a long Life, nor that it
might still be barren, and so provoke thee. I beg for the sake of the Soul, the
immortal Soul, Lord spare it one Year only, one Year longer, this Year also; if
I do any Good to it, it will be in little time. Thou shall not be over-wearied
with waiting, one Year and then.

Barren Fig Tree, Do thou hear what striving there is between the
Vine-dresser and the Husbandman for thy Life. Cut it down, says one; Lord,
spare it, says the other: It Is a cumber-ground, says the Father: one Year
longer prays the Son, Let it alone this Year also,

Until I shall dig about it, and dung it.
The Lord Jesus by these words supposes two things, as Causes of the want of
Fruit in a barren Fig Tree, and two things he supposes as a Remedy.

The things that are a cause of want of Fruit, are,

1. It Is Earth-bound; Lord, the Fig Tree is Earth-bound.

2. A want of warmer Means, of fatter Means.

Wherefore accordingly he propounds;

First, To looser the Earth, to dig about it.

Secondly, And then to supply it with Dung; to dig about it, and dung it. Lord,
let it alone this Year also, until I shall dig about it. I doubt it is too much
ground-bound, The Love of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches (Luke
14.) lie too close to the Roots of the Heart of this Professor. The love of
Riches, the Love of Honors, the Love of Pleasures, are the Thorns that choke
the Word; 1 John 2. 15, 16. For all that is in the World, the Lusts of the
Flesh, the Lusts of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, are not of the Father, but
enmity to God); how then (where these things bind up the Heart) can there be
Fruit brought forth to God? Barren Fig Tree, see how the Lord Jesus, by these
very words, suggesteth the cause of thy fruitlesness of Soul. The things of
this World lie too close to thy Heart; the Earth with its things have bound up
thy Roots. Thou art an Earth-bound Soul, thou art wrapped up in thick Clay. If
any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him: how then can he
be fruitful in the Vineyard? This kept Judas from the Fruit of caring for the
poor, Joh. 12. 6. This kept Demas from the Fruit of Self-denial, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
And this kept Ananias and Saphirah his Wife, from the goodly Fruit of Sincerity
and Truth, Act. 5. 5, 10. What shall I say, These are foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition; for the love of Money is
the root of all Evil, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. How then can good Fruit grow from such a
Root, the Root of all Evil; Which while some covet after, they have erred from
the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. It is an evil
Root, nay it is the Root of all Evil: how the^ can the Professor that has such
a Root, or a Root wrapped up in such earthly things, as the Lusts, and
Pleasures, and Vanities of this World, bring forth Fruit to God!

Until I shall [dig] about it.]
Lord, I will loose his Roots, I will dig up this Earth, I will lay his Roots
bare; my Hand shall be upon him by Sickness, by Disappointments, by cross
Providence; I will dig about him until he stands shaking and tottering, until
he be ready to fall; then, if ever, he will seek to take faster hold. Thus, I
say, deals the Lord Jesus oft-times with the barren Professor; he diggeth about
him, he smites one blow at his Heart, another blow at his Lusts, a third at
his Pleasures, a fourth at his Comforts, another at his Self-conceitedness;
thus he diggeth about him: This is the way to take bad Earth from his Roots,
and to loosen his Roots from the Earth. Barren Fig Tree, see here the Care, the
Love, the Labor and Way, which the Lord Jesus, the Dresser of the Vineyard, is
fain to take with thee, if happily thou may be made fruitful.

Until I shall dig about it, and [dung] it.
As the Earth, by binding the Roots too closely, may hinder the Tree's being
fruitful; so the want of better Means may be also a Cause thereof. And this is
more than intimated by the Dresser of the Vineyard, until I shall dig about it,
and dung it, I will supply it with a more fruitful Ministry, with a warmer
Word. I will give them Pastors after mine own Heart, I will dung them; You know
Dung is a more warm, more fat, more hearty, and succouring Matter, than is
commonly the place in which Trees are planted.

I will dig about it, and dung it, I will bring it under an heart-awakening
Ministry, the Means of Grace shall be fat, and good. I will also visit it with
Heart-awakening, Heart-warming, Heart-encouraging Considerations; I will apply
warm Dung to his Roots, I will strive with him by my Spirit, and give him some
tastes of the heavenly Gift, and the Power of the World to come. I am loath to
lose him for want of digging; Lord, let it alone this Year also, until I shall
dig about it, and dung it.

And if it bear Fruit, well.]
And if the Fruit of all my Labor does make this Fig Tree fruitful, I shall
count my Time, my Labor and Means well bestowed upon it; And thou also, O my
God, shall be therewith much delighted: For thou art gracious, and merciful,
and repentest thee of the Evil which thou threatnest to bring upon a People.

These words therefore inform us, that if a barren Fig Tree, a barren
Professor, shall now at last bring forth Fruit to God, it shall go well with
that Professor, it shall go well with that poor Soul. His former Barrenness,
his former tempting of God, his abuse of God's Patience, and long-Suffering;
his ^^^spending Year after Year, shall now be all forgiven him. Yea, God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ will now pass by, and forget all, and say,
Well done, at the last. When I say to the Wicked, O wicked Man, thou shall
surely die; if he then do that which is lawful and right, if he walk in the
Statutes of Life, without commiting Iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall
die, Ezekiel. 3. 3.

Barren Fig Tree, Do thou hear! the Ax is laid to thy Roots, the Lord Jesus
prays God to spare thee: Has he been digging about thee? Has he been dunging
of thee? O barren Fig Tree, now thou art come to the Point; if thou shall now
become good, if thou shall after a gracious manner suck in the Gospel-dung, and
if thou shall bring forth Fruit unto God, well; but if not, the Fire is the
last. Fruit, or the Fire; Fruit or the Fire, Barren Fig Tree. If it bo^r Fruit,
well.

And if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.]
And if not, etc. The Lord Jesus by this, If, gives us to understand, that
there is a Generation of Professors in the World, that are incureable, that
will not, that cannot repent, nor be profited by the means of Grace: A
Generation, I say, that will retain a Profession, but will not bring forth
Fruit: A Generation that will wear out the Patience of God, Time and Tide,
Threatenings and Intercessions, Judgments and Mercies, And after all will be
unfruitful.

O the desperate Wickedness that is in thy Heart! Barren Professor, Do thou
hear, the Lord Jesus stands yet in doubt about thee! There is an [if] stands
yet in the way. I say, the Lord Jesus stands yet in doubt about thee, whether
or no at last thou will be good; whether he may not labor in vain; whether his
digging and dunging will come to more than last labor. I gave her space to
repent, and she repented not, Rev. 2. 21. I dug about it, I dunged it; I
gained Time, and supplied it with Means; but I labored herein in vain, and
spent my strength for naught and in vain. Do thou hear, Barren Fig Tree!
There is yet a Question, Whether 'twill be well with thy Soul at last?

And if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.]
There is nothing more exasperating to the Mind of a Man, than to find all his
Kindness and Favor slighted: Neither is the Lord Jesus so provoked with any
thing, as when Sinners abuse his Means of Grace, if it be barren and fruitfless
under my Gospel; if it turn my Grace into wantonness; if after digging, and
dunging, and waiting, it yet remain unfruitful, I will let thee cut it down.

Gospel-means applied, is the last Remedy for a barren Professor; if the
Gospel, if the Grace of the Gospel will not do, there can be nothing expected,
but cut it down. Then after that thou shall cut it down.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as
an Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Therefore your
Houses are ^^ft unto you desolate, Matthew. 23. 37, 38. Yet it cannot be, but
that this Lord Jesus, wh^ at first did put a stop to the execution of his
Father's Justice, because he desired to try more Means with the Fig Tree* I
say, it cannot be, but that an Heart so full of Compassion, as his is, should
be touched, to behold this Professor (...) be cut down; Luke 19. (...) And when
he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day the things that belong to thy Peace,
but now they are hid from thine Eyes.

After that, thou shall cut it down.]
When Christ gives thee over; there is no Intercessor, no Mediator, no more
Sacrifice for Sin: all is gone but Judgment, but the Ax, but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28.

Barren Fig Tree, take heed that thou come not to these last words, for these
words are a give-up, a cast-up, a cast-up of a castaway; after that thou shall
cut it down. They are as much, as if Christ had said, Father; I begged for more
time for this barren Professor; I begged until I should dig about it, and dung
it: But now, Father, the time is out, the Year is ended, the I Summer is ended,
and no good done. I have also tried with (...) have dug about it; (...) the
fat and hearty (...) of the Gospel to it; but all comes to nothing. (...)
deliver up this Professor to thee again, I have done, I have done all, I have
done praying, and endeavoring, I will hold the head of thine Ax No longer:
Take him into the Hands of Justice, do Justice, do the Law, I will never beg
for him more. After that thou shall cut it down. Woe unto them when I depart
from them, Hos. 9. 12. Now is this Professor left naked indeed, naked to God,
naked to Satan, naked to Sin, naked to the Law, naked to Death, naked to Hell,
naked to Judgment, and naked to the Gripes of a Guilty Conscience, and to the
torment of that Worm that never dies, and to that Fire that never shall be
quenched. Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. From this brief
pass through this Parable, you have these two general Observations;

First, That even then when the Justice of God cries out, I cannot endure to
wait on this barren Professor any longer: Then Jesus Christ intercedes for a
little more Patience, and a little more striving with this Professor, if
possible he may make him a fruitful Professor. Lord, let it alone this Year
also, until I shall dig about it and dung it, and if it bear Fruit, well, etc.

Secondly, There are some Professors whose Day of Grace will end with, cut it
down, with Judgment; when Christ, by his means, has been used for their
Salvation.

The First of these Observations I shall pass, and not meddle at all therewith;
But shall briefly speak to the Second, to wit,

That there are some Professors, whose Day of Grace will end with, cut it down,
with Judgmeut, when Christ by his means has been used for their Salvation.

This the Apostle shows in that third Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews;
where he tells us, that the People of the Jews, after a forty Years patience,
and endeavor to do them good by the means appointed for that purpose, their
end was to be cut down, or excluded the Land of Promise, for their final
incredulity, So we see they could not enter in, because of Unbelief. Wherefore
says he, I was grieved with that generation, and said, they do always err in
their Hearts, and they have not known my ways: So I swear in my Wrath, they
shall not enter into my Rest. As who should say, I would they should have
entered in, and for that purpose I brought them out of Egypt, led them through
the Sea, and taught them in the Wilderness, but they did not answer my Work nor
Designs in that Matter; wherefore, they shall not, I swear they shall not; I
swore in my Wrath they should not enter into my Rest: Here is cutting down with
Judgment. So again, Chap. 4. he says, As I have sworn in my Wrath, if they
shall enter into my Rest, although the Works were finished from the Foundation
of the World, Heb. 4. 2, 3, 4. This word [if] is the same with [they shall not]
in the Chapter before. And where he says, Although the Works were finished
from the Foundation of the World. He gives us to understand, that what
preparations soever are made for the Salvation of Sinners, and of how long
continuance soever they are, yet the God-tempting, God-provoking, and fruitless
Professor is like to go without a share therein; although the Works were
finished from the Foundation of the World. Jude 5, 6. I will therefore put you
in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord having saved the
People out of the Land of Egypt, ^ afterward destroyed them that believed not.
And the Angels that kept not their first Estate* but left their own Habitation,
he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day. Here is an Instance to purpose, an Instance of Men and Angels: Men
saved out of the Land of Egypt, and in their Journey toward Canaan, the Type
of Heaven [cut down] Angels created and placed in the Heavens in great Estate
and Principality; yet both these, because unfruitful to God in their places,
were cut down, the Men destroyed by God, (for so says the Text) and the Angels
reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, to the Judgment of the great Day.

Now, in my handling of this Point, I shall discourse of the cutting down, or
the Judgment here denounced, as it respects the doing of it by God's Hand
immediately, and that too, with respect to his casting them out of the World;
and not as it respects an Act of the Church, etc. And as to this cutting
down, or Judgment, it must be concluded, that it cannot be before the Day of
Grace be past with the Fig Tree. But according to the Observation, There be
some Professors whose Day of Grace will end, with cut it down; and according to
the words of the Text, Then [after that] thou shall cut it down. After that,
that is, after all my Attempts and Endeavors to make it fruitful, after I have
left it, given it over, done with it, and have resolved to bestow no more Days
of Grace, Opportunities of Grace, and Means of Grace upon it; then, after that,
thou shall cut it down.

Besides, the giving up of the Fig Tree, is before the Execution. Execution is
not always presently upon the Sentence given; for after that a convenient Time
is thought on, and then is cutting down: And so it is here in the Text. The
Decree, that he shall perish, is gathered from its continuing fruitless quite
through the last Year, from its continuing fruitless at the end of all
Endeavors: But cutting down is not yet, for that comes with an after-word;
Then after that thou shall cut it down.

So then, that I may orderly proceed with the Observation, I must lay down
these two Propositions.

Prop. 1. That the Day of Grace ends with some Men before God takes them out of
this World. And,

Prop. 2. The Death, or cutting down of such Men, will be dreadful. For this
cut it down, when it is understood in the largest sense, (as here indeed it
ought) it shows, not only the Wrath of God against a Man's Life in this
World, but his Wrath against him Body and Soul. And is as much as to say, cut
him off from all the Privileges and Benefits that come by Grace, both in this
World, and that which is to come.

But to proceed, The Day of Grace ends with some Men, before God takes them
out of this World.

I shall give you some Instances of this; and so go on to the last Proposition.

First, I shall instance, Cain; Cain was a Professor, (Genesis 4. 3.) a
Sacrificer, a Worshipper of God; yea, the first Worshipper that we read of
after the Fall; but his Grapes were wild Ones, Genesis 4. 5, 8. his Works were
Evil, he did not do what he did, from true Gospel-motives; therefore God
disallowed his Work: at this his Countenance falls: Wherefore he envies his
Brother, disputes him, takes his opportunity and kills him. Now in that day
that he did this Act, were the Heavens closed up against him, and that himself
did smartingly and fearfully feel, when God made inquisition for the Blood of
Abel; And now cursed (said God) shall thou be from the Earth, which has opened
her Mouth to receive thy Brothers Blood from thy Hand, etc. Genesis 4. 8, 11, 12,
13, 14. And Cain said, My Punishment is greater than I can bear. Mine Iniquity
is greater than that it may be forgiven. Behold, thou have driven me out this
Day from the Face of the Earth, and from thy Face shall I be hid. Now thou art
cursed, says God. Thou have driven me out this Day, says Cain, and from thy
Face shall I be hid; I shall never more have Hope in thee, Smile from thee, nor
expect Mercy at thy Hand. Thus therefore, Cain's Day of Grace ended, and the
Heavens, with God's own Heart, were shut up against him; yet after this, he
lived long, Genesis 4. 10. Cutting down was not come yet; after this he lived to
marry a Wife, verse. 17. to beget a cursed Brood, to build a City, (and what
else I know not) all which could not be quickly done: Wherefore Cain might live
after the Day of Grace was past with him, several hundred of Years.

Secondly, I shall instance Ishmael, Genesis 17. 25, 26. Ishmael was a Professor,
was brought up in Abraham's Family, and was circumcised at thirteen Years of
Age, Genesis 16. 12. But he was the Son of the Bondwoman, he brought not forth
good Fruit, he was a wild Professor: For all his Religion, he would scoff at
those that were better than himself. Well, upon a day his Brother Isaac was
weaned, at which time his Father made a Feast, and rejoiced before the Lord,
for that he had given him the promised Son; at this Ishmael mocked them, their
Son, and godly rejoicing. Then came the Spirit of God upon Sarah, and she
cried, Cast him out, cast out this Bondwoman and her Son; for the Son of this
Bondwoman shall not be Her with my Sou, with Isaac, Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11. Now
Paul to the Galatians, (Chap. 4. 29, 30, 31.) makes this casting out to be, not
only a casting out of Abraham's Family, but a casting out also from a Lot with
the Saints in Heaven. Also Moses gives us a notable proof thereof, in saying,
that when he died, he was gathered to his People, Genesis 25. 17. his People by
his Mother's side, for he was reckoned from her, the Son of: Ha^ar; the Son of
the Bondwoman. Now ^he came of the Egyptians, Genesis 21. 9. So that he was
gathered when he died, notwithstanding his Profession, to the place that
P^araoh and his Host were gathered to, who: were drowned in the Red Sea; these
were his People, and he was of them, both by Nature and Disposition, by
persecuting as they did. But now, When did the Day of Grace and with this Man^
Observe, and I will show you: Ishmael was thirteen Years old when he was
circumcised^, and the^ was Abraham ninety Years old and nine, Genesis 17. 24, 25,
26. the next Year Isaac was born. So that Ishmael was now fourteen Years of
Age. Now when Isaac was weaned, (suppose (...) sucked four Years) by that
account, The^ Day of Grace must be ended with Ishmael, by that time he was
eighteen Years old, Genesis 25. 12, etc. For that day he mocked, that day it was
(...), Cast him out; and of that casting out; the Apostle makes what I have
said. Beware ye young barren Professors. Now Ishmael lived (...) Years after
this, in great tranquillity and honor with Men: After this he also begat
twelve Princes, even after his Day of Grace was past.

Thirdly, I shall instance Esau, Genesis 25. 27, etc. Esau also was a Professor,
he was born unto Isaac, and circumcised according to the custom: But Esau was a
gamesom Professor, an Huntsman, a Man of the Field; also he was wedded to his
Lusts, which he did also venture to keep rather than the Birthright. Well,
upon a day, when he came from hunting and was faint, he sold his Birthright to
Jacob his Brother. Now the Birthright, in those days, had the Promise and
Blessing annexed to it. Yea, they were so entailed in this, that the one could
not go without the other, wherefore the Apostle's Caution is here of weight;
Heb. 12. 16, (...). Take heed faith he, (...) you a Fornicator, or profane
Person as Esau, who (...) one (...) of Meat sold his Birthright* for ye know
how that afterward, when (...) would have inherited the Blessings he was
rejected; for he (...) of (...), though he (...). Now the ending of Esau^^ Day
of Grace is to be reckoned from his selling of his Birthright: For there the
Apostle points it, lest there be among you any, that like Esau, sells his
Birthright: for then goes hence the Blessing also.

But Esau sold his Birthright long before his Death. Twenty Years after this,
Jacob was with Laban, (Genesis 31. 41. and ^2. 6.) and when he returned home, his
brother Esau met him. Further, after ^his when Jacob dwelt again some time with
his Father, then Jacob and Esau buried him. I suppose, (Genesis 35. 28, 29.) He
might live above forty, yea for ought (...) know, above fourscore years after
he had ^old his Birthright, and so consequently had put himself out of the
Grace of God.

Three things I would further note upon these three Professors.

First, Cain an angry Professor, Ishmael (...) mocking one, Esau a lustful,
gamesome one: Three Symptoms of a barren Professor. For he that can be angry,
and that can mock, and that can indulge his lusts, cannot bring forth Fruit to
God.

Secondly, The Day of Grace ended with these Professors at that time when they
committed some grievous Sin; Cain's, when he killed his Brother; Ishmael's,
when he mocked at Isaac, etc. and Esau when out of love to his Lusts, he
despised, and sold his Birthright. Beware, barren Professor; Thou may (...)
that in half a quarter of an hour, from the evil of which thou may not be
delivered for ever and ever.

Thirdly, Yet these three, after their Day of Grace was over, lived better
lives as to outward things, than ever they did before. Cain, after this, was
Lord of a City, Genesis 4. 17. Ishmael was after this, father of twelve Princes,
Genesis 25. 16. and Esau after this, told his Brother I have enough, my Brother,
keep that th^^ have to thy self, Chap. 33. 8, 9. Ease, and Peace, and a
prosperous Life in outward, is no sign of the Favor of God to a barren and
fruitless Professor; But rather of his Wrath, that thereby he may be capable to
treasure up more Wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God.

Let thus much serve for the proof the first Proposition, namely, That the day
of Grace ends with some Men, before God takes them out of this world.

Now then, to show you, by some Signs, how you may know that the day of Grace
is ended, or near to ending with the Barren Professor; And after that thou
shall cut it down.

First, He that has stood it out against God, and that has withstood all
those means for Fruit, that God has used for the making of him (if it might
have been) a fruitful Tree in his Garden, he is in this danger; and this indeed
is the sum of the Parable: The Fig Tree here mentioned, was blessed with the
application of means, had time allowed it to receive the nourishment; but it
outstood, with-stood, overstood All, All that the Husbandman did, All that the
Vinedresser did.

Signs of being past Grace.
But a little distinctly to particularize in four or five Particulars:

First Sign. The Day of Grace is like to be past, when a Professor has
withstood, abused, and worn out God's Patience, then he is in danger, this is a
provocation, then God cries, Cut it down. There are some Men that steal into a
Profession, no body knows how; even as the Fig Tree was brought into the
Vineyard by other hands than God's; and th^^ they abide liveless, graceless,
careles^ and without any good Conscience to God (...) all. Perhaps they came in
for the Loave^ for a Trade, for Credit, for a Blind; (...) it may be to stifle
and choke the Check and grinding Pangs of an awakened and disquieted
Conscience. Now having obtained their purpose, like the Sinners (...) Sion,
they are at ease, and secure; Saying, like Agag, 1 Samuel 15. 32. Surely (...)
bitterness of Death is past; I am we^^ shall be saved, and go to Heaven: Th^^
in these vain conceits it spends a Year, two or three; not remembering that at
every Season of Grace, and at every opportunity of the Gospel, the Lord come^
seeking Fruit. Well, Sinner, well barre^ Fig Tree, this is but a course
beginning; God comes for Fruit. What have I here, says God,: what a Fig Tree
is this that has stood this Year in my Vineyard, and brought me forth no
Fruit* I will cry unto him, Professor! Barre^ Fig Tree, be fruitful! I look for
Fruit, I expect Fruit, I must have Fruit, therefore bethink thy self. At these
the Professor pauses; but these are words, not blows, therefore off goes this
Consideration from the Heart: When God comes the next Year, he finds him still
as he was, a barren, fruitless cumber-ground. And now again he complains, here
are two Years gone, and no Fruit appears; Well, I will defer mine anger for my
Namesake. Isa. 48. 9. I will defer mine Anger for my Praise, I will refrain
from thee, that I cut thee not off (as yet.) I will wait, I will yet wait to be
Gracious. But this helps not, this has not the least influence upon the barren
Fig Tree, Tush, says he, here is no Threatening: God is merciful, he will defer
his anger, Isa. 30. 18. He waits to be gracious: I am not yet afraid. O how
ungodly Men, that are at unawares crept into the Vineyard, how do they turn the
Grace of our God into lasciviousness! Well, he comes the third Year for Fruit,
as he did before, but still he finds but a barren Fig Tree; No Fruit: now he
cries out again, O thou Dresser of my Vineyard, come hither, here is a Fig Tree
has stood these three Years in my Vineyard, and has at every season
disappointed my expectation, for I have looked for Fruit in vain; Cut it down,
my patience is worn out, I sha^ wait on this Fig Tree no longer.

2. And now he begins to shake the Fig Tree with his threatenings; fetch out the
Ax. Now the Ax is Death, Death therefore is called for; Death, come, smi^^ me
this Fig Tree. And withal the Lord shakes this Sinner, and whirls him upon
Sickbed, saying, Take him Death, (...) has abused my Patience and
Forb^^rance, not remembering that it shou^^ have led him to Repentance, and to
the Fruits thereof. Death, fetch away the Fig Tree to the fire, fetch this
barren Professor to Hell. At this, Death com^ with Grim looks into the Chamber,
ye^ and Hell follows with him to the Bed-sid^ and both stare this Professor in
the fac^ yea, begin to lay Hands upon him; o^ smiting him with pains in his
Body, with Headache, Heart-ach, Back-ach, Shortness of Breath, Fainting Qualms,
Trembling of Joints, Stopping at the Chef^ and almost all the Symptoms of a
Man pa^ all recovery. Now while Death is the tormenting the Body, Hell is doing
with the Mind and Conscience, striking the^^ with its Pains, casting sparks of
Fire i^ thither, wounding with sorrows an^ Fears of everlasting damnation, the
Spirit of this poor creature: And now he begins to bethink himself, and to cry
to God for Mercy; Lord, spare me, Lord, spare me. Nay, says God, you have been
a Provocation to me these three Years. How many times have you disappointed me?
How many seasons have you spent in vain? How many Sermons and other Mercies did
I of my Patience afford you? but to no purpose at all, Take him Death. O good
Lord, says the Sinner, Spare me but this once; Raise me but this once. Indeed
I have been a barren Professor, and have stood to no purpose at all in thy
Vineyard: But spare! O spare this one time, I beseech thee, and I will be
better. Away, away, you will not. I have tried you these three Tears already,
you are naught; If I should recover you again, you would be us bad as you was
before (and all this talk is while Death stands by.) The Sinner cries again,
Good Lord, try me this once, let me get up again this once, and see if I do not
mend. But will you promise me to mend? Yes indeed, Lord, and vow it too; I will
never be so bad again, I will be better. Well, says God, Death, let this
Professor alone for this time. I will try him a while longer, he has promised,
he has vowed that he will amend his ways. It may be he will mind to keep his
Promises. Vows are solemn things, it may be he may fear to break his Vows:
Arise from off thy Bed; and now God lays down his Ax. At this the poor
Creature is very thankful, praises God, and fawns upon him, shows as if he did
it heartily, and calls to others to thank him too. He therefore rises as one
would think, to be a new creature indeed. But by that he has put on his
clothes, is come down from his bed, and ventured into the Yard, or Shop, and
there sees how all things are gone to Sixes and Sevens, he begins to have
second thoughts: and says to his folks, What have you all been doing? How are
all things out of order? I am I cannot tell what behind-hand; one may see if a
Man be but a little a to-side, that you have neither Wisdom, nor Prudence to
order things: And now, instead of seeking to spend the rest of his time to God,
he doubleth his Diligence after this World. Alas, all must not be lost, we must
have provident Care: and thus quite forgetting the Sorrows of Death, the pains
of Hell, the Promises and Vows which he made to God to be better: Because
Judgment was not (now) speedily executed, therefore the Heart of this poor
Creature is fully set in him to do Evil.

These things proving ineffectual, God takes hold of his Ax again, sends Death
to a Wife, to a Child, to his Cattle, (your young Men have I slain, and taken
away your horses, Amos 4. 9, 10.) I will blast him, cross him, disappoint him,
and cast him down, and will set my self against him, in all that he puts his
Hand unto. At this the poor Barren Professor cries out again, Lord, I have
sinned, spare me once more, I beseech thee. O take not away the desire of mine
Eyes, spare my Children, bless me in my labors, and I will mend and be better.
No, says God, you lied to me last time, I will trust you in this no longer,
and withal he tumbleth the Wife, the Child, the Estate, into a grave.

And then returns to his place, till this Professor more unfeignedly
acknowlegeth his offense, Hos. 5. 14, 15.

At this the poor creature is afflicted and distressed, Rents his Clothes, and
begins to call the breaking of his Promise and Vows to mind, he mourns and
Prays, and like Ahab, a while walks softly, at the remembrance of the justness
of the hand of God upon him. And now he renews his Promises; Lord, try me this
one time more, take off thy hand and see; They go far that never turn. Well,
God spares him again, sets down his Ax again; Many times He did deliver them,
but they provoked him with their Counsels, and were brought low for their
Iniquities, Psalm. 106. 43. Now they seem to be thankful again, and are as if
they were resolved to be Godly indeed. Now they Read, they Pray, they go to
Meetings, and seem to be serious a pretty while, but at last they forget. Their
Lusts prick them, suitable Temptations present themselves: wherefore they turn
to their own crooked ways again. Psalm. 78. 34, 36. When he slew them, then they
sought him, and returned early after God, nevertheless they did flatter him
with mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue.

4. Yet again, The Lord will not leave this Professor, but will take up his Ax
again, and will put him under a more heart-searching Ministry, a Ministry that
shall search him, and turn him over and over; a Ministry that shall meet with
him, as Elijah met with Ahab, in all his acts of Wickedness (and Now the Ax is
laid to the Roots of the Trees.) Besides, this Minstry does not only search the
Heart, but presents the Sinner with the Golden rays of the glorious Gospel;
Now is Christ Jesus set forth evidently, now is Grace displayed sweetly; Now,
now are the Promises broken like Boxes of Ointment to the perfuming of the
whole room. But a as, there is yet no Fruit on this Fig Tree. While his Heart
is searching, he wrangles; while the glorious Grace of the Gospel is unvailing,
this Professor wags and is wanton, gathers up some scraps thereof, Tastes the
good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, Jude 4. Drinks in the
Rain that comes often upon him, Heb. 6. 3 -- 7, 8. But brings not forth Fruit
meet for him, whose Gospel it is; takes no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord
God of Israel with all his Heart, 2 Kin. 10. 31. but counts that the Glory of
the Gospel consists in talk and show, and that our Obedience thereto, is a
matter of Speculation; that good Works lie in good Words, and if they can
finely talk, they think they bravely, please God. They think the Kingdom of God
consists only in Word, not in Power: and thus proves ineffectual this Fourth
Means also.

5. Well, Now the Ax begins to be heaved higher, for now indeed God is ready to
smite the Sinner, yet before he will strike the stroke, he will try one Way
more at the last, and if that misseth, down goes the Fig Tree. Now this last
way is to tug and strive with this Professor by his Spirit. Wherefore the
Spirit of the Lord is now come to him: But not always to strive with Man, Genesis
6. 8. yet a while he will strive with him, he will awaken, he will convince, he
will call to remembrance former Sins, former Judgments, the breach of former
Vows and Promises, the mispending of former Days; he will also present
persuasive Arguments, encouraging Promises, dreadful Judgments, the shortness
of time to repent in; and that there is hope if he come. Further, he will show
him the certainty of Death, and of the Judgment to come; yea, He will pull and
strive with this Sinner. But, behold, the mischief now lies here, here is
tugging and striving on both sides. The Spirit convinces, the Man turns a deaf
Ear to God; the Spirit says, Receive my Instruction and live; but the Man
pulls away his Shoulder; the Spirit shows him whither he is going, but the Man
closes his Eyes against it; the Spirit offers violence, the Man strives and
resists, They have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. The
Spirit parlieth a second time, and urges Reasons of a new nature; But the
Sinner answers, No, I have loved strangers, and after them I will go, Amos 4.
6, 8, 9, 10, 11. At this God's Fury comes up into his Face, now he comes out of
his holy Place, and is terrible: now He swears in his Wrath, they shall never
enter into his Rest, Ezekiel. 24. 13. I exercised toward you my Patience, yet you
have not turned unto me, says Lord. I smote you in your Person, in your
Relations, in your Estate, yet you have not returned unto me, says the Lord.
In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I cause my
Fury to rest npon thee. Cut it down, why does it cumber the ground?

The Second Sign, That such a Professor is almost (if not quite) past Grace,
is, When God has given him over, or lets him alone, and suffers him to do any
thing, and that without control, helps him not either in Works of Holiness,
or in Straits and Difficulties. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos.
4. 17. W^ be to them when I depart from them. I will laugh at their Calamities,
and will mock when their Fear comes, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

Barren Fig Tree, thou have heretofore been dug about, and dunged, God's
Mattock has heretofore been at thy Roots, Gospel-dung has heretofore been
applied to thee; thou have heretofore been strove with, convinced, awakened,
made to taste and see, and cry, O the Blessedness! Thou have heretofore been
met with under the Word; thy Heart has melted, thy Spirit has fallen, thy
Soul has trembled, and thou have felt something of the Power of the Gospel.
But thou have sinned, thou have provoked the Eyes of his Glory, thy Iniquity is
found to be hateful, and now perhaps God has left thee, given thee up, and
lets thee alone.

Heretofore thou wast tender, thy Conscience startled at the temptation to
Wickedness, for thou were taken off from the pollutions of the World, through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. but
that very Vomit that once thou were turned from, now thou lappest up (with the
Dog in the Proverb) again, and that very Mire that once thou seem to lie
washed from, in that very Mire thou now art tumbling afresh. But to
particularize, there are three Signs of a Man's being given over of God.

1. When he is let alone in Sinning, when the reins of his Lusts are loosed,
and he given up to them. And even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate Mind, to do those things which are
not convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness, Romans 1. 28, 29. See
thou a Man that heretofore had the knowledge of God, and that had some awe of
Majesty upon him; I say, see thou such an one, sporting himself in his own
Deceivings, Romans 1. 30, 31. turning the Grace of our God into Lasciviousness,
and walking after his own ungodly Lusts; his Judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, and his Damnation slumbereth not, 2 Pet. 2. 13. Do thou hear,
barren Professor? It is astonishing to see, how those that once seemed Sons of
the Morning, and were making Preparations for Eternal Life, now at last, for
the rottenness of their Hearts, by the just Judgment of God, to be permitted,
being past feeling, to give themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. A great number of such were in the
first Gospel-days; against whom Peter, and Jude, and John pronounces the heavy
Judgment of God. Peter and Jude couple them with the fallen Angels, 2 Pet. 2.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and John forbids that prayer be made for them, because that is
happened unto them, that has happened to the Angels that fell, Jude 5, 6, 7,
8. Who for forsaking their first State, and for leaving their own Habitation,
are reserved in Chains under everlasting Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day. Barren Fig Tree, do thou hear?

First, These are beyond all Mercy.

Secondly, These are beyond all Promises.

Thirdly, These are beyond all hopes of Repentance.

Fourthly, These have no Intercessor, nor any more share in a Sacrifice for Sin.

Fifthly, For these there remains nothing but a fearful looking for of Judgment.

Sixthly, Wherefore these are the true Fugitives and Vagabonds, that being left
of God, of Christ, of Grace, and of the Promise, and being beyond all hope,
wander and straggle to and fro, even as the Devil, their Associate, until their
time shall come to die, or until they descend in Battle, and perish.

2. Wherefore they are let alone in hearing. If these at any time come under
the Word, there is for them no God, no savor of the means of Grace, no
stirrings of Heart, no pity for themselves, no love to their own Salvation. Let
them look on this hand or that, there they see such effects of the Word in
others, as produces Signs of Repentance, and Love to God and his Christ, These
Men only have their Backs bowed down always, Romans 11. 10. These Men only, have
the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear to this very day, Eccl. 8. 10. Wherefore as they go to the place of
the Holy; So they came from the place of the Holy, and soon are forgotten in
the places where they so did. Only they reap this damage, They treasure up
Wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, Romans 2. 3, 4, 5. Look to it, barren Professor.

3. If he be visited after the common way of Mankind, either with Sickness,
Distress, or any kind of Calamity, still no God appears, no sanctifying Hand
of God, no special Mercy is mixed with the Affliction. But he falls sick, and
grows well, like the Beast; or is under distress, as Saul, who when he was
engaged by the Philistines, was forsaken and left of God. 1 Samuel 28. 4, 5, 6.
And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in
Shunem; and Saul gathered all Israel together, and thy pitched to Gilboa: And
when Saul saw the Host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his Heart greatly
trembled. And when Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him no more,
neither by Dreams, nor by Urim, nor by Prophets. The Lord answered him no more,
He had done with him, cast him off, and rejected him, and left him to stand and
fall with his Sins by himself. But of this more in the Conclusion, therefore I
here forbear.

4. These Men may go whither they will, do what they will, they may range from
Opinion to Opinion, from Notion to Notion, from Sect to Sect, but are steadfast
no where, they are left to their own Uncertainties: they have not Grace to
establish their Hearts, and though some of them have boasted themselves of this
Liberty, yet Jude calls them wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever, Jude 13. They are left, as I told you before, to be
Fugitives and Vagabonds in the Earth, to wander every where, but to abide no
where, until they shall descend to their own place, (Acts 1. 5.) with Cain and
Judas, Men of the same fate with themselves.

A Third Sign that such a Professor is quite past Grace, is, When his heart is
grown so hard, so stony and impenetrable, that nothing will pierce it. Barren
Fig Tree, do thou consider? A hard and impenitent Heart is the Curse of God.
A Heart that cannot repent, is instead of all Plagues at once; And hence it is
that God said of Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 14. when he spoke of delivering him up in
the greatness of his Anger, I will at this time, says he, send all my Plagues
upon thy Heart.

To some Men that have grievously sinned under a Profession of the Gospel, God
gives this Token of his Displeasure, they are denied the Power of Repentance,
their Heart is bound, they cannot repent: It is impossible that they should
ever repent should they live a thousand Years, It is impossible for those
Fall-a-ways to be renewed again unto Repentance, seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, aed put him to open shame, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
Now to have the Heart so hardened, so judicially hardened, this is as a bar put
in by the Lord God against the Salvation of this Sinner. This was the burden of
Spira's Complaint, I cannot do it: O now I cannot do it.

This Man sees what he has done, what should help him, and what will become of
him, yet he cannot repent; he pulled away his Shouldier before, he stopped his
Ears before, he shut up his Eyes before, and in that very posture God left him,
and so he stands to this very Day. I have had a fancy, that Lot's Wife, when
she was turned into a Pillar of Salt, (Genesis 19. 26.) stood yet looking over her
Shoulder, or else with her Face toward Sodom; as the Judgment caught her, so
it bound her, and left her a Monument of God's Anger to after-Generations.

We read of some that are seared with an hot Iron, and that are past feeling,
for so seared Persons, in seared Parts are. Their Conscience is seared, 1 Timothy
4. 2. The Conscience is the thing that must be touched with ^eeling fear and
remorse, if ever any good be done with the Sinner. How then can any good be
done to those whose Conscience is worse than that, that is fast asleep in sin,
Ephesians. 4. 19. For that Conscience that is fast asleep, may yet be effectually
awakened and saved; but that Conscience that is seared, dried, as it were, into
a Cinder, can never have sense, feeling, or the least regret in this World.
Barren Fig Tree, hearken, judicial hardening is dreadful. There is a difference
betwixt that hardness of Heart that is incident to all Men, and that which
comes upon some as a signal or special Judgment of God: and although all kind
of hardness of Heart, in some sense, may be called a Judgment, yet to be
hardened with this second kind, is a Judgment peculiar only to them that
perish; an hardness that is sent as a punishment, for the abuse of Light
received, for a reward of Apostasy.

This Judicial hardness is discovered from that which is incident to all Men,
in these Particulars:

1. It is an hardness that comes after some great Light received; Because of
some great Sin committed against that Light, and the Grace that gave it. Such
hardness as Pharaoh had, after the Lord had wrought wonderously before him:
Such hardness as the Gentiles had, a hardness which darkened the Heart, a
hardness which made their Minds reprobate. This hard^ess is also the same with
that the Hebrews are cautioned to beware of, (Heb. 3. 7, etc.) an hardness that
is caused by Unbelief, and a departing from the Living God; and hardness
completed through the deceitfulness of Sin: Such as that in the Provocation, of
whom God swear, that they should not enter into his Rest. 'Twas this kind of
hardness also that both Cain, and Ishmael, and Esau were hardened with, after
they had committed their great Transgressions.

2. It is the greatest kind of Hardness, and hence they are said to be Harder
than a Rock, Jer. 5. 3. or than an Adamant, Zec. 7. 13. that is, harder than
Flint. So hard that nothing can enter.

3. It is an Hardness given in much anger, and that to bind the Soul up in an
impossibility of Repentance.

4. It is an Hardness therefore which is incurable, of which a Man must die and
be damned. Barren Professor, hearken to this.

A Fourth Sign that such a Professor is quite past Grace, is, when he fortifies
his hard Heart against the tenor of God's Word, Job 9. 4, etc. This is called
hardening themselves against God, and turning of the Spirit against him. As
thus, When after a Profession of Faith in the Lord Jesus, and of the Doctrine
that is according to Godliness, they shall embolden themselves in courses of
Sin, by promising themselves that they shall have Life and Salvation
notwithstanding. Barren Professor, hearken to this. This Man is called, (Deuteronomy.
29. 18.) A Root that bears Gall and Wormwood, or a poisonful Herb, such an
one as is abominated of God; yea the abhorred of his Soul. For this Man says,
v. 19, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination or stubbornness of
my Heart, to add drunkeness to thirst; an opinion flat against the whole Word
of God, yea against the very Nature of God himself. Wherefore he adds, Deuteronomy.
19. 20. Then the Anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that
Man; and all the Curses that are written in God's Book shall lie upon him, and
God shall blot out his Name from under Heaven.

Yea, that Man shall not fail to be effectually destroyed, says the Text, 21.
verse. The Lord shall separate that Man unto evil, out of all the Tribes of
Israel, according to all the Curses of the Covenant.

He shall separate him unto Evil; He shall give him up, he shall leave him to
his Heart; he shall separate him to that, or those that will assuredly be too
hard for him.

Now this Judgment is much effected, when God has given a Man up unto Satan,
and has given Satan leave, without fail, to complete his destruction. I say,
When God has given Satan leave effectually to complete his destruction: For
all that are delivered up unto Satan, have not, nor do not come to this End.
But that is the Man, whom God shall separate to Evil, and shall leave in the
Hands of Satan, to complete, without fall, his Destruction.

Thus he served Ahab, a Man, that fold himself to work wickedness in the sight
of the Lord, 1 Kin. 21. 25. And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he
may go up, and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? And on said on this manner, and another
said on that manner: And there came forth a Spirit, and stood before the Lord,
and said, I will persuade him. 1 Kin. 22. 20, 21, 22. And the Lord said unto
him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and be a lying Spirit in the
mouth of all his Prophets. And he said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail
also, go forth, and do so. Thou shall persuade him and prevail, do thy Will, I
leave him in thy Hand, Go forth, and do so.

Wherefore in these Judgments, the Lord does much concern himself for the
management thereof, because of the Provocation wherewith they have provoked
him. This is the Man, whose Ruin contriveth, and brings to pass by his own
contrivance. I will choose their delusions for them; I will bring their fears
upon them, Isa. 66. 4. I will choose their Devices, or the Wickednesses that
their Hearts are contriving of. I even I, will cause them to be accepted of,
and delightful to them. But who are they that must thus be feared? Why, those
among Professors, that have chosen their own Ways, those whose Soul delights
in their Abominations.

Because they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved; for
this cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a
Lie, that they all might be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had
pleasure in Unrighteousness.

God shall send them.] It is a great word; Yea, God shall send them strong
Delusions; Delusions that shall do, that shall make them believe a Lie. Why so?
That they all might be damned, every one of them, who believe not the Truth,
but had pleasure in Unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 5, 10, 11, 12.

There is nothing more provoking to the Lord, than for a Man to promise, when
God threatens; for a Man to be light of conceit, that he shall be safe; and
yet to be more wicked than in former days: This Man's Soul abhors the Truth
of God, no marvel therefore if God's Soul abhors him: he has invented a way
contrary to God, to bring about his own Salvation; no marvel, therefore, if God
invent a way to bring about this Man's Damnation: And seeing that these Rebels
are at this point, We shall have peace; God will see whose Word shall stand,
His or theirs.

A Fifth Sign of a Man being past Grace, is, When he shall at this, scoff, and
inwardly grin, and fret against the Lord, secretly purposing to continue his
course, and put all to the venture, despising the Messengers of the Lord. He
that despised Moses' s Law, died without Mercy; of how much sorer Punishment
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, etc. Heb. 10. 28.

Wherefore, against these Despisers God has set himself, and foretold, that
they shall not believe, but perish. Behold ye Despisers, and wonder, and
perish; for I work a work in your days, which ye shall in no wise believe,
though a Man declare it unto you. Acts 13. 41.

After that thou shall out it down.]
Thus far we have treated of the Barren Fig Tree, or fruitless Professor, with
some Signs to know him by; whereto is added also some Signs of one who neither
will or can, by any means, be fruitful, but they must miserably perish. Now
being come to the time of Execution, I shall speak a word to that also, After
that thou shall cut it down.] Christ at last turns the Barren Fig Tree over to
the Justice of God, shakes his hands of him, And gives him up to the fire for
his unprofitableness.

Thou cut ent it down.]
Two things are here to be considered.

1. The Executioner, Thou, the great, the dreadful, the eternal God. These
words therefore, as I have already said, signify that Christ the Mediator,
through whom alone Salvation comes, and by whom alone Execution has been
deferred, Now gives up the Soul, forbears to speak one Syllable more for him,
or to do the least Act of Grace further, to try for his Recovery; but
delivers him up to that fearful Dispensation, To fall into the hand of the
living God, Heb. 10. 31.

2. The Second to be considered, is, The Instrument by which this Execution is
done, and that is Death, compared here to an Ax; and forasmuch as the Tree is
not felled at one Blow, therefore the strokes are here continued, till all the
blows be struck at it that are requisite for its felling; For now cutting-time,
and cutting-work is come, cutti^g must be his Portion, till he be cut down.
After that thou shall cut it down.] Death, I say, is the Ax, which God often
uses, therewith to take the Barren Fig Tree out of the Vineyard, out of a
Profession, and also out of the World at once. But this Ax is now new-ground,
it comes well-edged to the Roots of this Barren Fig Tree. It has been whetted
by Sin, by the Law, and by a formal Profession, and therefore must, and will
make deep gashes, not only in the natural life, but in the Heart and Conscience
also of this Professor. The wages of Sin is Death, the sting of Death is Sin, 1
Cor. 15. Wherefore Death comes not to this Man as he does to Saints, muzzled,
or without his Sting, but with open Mouth, in all his strength; yea, he sends
his First born, which is guilt, to devour his strength, and to bring him to the
King of Terrors, Job 18. 13, 14.

But to give you, in a few Particulars, the manner of this Man's dying.

1. Now he has his fruitless Fruits beleaguer him round his Bed, together with
all the Bands and Legions of his other wickedness. His own Iniquities shall
take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden in the Cords of his Sins, Prove.
5. 22.

2. Now some terrible discovery of God is made out unto him, to the perplexing
and terrifying of his guilty Conscience, God shall cast upon him, and not
spare; and he shall be afraid of that which is high, Job. 27. 22.

3. The dark Entry he is to go through, will be a sore amazement to him; For fear
shall be in the way, Eccl. 12. 5. yea Terrors will take hold on him, when he
shall see the yawning Jaws of Death to gape upon him, and the Doors of the
Shadow of Death open to give him passage out of the World. Now who will meet me
in this dark Entry; how shall I pass through this dark Entry into another World!

4. For by reason of Guilt, and a shaking Conscience, His Life will hang in
continual doubt before him, and he shall be afraid day and night, Deuteronomy. 28. 66,
67. and shall have no assurance of his Life.

5. Now also Want will come up against him, he will come up like an armed Man.
This is a terrible Army to him that is graceless in Heart, and fruitless in
Life. This Want will continually cry in thine Ears, here is a New Birth
wanting, a new Heart, and a new Spirit wanting; here is Faith wanting; here is
Love and Repentance wanting; here is the Fear of God wanting, and a good
Conversation wanting; Thou art weighed in the Balance, and art found wanting.
Dan. 5. 27.

6. Together with these, stands by the companions of Death; Death and Hell,
Death and Devils, Death and endless Torment in the everlasting flames of
devouring Fire. When God shall come up unto the people, he will invade them
with his Troops. Hab. 3. 16.

But how will this Man die? Can his Heart now endure, or can his Hands be
strong? Ezekiel. 22. 14.

1. God, and Christ, and Pity have left him: Sin against Light, against Mercy,
and the Long-suffering of God, is come up against him; his Hope and Confidence
now lie a dying by him, and his Conscience totters and shakes continually
within him.

2. Death is at his work, Cutting of him down, hewing both Bark and Heart, both
Body and Soul assunder; The Man groans, but Death hears him not: He looks
ghastly, carefully, dejectedly; he sighs, he sweats, he trembles, but Death
matters nothing.

3. Fearful Cogitations haunt him, misgivings, direful apprehensions of God
terrify him. Now he has time to think what the loss of Heaven will be, and
what the torments of Hell will be; now he looks no way but he is frighted.

4. Now would he live, but may not; he would live, though it were but the life
of a Bedridden Man, but must not. He that cuts him down, sways him, as the Feller
of Wood, sways the tottering Tree; now this way, then that, at last a Root
breaks, an Heart-string, an Eye-string snaps assunder.

5. And now, could the Soul be anihilated or brought to nothing, how happy
would it count it self; but it sees that may not be. Wherefore it is put to a
wonderful strait: stay in the Body it may not, go out of the Body it dares not.
Life is going, the Blood settles in the Flesh, and the Lungs being no more able
to draw Breath through the Nostrils, at last out goes the weary trembling Soul,
who is immediately seized by Devils, who lay lurking in every hole in the
Chamber for that very purpose: His Friends take care of the Body, wrap it up in
the Sheet or Coffin; but the Soul is out of their thought and reach, going down
to the Chambers of Death.

I had thought to have enlarged, but I forbear: God, who teaches Man to profit,
bless this brief and plain Discourse to thy Soul, who yet stand a Professor
in the Land of the Living, among the Trees of his Garden. Amen.

FINIS.
AN EXHORTATION TO PEACE and UNITY.
Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace.
BEloved, Religion is the great Bond of humane Society; and it were well if it
self were kept within the Bond of Unity; and that it may so be, let us,
according to the Text, use our utmost endeavors to keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the Bond of Peace.

These words contain a Counsel and a Caution: the Counsel is, That we endeavor
the Unity of the Spirit; the Caution is, That we do it in the Bond of Peace: as
if he should say, I would have you live in Unity, but yet I would have you to
be careful, that you do not purchase Unity with the breach of Charity.

Let us therefore be cautioned that we do not so press after Unity in Practice
and Opinion, as to break the Bond of Peace and Affection.

In the handling of these words, I shall observe this method;

First, I shall open the Sense of the Text.

Secondly, I shall show wherein this Unity and Peace consists.

Thirdly, I shall show you the Fruits and Benefits of it, together with nine
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that attend those Churches where Unity and Peace
is wanting.

Fourthly, and lastly, I shall give you twelve Directions and Motives for the
obtaining of it.

First, As touching the Sense of the Text; when we are counseled to keep the
Unity of the Spirit, we are not to understand the Spirit of God, as personally
so considered; because the Spirit of God in that sense, is not capable of being
divided; and so there would be no need for us to endeavor to keep the Unity of
it.

By the Unity of the Spirit then, we are to understand, that Unity of Mind
which the Spirit of God calls for, and requires Christians to endeavor after;
hence it is that we are exhorted, by one Spirit, with one Mind, to strive
together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27.

But farther; the Apostle in these words alludes to the state and composition
of a Natural Body, and does thereby inform us, that the Mystical Body of Christ
holds an Analogy with the Natural Body of a Man: As first, In the Natural Body
there must be a Spirit to animate it, for the Body without the Spirit is dead,
James 2. 26. So it is in the Mystical Body of Christ; the Apostle no sooner
tells us of that one Body, but he minds us of that one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4.

Secondly, The Body has Joints and Bands to unite all the parts; so has the
Mystical Body of Christ, Col. 2. 19. This is that Bond of Peace mentioned in
the Text, as also in the 16th Verse of the same Chapter, where the whole Body
is said to be fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every Joint
supplieth.

Thirdly, The Natural Body receives Counsel and Nourishment from the Head; so
does the Mystical Body of Christ, he is their Counselor, and him they must
hear; he is their Head, and him they must hold; hence it is that the Apostle
complains, Col. 2. 19. of some that did not hold the Head from which the
whole Body by Joints and Bands has Nourishment.

Fourthly, The Natural Body cannot well subsist if either the Spirit be
wounded, or the Joints broken or dislocated; the Body cannot bear a Wound or
broken Spirit; A broken Spirit dries the Bones, Prove. 17. 22. And a wounded
Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14. And on the other hand, how often have the
disjoyinting of the Body, and the breakings thereof, occasioned the expiration
of the Spirit? In like manner it fares with the Mystical Body of Christ, how do
divided Spirits break the Bonds of Peace, which are the Joints of this Body?
And how does the breakings of the Body and Church of Christ, wound the Spirit
of Christians, and oftentimes occasion the Spirit and Life of Christianity to
languish, if not to expire? How needful is it then that we endeavor the Unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace?

I now come to show you wherein this Unity and Peace consists, and this I shall
demonstrate in five particulars.

1. This Unity and Peace may consist in the ignorance of many Truths, and in
the holding of some Errors; or else this Duty of Peace and Unity could not be
practicable by any on this side Perfection; but we must now endeavor the Unity
of the Spirit, till we come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of
the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 13. Because now (as the Apostle says) we know in
part, and we prophesy in part, and now we see through a Glass darkly, 1 Cor.
13. 12. And as this is true in general, so we may ^ind it true if we descend to
particular Instances; the Disciples seem to be ignorant of that great Truth
which they had often, and in much plainness been taught by their Master once
and again (viz.) That his Kingdom was not of this World, and that in the World
they should suffer, and be persecuted; yet in the first of the Acts, ver. 6. we
read, That they asked of him if he would at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? thereby discovering that Christ's Kingdom (as they thought) should
consist in his Temporal Jurisdiction over Israel, which they expected should
now commence and take place amongst them. Again, Our Lord tells them, that he
had many things to say (and these were many important Truths) which they could
not now bear, John 16. 12. And that these were important Truths, appears by the
10th and 11th Verses, where he is discoursing of Righteousness and Judgment,
and then adds, that he had yet many things to say, which they could not bear;
and thereupon promises the Comforter to lead them into ALL TRUTH; which
implies, that they were yet ignorant of many Truths, and consequently held
diverse Errors; and yet for all this he prays for, and presses them to their
great Duty of Peace and Unity, John* 14. 27. and 17. 21. To this may be added
that of Heb. 5. 11. where the Author says, He had many things to say of the
Priestly Office of Christ, which by reason of their dullness, they were not
capable to receive; as also that in the 10th of the Acts, where Peter seems to
be ignorant of that Truth, viz. That the Gospel was to be preached to all
Nations; and contrary hereunto, he erred in thinking it unlawful to Preach
amongst the Gentiles. I shall add two Texts more, one is Acts 19. where we
read, That those Disciples which had been discipled and baptized by John, were
yet ignorant of the Holy Ghost, and knew not (as the Text tells us) whether
there were any Holy Ghost or no; though John did teach constantly, That he that
should come after him, should baptize with the Holy Ghost and Fire. From hence
we may easily and plainly infer, that Christians may be ignorant of many
Truths, by reason of weak and dull Capacities, and other suchlike Impediments,
even while those Truths are with much plainness delivered to them. Again, We
read, Heb. 5. 13. of some that were unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, who
nevertheless are called Babes in Christ, and with whom Unity and Peace is to be
inviolably kept and maintained.

2. As this Unity and Peace may consist in the ignorance of many Truths, and in
the holding some Errors, so it must consist with (and it cannot consist
without) the believing and practicing those things which are necessary to
Salvation and Church Communion; and they are, First, Believing that Christ the
Son of God died for the Sins of Men. Secondly, That whoever believed, ought to
be baptized: The third thing essential to this Communion, is a holy and a
blameless Conversation.

First, That believing that the Son of God died for the Sins of Men, is
necessary to Salvation, I prove by these Texts, which tell us, that he that
does not believe, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. Romans 10. 19.

That it is also necessary to Church Communion, appears from Mat. 16. 16, 17,
18. Peter having confessed that Christ was the Son of the Living God, Christ
thereupon assures Peter, that upon this Rock, viz. this Profession of Faith, or
this Christ which Peter had confessed, he would Build his Church, and the Gates
of Hell should not prevail against it. And 1 Cor. 3. 11. The Apostle having
told the Corinthians they were God's Building, presently adds, that they could
not be built upon any Foundation but upon that which was laid, which was Jesus
Christ. All which proves, that Christian Society is founded upon the profession
of Christ; and not only Scripture, but the Laws of Right-reason dictate this,
that some Rules and Orders must be observed for the founding all Society, which
must be consented to by all that will be of it. Hence it comes to pass, that to
own Christ as the Lord and Head of Christians, is essential to the founding
Christian Society.

Secondly; The Scriptures have declared that this Faith gives the Professors of
it a right to Baptism, as in the case of the Eunuch, Acts 8. when he demanded
why he might not be baptized? Philip answers, That if he believed with all
his heart, he might; the Eunuch thereupon confessing Christ, was baptized.

Now that Baptism is essential to Church Communion, I prove from 1 Cor. 12.
where we shall find the Apostle laboring to prevent an evil use that might be
made of Spiritual Gifts, as thereby to be puffed up; and to think that such as
wanted them, were not of the Body, or to be esteemed Members; he thereupon
resolves, that whoever did confess Christ, and own him for his Head, did it by
the Spirit, ver. 3. though they might not have such a visible manifestation of
it as others had, and therefore they ought to be owned as Members, as appears,
ver. 23. And not only because they have called him Lord by the Spirit, but
because they have by the guidance and direction of the same Spirit been
baptized, ver. 13. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, etc. I
need not go about to confute that Notion that some of late have had of this
Text, viz. That the Baptism here spoken of, is the Baptism of the Spirit,
because you have not owned and declared that Notion as your Judgment, but on
the contrary. All of you that I have ever conversed with, have declared it to
be understood of Baptism with Water, by the direction of the Spirit: if so,
then it follows, that Men and Women are declared Members of Christ's Body by
Baptism, and cannot be by Scripture reputed and esteemed so without it; which
farther appears from Romans 6. 5. where Men by Baptism are said to be planted
into the likeness of his Death; and Col. 2. 12. We are said to be buried with
him by Baptism; all which, together with the consent of all Christians, (some
few in these late times excepted) do prove that Baptism is necessary to the
initiating Persons into the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, Holiness of Life is essential to Church Communion, because it seems
to be the reason why Christ founded a Church in the World, viz. that Men might
thereby be watched over, and kept from falling; and that if any be overtaken
with a Fault, he that is Spiritual might restore him.

That by this means Men and Women might be preserved without blame to the
coming of Christ, and the Grace of God teaches us to deny Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly and uprightly in this present evil World,
Tit. 2. 11, 12. And let every one that names the Name of the Lord, depart from
Iniquity, Tim. 2. 19. And James tells us, (speaking of the Christian Religion)
That pure Religion and undefiled before God, is to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Affliction, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World,
James 1. 27. From all which (together with many more Texts that might be
produced) it appears, that an unholy and profane Life, is inconsistant with
Christian Religion and Society. And that Holiness is essential to Salvation and
Church Communion; so that these three things, Faith, Baptism, and a Holy Life,
as I said before, all Churches must agree and unite in, as those things, which
when wanting, will destroy their being; And let not any think, that when I say,
believing the Son of God died for the Sins of Men, is essential to Salvation
and Church Communion, that I hereby would exclude all other Articles of the
Christian Creed, as not necessary, as the belief of the Resurrection of the
Dead, and eternal Judgment, etc. which for want of time, I omit to speak
particularly to, and the rather, because I understand this great Article of
believing the Son of God died for the Sins of Men, is comprehensive of all
others, and is that from whence all other Articles may easily be inferred.

And here I would not be mistaken, as though I held there were nothing else for
Christians to practice, when I say this is all that is requisite to
Church Communion; for I very well know that Christ requires many other things
of us, after we are Members of his Body, which if we knowingly or maliciously
refuse, may be the cause, not only of Excommunication, but Damnation: But yet
these are such things as relate to the wellbeing, and not to the being of
Churches; as laying on of Hands in the Primitive Times upon Believers, by which
they did receive the Gifts of the Spirit; this (I say) was for the increase and
edifying of the Body, and not that thereby they might become of the Body of
Christ, for that they were before: And do not think that I believe laying on of
Hands was no Apostolical Institution, because I say Men are not thereby made
Members of Christ's Body, or because I say that it is not essential to
Church Communion: Why should I be thought to be against a Fire in the Chimney,
because I say it must not be in the Thatch of the House? Consider then how
pernicious a thing it is to make every Doctrine (though true) the bound of
Communion, this is that which destroys Unity, and by this Rule all Men must be
perfect before they can be in Peace: For do we not see daily, that as soon as
Men come to a clearer understanding the Mind of God (to say the best of what
they hold) that presently all Men are Excommunicable, if not Damnable, that do
not agree with them; do not some believe and see, that to be Pride and
Covetousness, which others do not, because (it may be) they have more narrowly
and diligently searched into their Duty of these things than others have^ what
then? Must all Men that have not so large acquaintance of their Duty herein be
Excommunicated? Indeed it were to be wished that more moderation in Apparel and
Secular Concernments were found among Churches; but God forbid, that if they
should come short herein, that we should say, as one lately said, That he could
not Communicate with such a People, because they were proud and superfluous in
their Apparel.

Let me appeal to such, and demand of them if there was not a time since they
believed and were baptized, wherein they did not believe laying on of Hands a
Duty? and did they not then believe, and do they not still believe they were
Members of the Body of Christ? And was not there a time when you did not so
well understand the nature and extent of Pride and Covetousness as now you do?
And did you not then believe, and do you not still believe that you were true
Members of Christ, though less perfect? Why then should you not judge of those
that differ from you herein, as you judged of your selves when you were as they
now are? How needful then is it for Christians to distinguish (if ever they
would be at Peace and Unity) between those truths which are essential to
Church Communion, and those that are not?

Thirdly; Unity and Peace consists in our making one Shoulder to practice and
^ut in execution the things we do know. Phil. 3. 16. Nevertheless wherein we
have ^^ained, let us walk by the same Rule, let (...) mind the same things. How
sad is it to (...) our Zeal consume us, and our precious Time, in things
doubtful and disputable, while we are not concerned, nor affected with the
practice of those indisputable things we all agree in? We all know Charity to
be the great Command, and yet how few agree to practice it? We all know they
that* labor in the Word and Doctrine, are worthy of double Honor; and that
God has ordained that they which Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel;
these Duties, however others have cavil'd at them, I know you agree in them,
and are persuaded of your Duty herein; but where is your Zeal to practice? O how
well would it be with Churches, if they were but half as zealous for the great
and plain, and indisputable Things, and the more chargeable and costly Things
of Religion, as they are for Things doubtful or less necessary, or for Things
that are no charge to them, and cos^ them nothing but the breath of Contention,
though that may be too great a price for the small things they purchase with it.

But further; Do we not all agree, that Men that preach the Gospel, should do
it like Workmen that need not be ashamed? and yet how little is this considered
by many Preachers, who never consider before they speak of what they say, or
whereof they affirm? How few give themselves to study, that they may be
approved? How few meditate and give themselves to these things, that their
profiting may appear to all?

For the Lord's sake let us unite to practice those things we know; and if we
would have more Talents, let us all agree to improve those we have.

See the Spirit that was among the Primitive Professors, that knowing and
believing how much it concerned them in the propagating of Christianity, to
show forth Love to one another (that so all might know them to be Christ's
Disciples) rather than there should be any complainings among them, they sold
all they had: Oh how zealous were these to practice, and with one Shoulder to
do that that was upon their Hearts for God! I might further add, how often have
we agreed in our Judgment? and has it not been upon our Hearts, that this and
the other Thing is good to be done, to enlighten the dark World, and to repair
the breaches of Churches, and to raise up those Churches that now lie a
gasping, and among whom the Sou^ of Religion is expiring? But what (...) we
more than talk of them? Do no^ most decline these things, when they either call
for their Purses, or their Persons to help in this and suchlike Work^ as
these? Let us then, in what we know^ unite, that we may put it in practice
remembering, that if we know these things, we shall be happy if we d^ them.

Fourthly; This Unity and Peace consists in our joining and agreeing to pray
for, and to press after those Truths we do not know. The Disciples in the
Primitive Times, were conscious of their Imperfections, and therefore they with
one accord continued in Prayer and Supplications: If we were more in the sense
of our own Ignorances and Imperfections, we should carry it better toward
those that differ from us, then we should abound more in the Spirit of Meekness
and Forbearance, that thereby we might bring others (or be brought by others)
to the knowledge of the Truth; this would make us go to God, and say with Elihu,
Job 34. 32. That which we know not, teach thou us. Brethren, did we but all
agree that we were erring in many things, we should soon agree to go to God,
and pray for more Wisdom and Revelation of his Mind and Will concerning us.

But here is our misery, that we no sooner receive any thing for Truth, but we
presently ascend the Chair of Infallibility with it, as though in this we could
not err: Hence it is we are impatient of contradiction, and become uncharitable
to those that are not of the same Mind; but now a consciousness that we may
mistake, or that if my Brother err in one thing, I may err in another, this
will unite us in Affection, and engage us to press after Perfection, according
to that of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. Brethren, I count not my self to
have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things that are
behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward
the Mark, for the prize of the ^igh Calling of God in Christ Jesus. And if in
any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. O then
that we could but unite and agree to go to God for one another, in confidence
that he will teach us; and that if any of us want Wisdom (as who of us does
not) we might agree to ask of God, who gives to all Men liberally, and
upbraideth no Man. Let us, like those people spoken of in the second of Isaiah,
say one to another, Come, let us go to the Lord, for he will teach us of his
Ways, and we will walk in his Paths.

Fifthly; This Unity and Peace mainly consists in Unity of Love and Affection;
this is the great and indispensible Duty of all Christians, by this they are
declared Christ's Disciples: And hence it is that Love is called the Great
Commandment, the Old Commandment, and the New Commandment; that which was
commanded in the beginning, and will remain to the end, yea and after the end.
1 Cor. 13. 8. Charity never fails; but whether there be Tongues, they shall
cease; or whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away. And, verse 13. And
now abides Faith, Hope and Charity; but the greatest of these is Charity. And*
Col. 3. 14. Above all these things put on Charity, which is the Bond of
Perfectness. Because Charity is the end of the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1. 5.
Charity is therefore called the Royal Law; and though it had a superintendency
over other Laws, and doubtless is a Law to which other Laws must give place,
when they come in competition with it; Above all things therefore have fervent
Charity among your selves, for Charity covers a multitude of Sins, 1 Pet. 4.
8. Let us therefore live in Unity and Peace, and the God of Love and Peace will
be with us.

That you may so do, let me remember you (in the words of a learned Man) that
the Unity of the Church, is a Unity of Love and Affection, and not a bare
Uniformity of Practice and Opinion.

Having shown you wherein this Unity consists, I now come to the third General
Thing propounded; and that is, to show you the Fruits and Benefits of Unity and
Peace; together with the Mischiefs and Inconveniences that attend those
Churches where Unity and Peace is wanting.

First, Unity and Peace is a Duty well-pleasing to God, who is styled the
Author of Peace, and not of Confusion in all the Churches, God's Spirit
rejoices in the Unity of our Spirits; but on the other hand, where Strife and
Divisions are, there the Spirit of God is grieved. Hence it is that the Apostle
no sooner calls upon the Ephesians, not to grieve the Spirit of God, but he
presently subjoins us a Remedy against that evil, That they put away bitterness
and evil-speaking. And be kind one to another, and tenderhearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven them, Ephesians. 4. 30, 32.

Secondly, As Unity and Peace is pleasing to God, and rejoiceth his Spirit, so
it rejoiceth the Hearts and Spirits of God's People; Unity and Peace brings
Heaven down upon Earth among us: Hence it is that the Apostle tells us, Romans 4.
17. That the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Where Unity and Peace is, there is Heaven upon
Earth; by this we taste the first Fruits of that blessed Estate we shall one
day live in the fruition of; when we shall come to the general Assembly and
Church of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23.

This outward peace of the Church (as a learned Man observes) disti^s into
peace of Conscience, and turns writings and readings of Controversy, into
Treatises of Mortification and Devotion.

And the Psalmist tells us, that it is not only good, but pleasant for Brethren
to dwell together in Unity, Psalm. 133. 1. But where Unity and Peace is wanting,
there are Storms and Troubles; where Envy and Strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil Work, Jam. 3. 16. It is the outward Peace of the Church that
increases our inward Joy; and the Peace of God's House gives us occasion to
eat our meat with gladness in our own Houses, Act. 2. 46.

Thirdly, The Unity and Peace of the Church makes Communion of Saints
desirable. What is it that imbitters Church Communion, and makes it burdensome,
but Divisions? Have you not heard many complain that they are weary of
Church Communion, because of Church-Contention? but now where Unity and Peace
is, there Christians long for Communion.

David says, that he was glad when they said unto him, Let us go to the House
of God, Psalm. 122. 1. Why was this, but because (as the third verse tells us)
Jerusalem was a City compact together, where the Tribes went up, the Tribes of
the Lord, to give thanks to his Name. And David speaking of the Man that was
once his Friend, does thereby let us know the benefit of Peace and Unity, Psalm.
55. 14. We (says he) took sweet counsel together, and walked to the House of
God in company. Where Unity is strongest, Communion is sweetest and most
desirable. You see then that Peace and Union fills the People of God with
desires after Communion: But on the other hand, hear how David complains, Psalm.
120. Woe is me, I sojourn in Mesech, and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar. The
Psalmist here is thought to allude to a sort of Men that dwelt in the deserts
of Arabia, that got their livings by Contention; and therefore he adds, ver. 6.
That his Soul had long dwelt with them that hated Peace. This was that which
made him long for the Courts of God, and esteem one day in his House better
than a thousand; this made his Soul even faint for the House of God, because of
the peace of it; Blessed are they (says he) that dwell in thy House, they will
be still praising thee. There is a certain note of concord, as appears, Act. 2.
where we read of Primitive Christians, meeting with one accord, praising God.

Fourthly, Where Unity and Peace is, there many Mischiefs and Inconveniences
are prevented, which attends those People where Peace and Unity is wanting: And
of those many that might be mentioned, I shall briefly insist upon these nine.

First, Where Unity and Peace is wanting, there is much precious time spent to
no purpose; How many Days are spent, and how many fruitless Journeys made to no
profit, where the People are not in peace? How often have many redeemed time
(even in Seed-time and Harvest) when they could scarce afford it, to go to
Church, and, by reason of their Divisions, come home worse than they went,
repenting they have spent so much precious time to so little benefit? How sad
is it to see Men spend their precious time, in which they should work out their
Salvation, by laboring, as in the Fire, to prove an uncertain and doubtful
Proposition; and to trifle away their time, in which they should make their
Calling and Election sure, to make sure of an Opinion, which when they have
done all, they are not infallibly sure whether it be true or no, because all
things necessary to Salvation and Church Communion are plainly laid down in
Scripture, in which we may be infallibly sure of the Truth of them; but for
other things that we have no plain Texts for, but the Truth of them depends
upon our Interpretations, Here we must be cautioned, that we do not spend much
time in imposing those upon^ others, or venting those among others, unless we
can assume Infallibility, otherwise we spend time upon uncertainty* And whoever
casts their Eyes abroad, and dot^ open their Ears to intelligence, shall both
see, and to their sorrow hear, that many Churches spend most of their time in
Jangling and Contending* about those things, which are neither essentialy to
Salvation or Church Communion, and that which is worse, about such doubtful
Questions which they are never able to give an infallible solution of. But now
where Unity and Peace is, there, our time is spent in praising God; and in
those great Questions, What we should do to be saved? and how we may be more
holy and more humble toward God, and more charitable and more serviceable to
one another?

Secondly, Where Unity and Peace is wanting, there is evil surmizing, and
evil-speaking, to the damage and disgrace, if not to the ruining of one
another; Gal. 5. 14, 15. The whole Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self: but if you bite and devour one another, take
heed you be not consumed one of another. No sooner the Bond of Charity is
broken, which is as a Wall about Christians, but soon they begin to make havoc
and spoil of one another; then there is raising evil Reports, and taking up
evil Reports against each other: Hence it is that whispering and backbiting
proceeds, and going from House to House to blazon the Faults and Infirmities of
others; Hence it is that we watch for the haltings of one another, and do
inwardly rejoice at the Miscarriages of others; saying, in our Hearts, Ah, ah,
so we would have it: But now where Unity and Peace is, there is Charity; and
where Charity is, there we are willing to hide the Faults, and cover the
nakedness of our Brethren; Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5. And
therefore it cannot surmize, neither will it speak evil.

Thirdly, Where Unity and Peace is wanting, there can be no great matters
enterprized, we cannot do much for God, nor much for one another; when the
Devil would hinder the bringing to pass of good in Nations and Churches, he
divides their Councils, (and as one well observes) he divides their Heads, that
he may divide their Hands; when Jacob had prophesied of the cruelty of Simeon
and Levi, who were Brethren, he threatens them with the consequent of it, Genesis
49. 7. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. The Devil is
not to learn that Maxim he has taught the Machavilians of the World, divide
and impera, divide and rule, it is a united force that is formidable: Hence the
Spouse in the Canticles is said to be but one, and the only one of her Mother,
Cant. 6. 9. Hereupon it is said of her, ver. 10. That she is terrible as an
Army with Banners. What can a divided Army do, or a disordered Army, that have
lost their Banners, or for fear or shame thrown them away? In like manner, what
can Christians do for Christ, and the enlarging his Dominions in the World, in
bringing Men from darkness to light, while themselves are divided and
disordered? Peace is to Christians, as great Rivers are to some Cities, which
(besides other Benefits and Commodities) are natural Fortifications, by reason
whereof those places are made impregnable; but when, by the subtilty of an
Adversary, or the folly of the Citizens, these Waters come to be divided into
little petty Rivulets, How soon are they assailed and taken? Thus it fares with
Churches, when once the Devil or their own folly divides them, they will be so
far from resisting of him, that they will be soon subjected by him.

Peace is to Churches as Walls to Cities; nay, Unity has defended Cities that
had no Walls; it was once demanded of Ageslaus, why Lacedemon had no Walls; he
answers (pointing back to the City) That the Concord of the Citizens was the
strength of the City. In like manner, Christians are strong when united, then
they are more capable to resist temptation, and to succor such as are tempted;
when Unity and Peace is among the Churches, then are they like a Walled Town;
And when Peace is the Churche's-Walls, Salvation will be her Bulwarks.

Plutarch tells us of one Si^^rus that had 80 Sons, whom he calls to him as he
lay upon his Deathbed, and gave them a shea^ of Arrows, thereby to signify,
that if they lived in Unity, they might do much, but if they divided, they
would come to nothing. If Christians were all of one Piece, if they were all
but one Lump, or but one Sheaf or Bundle, how great are the things they might
do for Christ and his People in the World, whereas otherwise they can do little
but dishonor him, and offend his.

It is reported of the Leviathan, that his strength is in his Scales, Job 41.
15, 16, 17. His Scales are his pride, shut up together, as with a close Seal;
one is so near to another, that no Air can come between them; they join
together, they stick together, they cannot be sundred. If the Church of God
were united like the Scales of Leviathan, it would not be every brainsick
Notion, nor angry Speculation, that would cause their separation.

Solomon says, Two are better than one, because if one fail, the other may
raise him; then surely twenty are better than two, and an hundred are better
than twenty, for the same reason, because they are more capable to help one
another. If ever Christians would do any thing to raise up the fallen
Tabernacles of Jacob, and to strengthen the weak, and comfort the feeble, and
to fetch back those that have gone astray, it must be by Unity.

We read of the Men of Babel, Genesis 11. 6. The Lord said, Behold, the People are
one, etc. And now nothing will be restrained from them that they have imagined
to do.

We learn by Reason what great things may be done in worldly Achievements
where Unity is: And shall not Reason (assisted with the Motives of Religion)
teach us, that Unity among Christians may enable them to enterprise greater
Things for Christ? would not this make Satan fall from Heaven like Lightning?
For as Unity built literal Babel, it is Unity that must pull down mystical
Babel. And on the other hand, where Divisions are, there is Confusion; by this
means a Babel has been built in every Age. It has been observed by a Learned
Man, and I wish I could not say truly observed, That there is most of Babel and
confusion among those that cry out most against it.

Would we have a Hand to destroy Babylon, let us have a Heart to unite one among
another.

Our English Histories tell us, that after Austin the Monk had been some time
in England, that he heard of some of the Remains of the British Christians,
which he convened to a place, which Cambden in his Britannia calls Austin's
Oak; here they met to consult about Matters of Religion; but such was their
Division, by reason of Austin's imposing Spirit, that our Stories tell us, That
Synod was only famous for this, that they only met and did Nothing. This is the
mischief of Divisions, they hinder the doing of much good; and if Christians,
that are divided, be ever famous for any thing, it will be, that they have
often met together, and talked of this and the other thing, but they did
nothing.

Fourthly, Where Unity and Peace is wanting, there the Weak are wounded, and
the Wicked are hardened: Unity may well be compared to precious Oil, Psalm. 133.
2. It Is the nature of Oil, to heal that which is wounded, and to soften that
which is hard. Those Men that have hardened themselves against God and his
People, when they shall behold Unity and Peace among them, will say, God is in
them indeed. And on the other hand, are they not ready to say, when they see
you divided, That the Devil's in you that you cannot agree?

Fifthly, Divisions, and want of Peace, keep those out of the Church that would
come in; and cause many to go out that are in.

The Divisions of Christians (as a Learned Man observes) are a Scandal to the
Jews, an Opprobrium to the Gentiles, and an Inlet to Atheism and Infidelity.
Insomuch that our Controversies about Religion (especially as they have been of
late managed) have made Religion it self become a Controversy. O then, how good
and pleasant a thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! The Peace
and Unity that was among the Primitive Christians, drew others to them: What
hinders the Conversion of the Jews, but the Divisions of Christians? Must I be
a Christian, says the Jew; what Christian must I be, of what Sect must I be of?
The Jews (as one observes) glossing upon that Text in Isa. 11. 6. where it is
prophesied, That the Lion and the Lamb shall lie down together, and that there
shall be none left to hurt nor destroy in all God's Holy Mountain; they
interpreting these Sayings, to signify the Concord and Peace that shall be
among the People that shall own the Messiah, do from hence conclude, that the
Messiah is not yet come, because of the Contentions and Divisions that are
among those that profess him. And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14. 23. That if an
Unbeliever should see their Disorders, he would say they were mad; but where
Unity and Peace is, there the Churches are multiplied; we read, Acts 9. that
when the Churches had rest, they multiplied. And, Act ^2. 46, 47. when the
Church was serving God with one accord, the Lord added to them daily such as
should be saved.

It is Unity brings Men into the Church, and Divisions keep them out. It is
reported of an Indian passing by the House of a Christian, and hearing them
contending, being desired to turn in, he refused, saying, Habamack dwells
there, meaning, that the Devil dwelt there: but where Unity and Peace is, there
God is; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God. The Apostle tells the
Corinthians, That if they walked orderly, even the Unbeliever would hereby be
enforced to come and worship, and say, God was in them indeed. And we read,
Zech. 8. 23. of a Time when ten Men shall take hold of a Jew, and say, We will
go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

And hence i^ is that Christ prays, John 17. 21. That his Disciples might be
one, as the Father and he were one, that the World might believe the Father
sent him: As if he should say, you may preach me as long as you will, and to
little purpose, if you are not at Peace and Unity among your selves. Such was
the Unity of Christians in former days, that the intelligent Heathen would say
of them, That though they had many Bodies, yet they had but one Soul: And we
read the same of them, Acts 4. 32. That the multitude of them that believed
were of one Heart and one Soul.

And as the Learned Stillingfleet observes in his Irenicum; The Unity and Peace
that was then among Christians, made Religion amiable in the Judgment of
impartial Heathens: Christians were then known by the benignity and sweetness
of their Dispositions, by the candor and ingenuity of their Spirits, by their
mutual Love, Forbearance, and Condescension to one another: But either this is
not the practice of Christianity, (viz. a Duty that Christians are now bound to
observe) or else it is not calculated for our Meridian, where the Spirits of
Men are of too high an elevation for it; for if Pride and Uncharitableness, if
Divisions and Strifes, if Wrath and Envy, if Animosities and Contentions were
but the Marks of true Christians, Diogenes need never light his Lamp at noon to
find out such among us; but if a Spirit of Meekness, Gentleness, and
Condescension; if a stooping to the Weaknesses and Infirmities of one another,
if pursuit after Peace, when it flies from us, be the indispensable Duties, and
charactaristical Notes of Christians, it may possibly prove a difficult Inquest
to find out such, for the crowds of those that shelter themselves under that
glorious Name.

It is the Unity and Peace of Churches that brings others to them, and makes
Christianity amiable. What is prophesied of the Church of the Jews, may in this
case be applied to the Gentile Church, Isa. 66. 12. That when once God extends
Peace to her like a River, the Gentiles shall come in like a flowing Stream;
then (and not till then) the Glory of the Lord shall arise upon his Churches,
and his Glory shall be seen among them; then shall their Hearts fear and be
enlarged, because the abundance of the Nations shall be converted to them.

Sixthly, As want of Unity and Peace keeps those out of the Church that would
come in, so it hinder the growth of those that are in. Jars and Divisions,
Wranglings and Prejudices, eat out the Growth, if not the Life of Religion.
These are those Waters of Marah, that imbitter our Spirits, and quench the
Spirit of God. Unity and Peace is said to be like the Dew of Hermon, and as a
Dew that descended upon Sion, where the Lord commanded his Blessing, Psalm. 133.
3.

Divisions run Religion into Briars and Thorns, Contentio^s and Parties.
Divisions are to Churches like Wars in Countries: Where War is, the Ground
lies waste and untilled, none takes care of it. It is Love that edifieth, but
Division pulls down: Divisions are as the North-east Wind to the Fruits,
which causes them to dwindle away to nothing; but when the Storms are over,
every thing begins to grow. When Men are divided, they seldom speak the Truth
in Love; and then no marvel they grow not up to him in all things, which is the
Head.

It is a sad presage of an approaching Famine, (as one well observes) not of
Bread nor Water, but of hearing the Word of God, when the thin Ears of Corn,
devour the plump full Ones; when the lean Kine devour the fat Ones; when our
Controversies about doubtful things, and things of less moment, eat up our
Zeal, for the more indisputable and practical things in Religion; which may
give us cause to fear, that this will be the Character by which our Age will be
known to Posterity, that it was the Age that talked of Religion most, and loved
it least.

Look upon those Churches where Peace is, and there you shall find Prosperity:
When the Churches had rest, they were not only multiplied, but walking in the
Fear of the Lord, and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, they were edified* it is
when the whole Body is in it together, as with Joints and Bands, that they
increase with the Increase of God.

We are at a stand sometimes, why there is so little growth among Churches, why
Men have been so long in learning, and are yet so far from attaining the
knowledge of the Truth; some have given one Reason, and some another; some say
Pride is the cause, and others say Covetousness is the cause; I wish I could
say these were no causes: but I observe, that when God entered his Controversy
with his People of old, he mainly insisted upon some one Sin, as Idolatry, and
shedding Innocent Blood* etc. as comprehensive of the rest; not but that they
were guilty of other Sins, but those that were the most capital are
particularly insisted on; in like manner, whoever would but take a review of
Churches that live in Contentions and Divisions, may easily find that breach of
Unity and Charity is their capital Sin, and the occasion of all other Sins. No
marvel then, that the Scripture says, the whole Law is fulfilled in Love; and
if so, then where Love is wanting, it must needs follow, the whole Law is
broken. It is where Love grows cold; that Sin abounds; and therefore the want
of Unity and Peace is the cause of that leanness and barrenness that is among
us; it is true in Spirituals as well as Temporals, That Peace brings Plenty.

Seventhly; Where Unity and Peace is wanting, our Prayers are hindered: The
Promise is, that what we shall agree to ask, shall be given us of our Heavenly
Father: No marvel we pray and pray, and yet are not answered, it is because we
are not agreed what to have.

It Is reported, that the People in Lacedemonia, coming to make Supplications to
their Idol God, some of them asked for Rain, and others of them asked for fair
Weather: The Oracle returns them this Answer, That they should go first and
agree among themselves: Would a Heathen God refuse to answer such Prayers, in
which the Supplicants were not agreed; and shall we think the True God will
answer them?

We see then that Divisions hinder our Prayers, and lay a prohibition on our
Sacrifice: If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, (says Christ) and there
remember that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave thy Gift, and go, and
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer it: So that want of
Unity and Charity hinders even our particular Prayers and Devotions.

This hindered the Prayers and Fastings of the People of old from finding
acceptance, Isa. 58. 3. The People ask the Reason wherefore they: fasted, and
God did not see nor take notice of them? He gives this Reason, because they
fasted for Strife and Debate, and hid their Face from their own F^esh. Again,
Isa. 59. the Lord says, His Hand was not shortened, that he could not save; nor
his Ear heavy that he could not hear: but their Sins had separated between
their God and them. And among those many Sins they stood chargeable with, this
was none of the least, (viz.) that the way of Peace they had not known. You see
where Peace was wanting, Prayers were hindered, both under the Old and New
Testament.

The Sacrifice of the People in the 65th of Isaiah, that said* Stand farther
off, I am holier than thou, was as Smoke in the Nostrils of the Lord. On the
other hand we read how acceptable those Prayers were that were made with one
accord, Acts 4. 24. compared with verse 31. they prayed with one accord, and
they were all of one Heart, and of one Soul: and see the benefit of it, they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke the Word with all boldness:
Which was the very thing they prayed for, as appears verse. 29. And the Apostle
exhorts the Husband to dwell with his Wife, that their Prayers might not be
hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. We see then, want of Unity and Peace, either in Families
or Churches, is a hindrance of Prayers.

Eighthly; It is a dishonor and disparagement to Christ, that his Family
should be divided. When an Army falls into Mutiny and Division, it reflects
disparagement on him that has the Conduct of it: In like manner the Divisions
of Families are a dishonor to the Heads, and those that govern them. And if
so, then how greatly do we dishonor our Lord and Governor, who gave his Body
to be broken, to keep his Church from breaking, who prayed for their Peace and
Unity, and left Peace at his departing from them for a Legacy, even a Peace
which the World could not bestow upon them.

Ninthly; Where there is Peace and Unity, there is a sympathy with each other;
that which is the want of one, will be the want of all; Who is afflicted,
(says the Apostle) and I burn not? we should then remember them that are in
Bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer Adversity, as being our selves
also of the Body, Heb. 13. 3. But where the Body is broken, or Men are not
reckoned or esteemed of the Body, no marvel we are so little affected with such
as are afflicted: Where Divisions are, that which is the Joy of the one, is the
Grief of another; but where Unity, and Peace, and Charity abounds, there we
shall find Christians in Mourning with them that mourn, and rejoicing with them
that rejoice; then they will not envy the Prosperity of others, nor secretly
rejoice at the Miseries or Miscarriages of any.

Last of all; I now come to give you Twelve Directions and Motives for the
obtaining Peace and Unity.

First; If ever we would live in Peace and Unity, we must pray for it. We are
required to seek Peace: Of whom then can we seek it with expectation to find
it, but of him who is a God of Peace, and has promised to bless his People
with Peace? It is God that has promised to give his People one Heart, and one
Way; yet for all these things, he will be sought unto: O then let us seek
Peace, and pray for Peace, because God shall prosper them that love it.

The Peace of Churches is that which the Apostle prays for in all his Epistles;
in which his desire is, that Grace and Peace may be multiplied and increased
among them.

Secondly; They that would endeavor the Peace of the Churches, must be careful
who they commit the care and oversight of the Churches to; as, first, (over and
besides those Qualifications that should be in all Christians) they that rule
the Church of God, should be Men of Counsel and Understanding; where there is
an ignorant Ministry, there is commonly an ignorant People, according as it was
of old, Like Priest, like People.

How sad is it to see the Church of God committed to the care of such that
pretend to be Teachers of others, that understand not what they say, or whereof
they affirm: No marvel the Peace of Churches is broken, when their Watchmen
want skill to preserve their Unity, which of all other Things is as the
Church's Walls; when they are divided, no wonder they crumble to Attoms, if
there is no skilful Physician to heal them: It Is sad when there is no Balm in
Gilead, and when there is no Physician there. Hence it is, that the Wounds of
Churches become incurable, like the Wounds of God's People of old, either not
healed at all, or else slightly healed, and to no purpose. May it not be said
of many Churches at this day, as God said of the Church of Israel, That he
sought for a Man among them that should stand in the Gap, and make up the
Breach, but he found none?

Remember what was said of old, Mal. 2. 7. The Priest's Lips should preserve
Knowledge; and the People should seek the Law at his Mouth: But when this is
wanting, the People will be stumbling and departing from God and one another;
therefore God complains, Hos. 4. 6. That his People were destroyed for want of
Knowledge; that is, for want of knowing Guides; for if the Light that is in them
that teach, be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? And if the Blind lead the
Blind, no marvel both fall into the Ditch.

How many are there that take upon them to teach others, that had need be
taught in the beginning of Religion; that instead of multiplying Knowledge,
multiply Words without Knowledge; and instead of making known God's Counsel,
darken Counsel by Words without Knowledge? The Apostle speaks of some that did
more than darken Counsel, for they wrested the Counsel of God; 2 Pet. 3. 16. In
Paul' s Epistles (says he) are some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to
their own destruction. Some things in the Scripture are hard to be known, and
they are made harder by such unlearned Teachers, as utter their own Notions by
Words without Knowledge.

None are more bold and adventurous to take upon them to expound the dark
Mysteries and Sayings of the Prophets and Revelations, and the 9th of the
Romans, which I believe contains some of those many things which in Paul's
Epistles, Peter says, were hard to be understood. I say, none are more forward
to dig in these Mines, than those that can hardly give a sound Reason for the
first Principles of Religion; and such as are ignorant of many more weighty
things, that are easily to be seen in the Face and Superficies of the
Scripture; nothing will serve these but swimming in the Deeps, when they have
not yet learned to wade through the Shallows of the Scriptures: Like the
Gnostics of old, who thought they knew all Things, though they knew nothing as
they ought to know. And as those Gnostics did of old, so do such Teachers of
late break the Unity and Peace of Churches. How needful then is it, that if we
desire the Peace of Churches, that we choose out Men of Knowledge, who may be
able to keep them from being shattered and scattered with every Wind of
Doctrine: And who may be able to convince and stop the Mouths of Gainsayers?

Secondly; You must not only choose Men of Counsel; but if you would design the
Unity and Peace of the Churches, you must choose Men of courage to govern them;
for as there must be Wisdom to bear with some, so there must be Courage to
correct others; as some must be instructed meekly, so others must be rebuked
sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith; there must be Wisdom to rebuke
some with long-suffering, and there must be Courage to suppress and stop the
Mouths of others. The Apostle tells Titus of some whose Mouths must be stopped,
or else they would subvert whole Houses, Tit. 1. 11. Where this Courage has
been wanting, not only whole Houses, but whole Churches have been subverted.
And Paul tells the Galatians, That when he saw some endeavor to bring the
Churches into Bondage, that he did not give place to them, no not for an hour,
etc. Gal. 2. 5. If this course had been taken by the Rulers of Churches, their
Peace had not been so often invaded by unruly and vain Talkers.

Thirdly; In choosing Men to rule (if you would endeavor to keep the Unity of
the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace thereby) be careful you choose Men of
peaceable Dispositions. That which has much annoyed the Peace of Churches,
has been the froward and perverse Spirits of the Rulers thereof: Solomon
therefore advises, That with a furious Man we should not go, lest we learn his
Ways, and get a Snare to our Souls, Prove. 22. 24, 25. and with the Froward we
learn frowardness. How do some Men's words eat like a Canker; who instead of
lifting up their Voice like a Trumpet, to sound a Parley for Peace, have rather
sounded an Alarm to War and Contention. If ever we would live in Peace, let us
reverence the Feet of them that bring the glad-Tidings of it.

O how have some Men made it their Business to preach Contentions, and upon
their entertainment of every novel Opinion, to preach Separation! How has
God's Word been stretched and torn, to furnish these Men with Arguments to tear
Churches! Have not our Ears heard those Texts, that says, Come out from among
them, and be separate, etc. and, withdraw from every Brother that walks
disorderly? I say, have we not heard these Texts, that were written to prevent
Disorder, brought to countenance the greatest Disorder that ever was in the
Church of God, even Schism and Division? whereas one of these Exhortations was
written to the Church of Corinth, to separate themselves from the Idol's
Temple, and the Idol's Table, in which many of them lived in the participation
of, notwithstanding their profession of the True God; as appears 2 Cor. 6. 16,
17. compared with 1 Cor. 8. 7. and 1 Cor. 10. 14, 20, 22, recites. And not for
some few or more Members, who shall make themselves both Judges and Parties, to
make separation, when and as often as they please, from the whole Congregation
and Church of God where they stood related; for by the same Rule, and upon the
same Ground, may others start some new Question among these new Separatists,
and become their own Judges of the communicableness of them, and thereupon make
another separation from these, till at last two be not left to walk together.
And for that other Text mentioned 2 Thessalonians. 3. 9. where Paul exhorts the Church
of Thessalonica to withdraw themselves from every Brother that walks
disorderly; I cannot but wonder that any should bring this to justify their
separation, or withdrawing from the Communion of a true (though a disorderly)
Church. For,

1. Consider, that this was not writ for a few Members to withdraw from the
Church, but for the Church to withdraw from disorderly Members.

2. Consider, that if any offended Members, upon pretense of Error, either in
Doctrine or Practice, should by this Text become Judges (as well as Parties) of
the Grounds and Lawfulness of their Separation: Then it will follow, that half
a store notorious Heretics, or scandalous Livers (when they have walked so as
they foresee the Church are ready to deal with them, and withdraw from them)
shall anticipate the Church, and pretend somewhat against them, of which
themselves must be Judges, and so withdraw from the Church, pretending either
Heresy or Disorder; and so condemn the Church, to prevent the disgrace of being
condemned by the Church. How needful then is it, that Men of peaceable
Dispositions, and not of froward and factious, and dividing Spirits, be chose
to rule the Church of God, for fear lest the whole Church be lea^^^ed and
sower'd by them.

Fourthly; As there must be care used in choosing Men to rule the Church of God,
so there must be a consideration had, that there are many things darkly laid
down in Scripture, this will temper our Spirits and make us live in Peace and
Unity the more firmly in things in which we agree; this will help us to bear
one another's Burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, in as much as all things
necessary to Salvation and Church Communion are plainly laid down in Scripture.
And where things are more darkly laid down, we should consider that God
intended hereby to stir up our diligence, that thereby we might increase our
Knowledge, and not our Divisions, for it may be said of all Discoveries of Truth
we have made in the Scriptures, as it is said of the Globe of the Earth, that
though Men have made great Searches, and thereupon great Discoveries, yet there
is still a terra incognita, an unknown Land; so there is in the Scriptures, for
after Men have traveled over them, one Age after ano^^^^ yet still there is,
as it were, a ^^rra incognita, an unknown Tract to put us upon farther search
and enquiry, and to keep us from censuring and falling out with those who have
not yet made the same Discoveries; that so we may say with the Psalmist, when
we reflect upon our short apprehensions of the Mind of God, that we have seen
an end of all Perfections, but God's Commands are exceeding broad; and as one
observes, speaking of the Scriptures, that there is a Path in them leading to
the Mind of God, which lies a great distance from the Thoughts and
Apprehensions of Men. And on the other hand, in many other places, God sits, as
it were, on the Superficies, and the Face of the Letter, where he that runs may
discern him speaking plainly, and no Parable at all. How should the
consideration of this induce us to a peaceable deportment toward those that
differ.

Fifthly; If we would endeavor Peace and Unity, we must consider how God has
tempered the Body; that so the comely Parts should not separate from the
uncomely, as having no need of them, 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23, 24, 25. There is in
Christ's Body and House, some Members and Vessels less honorable, 2 Timothy 2.
20. And therefore we should not, as some now adays do, po^^ the more abundant
disgrace, instead of putting the more abundant honor upon them: Did we but
consider this, we should be covering the Weakness, and hiding the Miscarriages
of one another, because we are all Members one of another, and the most useless
Member in his place is useful.

Sixthly; If we would live in Peace, let us remember our Relations to God, as
Children to a Father, and to each other as Brethren. Will not the thoughts that
we have one Father, quiet us, and the thoughts that we are Brethren, unite us?
It was this that made Abraham propose Terms of Peace to Lot, Genesis 13. Let there
be no Strife (says he) between us, for we are Brethren. And we read of Moses,
in Acts 7. 26. using this Argument, to reconcile those that strove together,
and to set them at one again; Sirs, says he, you are Brethren, why do ye wrong
one another? A deep sense of this Relation, that we are Brethren, wou^d keep us
from dividing.

Seventhly; If we would preserve Peace, let us mind the Gifts, and Graces, and
Virtues that are in each other; let these be more in our eye, than their
Failings and Imperfections. When the Apostle exhorted the Philippians to Peace,
as a means hereunto, that so the Peace of God might rule in their Hearts, he
tells them, Chap. 4. 8. that if there were any Virtue, or any Praise, they
should think of these things. While we are always talking and blazoning the
Faults of one another, and spreading their Infirmities, no marvel we are so
little in Peace, and Charity; for as Charity covers a multitude of Sins, so
Malice covers a multitude of Virtues, and makes us deal by one another, as
the Heathen Persecutors dealt with Christians, (viz.) put them in Bears Skins,
that they might the more readily become a Prey to those Dogs that were designed
to devour them.

Eighthly; If we would keep Unity and Peace, let us lay aside provoking and
dividing Language, and forgive those that use them. Remember that old Saying,
Evil Words corrupt good Manners. When Men think to carry all before them, with
speaking uncharitably and disgracefully of their Brethren, or their Opinions;
may not such be answered, as Job answered his unfriendly Visitants, Job 6. 25.
How forcible are right Words? but what do your Arguings reprove? How healing
are words fitly spoken? A word in season, how good is it? If we would seek
Peace, let us cloth all our Treaties for Peace with acceptable words; and
where one word may better accommodate than another, let that be used to express
Persons or Things by; and let us not, as some do, call the different Practices
of our Brethren, Will Worship, and their different Opinions, Doctrines of
Devils, and the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Fornication, etc. unless we can
plainly, and in expressness of Terms prove it so; such Language as this has
strangely divided our Spirits, and hardened our Hearts one toward another.

Ninthly; If we would live in Peace, let us make the best constructions of one
another's Words and Actions. Charity judges the best, and it thinks no evil;
if Words and Actions may be construed to a good sense, let us never put a bad
construction upon them: How much has the Peace of Christians been broken by an
uncharitable Interpretation of Words and Actions? as some lay to the charge of
others, that which they never said; so by straining Men's Words, others lay to
their charge, that they never thought.

Tenthly, Be willing to hear, and learn, and obey those that God by his
Providence has set over you; this is a great means to preserve the Unity and
Peace of Churches: but when Men (yea, and sometimes Women) shall usurp
Authority, and think themselves wiser than their Teachers, no wonder if these
People run into Contentions and Parties, when any shall say they are not free
to hear those whom the Church thinks fit to speak to them: This is the first
step to Schism, and is usually attended, if not timely prevented, with a sinful
Separation.

Eleventhly; If you would keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, be
mindful, that the God, whom you serve, is a God of Peace, and your Savior is a
Prince of Peace, and that his Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths
are Peace; and that Christ was sent into the World, to give Light to them that
sit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and to guide our Feet in the Way
of Peace.

Twefthly; Consider the oneness of Spirit that is among the Enemies of
Religion; though they differ about other things, yet to persecute Religion, and
extirpate Religion out of the earth, here they will agree; the Devils in the
Air, and the Devils in the Earth, all the Devils in Hell, and in the World,
make one at this turn. Shall the Devil's Kingdom be united, and shall Christ's
be divided? Shall the Devils make one shoulder to drive on the design of
damning Men, and shall not Christians unite to carry on the great Design of
saving of them? Shall the Papists agree and unite to carry on their Interest,
notwithstanding the multitudes of Orders, Degrees and Differences there are
among them, and shall not those that call themselves Reformed Churches, unite,
to carry on the common Interest of Christ in the World, notwithstanding some
petty and disputable Differences that are among them? Quarrels about Religion
(as one observes) were Sins not named among the Gentiles. What a shame is it
then, for Christians to abound in them, especially considering the nature of
Christian Religion, and what large provisions the Author of it has made, to
keep the Professors of it in Peace? Insomuch (as one well observes) It is next
to a miracle, that ever any (especially the Professors of it) should fall out
about it.

Thirteenthly; Consider and rememher, That the Judge stands at the door; let
this moderate our Spirits, that the Lord is at hand. What a sad account will
they have to make when he comes, that shall be found to smite their Fellow
Servants, and to make the way to his Kingdom more narrow than ever he made it?
Let me close all in the words of that great Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally,
Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, I thought good to advertise thee, that I have delivered this to thy
Hand, in the same Order and Method in which it was preached, and almost in the
same words, without any diminishings, or considerable Enlargings, unless it be
in the thirteen last Particulars; upon some of which I have made some
enlargements, which I could not then do for want of time; but the substance of
every one of them was then laid down in the same particular order as here thou
have them; and now I have done, I make no other account (to use the words of a
moderate Man upon the like Occasion) but it will fall out with me, as does
commonly with him that parts a Fray, both Parties may perhaps drive at me for
wishing them no worse than peace: My ambition of the public Tranquillity of
the Church of God, I hope (...) through these hazards, let (...) me, so their
Quarrels may cease^ (...) shall rejoice in those Blows and Scars I shall take
for the Church's Safety.

VALE.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
FOLIO.
MR. Pool's Annotations on the whole Bible, in which the whole Sacred Text is
inserted. In two Volumes. Dr. Tho. Goodwin's Works. In 2 Vol. Dr. Tho. Manton's
Works. In Folio, Quarto,and Octavo. Bp Usher's Body of Divinity. Josephus's
History of the Jews. With Cuts. The Turkish History, to the Year 1687. In 2
Vol. Thesaurus Brevium, or a Collection of approved Forms of Writs. Nani's
History of Venice. Crollius and Hartman's Chemistry in English.
In QUARTO.
DR. Tuckney' s Prelectiones and Determinationes. Dr. Jacomb on the 8th of the
Romans. Several Sermons before several Lord Mayors of London, viz. Mr.
Jekyll's, Mr. Fen's Mr. Newcome's, Mr. Williams, etc. A plain Representation of
Transubstantiation. A Paraphrase on the 6th of S. John. A Sermon on Humanity
and Charity: both by Dr. Claget.
In OCTAVO.
DR. Bates's Harmony of the Divine Attributes. -- His three Sermons, -- at Dr.
Jacomb's -- at Mr. Clarkson's -- at Mr. Ashurst's Funeral. Mr. Tho. Gale his
Philosophy. In Latin. -- his Anatomy of Infidelity. Several Pieces of Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Whiston, and Mr. Willis, of Infant Baptism. Mr. Faldoe against the
Quakers. Mr. Shelton's Discourse of Superstition. Mr. Ran^w on Divine
Meditation. Mr. Lassell's Voyages into Italy. Suetonius in English, with Cuts.
Sir Paul Ricaut's State of the Ottoman Empire. A Voyage to Syam, performed by
Six Jesuits. Grotius, of the Truth of the Christian Religion. In English Verse.
The Idea of Christian Love. By W. Atwood Esquire.
In TWELVES.
MR. Pearse's Preparation for Death. -- his Best Match. -- his Last Legacy. Mr.
Case his Treatise of Affliction. Mr. Hooker, the Doubting Christian drawn to
Christ. The Epitome of the Bible in English Verse, useful for Children. The
Temperate Man. By Lessius, in English. The Rules of Civility, useful for all
people. Meriton's Guide for Constables. Bibanck's Present for Children.
In 16o and 24o.
QVintus Curtius. Lat. Val. Maximus. Lat. Kempis Imitation of Christ. In
English.
Lately Published.
A Brief Account of the first Rise of the name Protestant; and what
Protestantism is: With a Justification of it; and an Earnest Exhortation to all
Protestants to persist in that Holy Religion. Very useful for these times. For
ever being with the Lord, The Great Hope, End and Comfort of Believers.
Preached by Matthew Sylvester, and published at the public Request of Mr.
Richard Baxter. Price stich'd 6d. Catechism made Practical. The Christian
Instructed: 1. In the Principles of Christian Religion; Positively, in the
Shorter Catechism. 2. In what he is to refuse, and what to hold fast in the
greatest Points of Controversy: and how to Confute Errors, and Defend the
Truth. 3. In the Practice of several Duties. Viz. (1) The Practical Improvement
of the Holy Trinity. (2) Baptism. (3) Prayer. Ard (4) Preparation for the
Lord's Supper. Fitted to the meanest Capacity, and very useful for all
Families. A System of the Revelations, proving who is The Antichrist, etc.

