Come, and Welcome, TO JESUS CHRIST. OR, A plain and profitable Discourse upon
the Sixth of John, 37 Verse. Showing the Cause, Truth, and Manner of the Coming
of a Sinner to Jesus Christ; with his Happy Reception, and Blessed
Entertainment.

Written by J. Bunyan.

And they shall come which were ready to Perish,

Isa. 27. 13. LONDON, Printed for B. Harris at the Stationers Arms in Swithings
Rents in Cornhil by the Royal Exchange, 1678.

Come, and Welcome, TO JESUS CHRIST.
John 6. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
A Little before in this Chapter you may read, That the Lord JESUS walked on
the Sea to go to Capernaum, having sent his Disciples before in a Ship: But the
Winds was contrary, by which means the Ship was hindered in her Passage: Now
about the fourth watch of the night, Jesus came Walking upon the Sea, and
overtook them; at the sight of whom they were afraid.

Note, When Providence are black and terrible to Gods People, the Lord Jesus
shows himself to them in wonderful manner, the which, sometimes they can as
little bear, as they can the things that before were terrible to them. They
were afraid of the Wind, and the Water; they were also afraid of their Lord and
Savior, when He appeared to them in that State.

But He said, be not afraid, it is I. Note, That the End of the appearing of
the Lord Jesus unto his people, (though the manner of his appearing be never so
terrible) is to alay their fears and perplexities.

Then they received him into the Ship, and immediately the Ship was at the Land
whether it went.

Note, When Christ is absent from his people, they go on but slowly, and with
great difficulty; but when he joyneth himself unto them, Oh! how fast they
stear their course, how soon are they at their Journies end!

The people now among whom he last preached, when they saw that both Jesus was
gone, and his Disciples, they also took shipping and came to Capernaum seeking
for Jesus. And when they had found him, they wonderingly asked him, Rabbi, when
came thou hither? But the Lord Jesus, slighting their complement, answered,
Verily, Verily, ye seek me, not because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did
eat of the Loaves and were filled.

Note, A People may follow Christ far, for base ends, as these went after him
beyond - Sea for Loaves; a man's belly will carry him a great way in Religion:
yea, a man's belly will make him venture far for Christ.

Note again, They are not feigning complements, but gracious intentions that
crowns the work, in the eye of Christ: Or thus, It is not the toil, and
business of professors, but their love to him, that makes him approve of them.

Note again, When men shall look for friendly entertainment at Christ's Hand
(if their hearts be rotten) even then will they meet with a check and rebuke:
Ye seek me not because ye saw the Miracles, but because ye did eat of the
Loaves, and were Filled.

Yet observe again, He does not refuse to give, even to these, good counsel; he
bids them Labor for the meat that endures to eternal Life. O how willingly
would Jesus Christ have even those Professors that come to him with pretenses
only, come to him sincerely, that they may be saved.

The Text, you will find, is after much more discourse with, and about this
people; and it is uttered by the Lord Jesus as the conclusion of the whole, and
intimates, that since they were Professors in pretense only; and therefore
such as his soul could not delight in as such, that he would content himself
with a Remnant that his Father had bestowed upon him. As who should say, I am
not like to be Honored in your Salvation; but the Father has bestowed upon me
a people, and they shall come to me in Truth; and in them will I be satisfied.
The Text therefore may be called Christ's repose; in the fulfilling whereof, he
rests himself content, after much Labor, and many Sermon spent, as it were,
in vain. As he says by the Prophet: I have Labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught, and in vain, Isa. 49. 4.

But as there he says, my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God:
So in the Text, he says, All the Father gives me, shall come to me; and them
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. By these words therefore, the
Lord Jesus comfort himself under the consideration of the dissimulation of
some of his followers.

He also thus betook himself to rest under the consideration of the little
effect that his Ministry had even in Capernaum, Corazin and Bethsaida. I thank
thee O Father, said he, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to babes: even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Matt. 11. 25. Luke. 10. 21.

The Text, in the general stands of two parts, and has special respect to
the Father, and the Son: As also to their joint management of the Salvation of
their People. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

The first part of the Text, as is evident, respects the Father and his gift;
the other part, the Son and his reception of that gift.

First, For the gift of the Father, there is this to be considered about it; to
wit,

The gift it self, and that is a gift of certain persons to the Son. The Father
gives, and that gift shall come; And Him that comes. The gift then is of
Persons* the Father gives Persons to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Next, you have the Sons reception of this gift, and that shows it
self in these particulars.

1. In his hearty acknowledgment of it, to be a gift: The Father gives me. 2.
In his taking notice, after a solemn manner, of All, and every part of the
gift: All that the Father gives me. 3. In his resolution to bring them to
himself. All the Father gives me, shall come to me. 4. And in his determining,
that not any thing shall make him dislike them in their coming. And him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
These things might be spoken to at large, as they are in this method presented
to view; but I shall choose to speak to the words,

1. By way of Explication. 2. By way of Observation.
First, By way of Explication. [All] that the Father gives me. This word, All,
is often used in Scripture; and is to be taken more largely, or more strictly,
even as the Truth, or argument for the sake of which it is made use of, will
bare: wherefore, that we may the better understand the mind of Christ, in the
use of it here, we must consider, that it is Limited, and Restrained, only to
those that shall be Saved; to wit, to those that shall come to Christ; even to
those that he will, in no wise cast out. Thus also the word All Israel, is
sometimes to be taken (though sometimes it is taken for the whole Family of
Jacob.) And so All Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. By All Israel, here he
intends, not All of Israel in the largest sense: For they are not All Israel
which are of Israel; neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they All
Children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called: That is, they which are the
Children of the flesh; these are not the Children of God, but the Children of
the promise are counted for the seed, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.

This word, All, must therefore be limited, and enlarged, as the truth, and
argument, for the sake of which it is used, will bare; else we shall abuse
Scriptures and Readers, and our selves, and All. And I, if I be lifted up from
the earth, said Christ, will draw All men after me, Joh. 12. 32. Can any man
imagine, that by All, in this place, he should mean All, and every individual
man in the World; and not rather, That All, that is consonant to the scope of
the place? And if by being lift up from the earth, he means, as he should seem,
his being taken up into Heaven; and if by drawing All men after him, he meant a
drawing of them into that place of Glory: then must he mean, by All Men, Those,
and only Those, that shall in truth be eternally Saved from the Wrath to Come.
For God has concluded them All in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon All,
Romans 11. 32. Those intended in this Text, are the Jews, even All of them, by
the first [ All,] that you find in the words. The second All does also intend
the same People; but yet only so many of them as God will have Mercy upon. He
has concluded them All in unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon All. The All
also in the Text, is also to be limited, and restrained to the Saved, and to
them only. But again: The word [ Giveth] or has given, must be restrained
after the same manner, to the same limited number. All that the Father gives
me. Not all that are given, if you take the gift of the Father to the Son, in
the largest sense. For in that sense, there are Many given to him that shall
never come unto him. Yea, many are given to him, that he will cast out. I shall
therefore first, show you the truth of this, and then, in what sense the gift,
in the Text, must be taken.

First, That All that are given to Christ, if you take the Gift of the Father
to him, in the largest sense, cannot be intended in the Text; is evident:

1. Because, then all the men, yea all the things in the World must be Saved.
All things, says he, are delivered unto Me of my Father, Mat. 11. V. 27. This
I think, no rational man in the world, will conclude. Therefore, the Gift
intended in the Text, must be restrained to some, to a Gift that is given by
way of speciality by the Father to the Son.

2. It must not be taken for All, that in any sense are given by the Father to
him; because, the Father has given some, yea, many to him to be dashed in
pieces by him. Ask of me, said the Father to him, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession; But what must be done with them? Must he Save them All? No, Thou
shall brake them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel, Psalm. 2. This method he uses not with them that he saves by
his Grace, but with those, that Himself and Saints shall rule over in Justice
and Severity, ( Rev. 2* 26, 27.) Yet, as you see, they are given to him.
Therefore the gift intended in the Text, must be restrained to some; to a gift
that is given, by way of speciality, by the Father to the Son.

In Psalm 18. he says plainly, That some are given to him, that he might
destroy them. Thou have given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might
destroy them that hate me, ver. 40. These therefore cannot be of the number of
those that are said to be given in the Text; for those, even All of them shall
come to him, and he will in no wise cast them out.

3ly. Some are given to Christ, that he by them might bring about some of his
high and deep designs in the world. Thus Judas was given to Christ, to wit,
that by him, even as was determined before, he might bring about His death, and
so the Salvation of his Elect by his Blood. Yea, and Judas must so manage this
business, as that he must lose himself for ever in the bringing of it to pass.
Therefore the Lord Jesus, even in his losing of Judas, applies himself to the
Judgment of his Father, if he had not in that thing, done the thing that was
right, even in suffering of Judas so to bring about his Masters death, as he
might bring about his own eternal Damnation.

Those, says he, that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them is lost,
but the Son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Joh. 17. 12.
Let us then, grant that Judas was given to Christ, but not as others are given
to him, to wit, not as those made mention of in the Text; for then he should
not have failed to have been received by Christ, and kept to Eternal life.
Indeed he was given to Christ, but he was given to him to lose him, in the way
that I have mentioned before; that is, he was given to Christ, that he by him
might bring about his own death, as was before determined; and that, in the
overthrow of him that did it. Yea, he must bring about his Dying for us in the
loss of the instrument that betrayed him, that he might even fulfill the
Scripture in his destruction, as well as in the Salvation of the rest. And none
of them is lost, but the Son of perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled.

The gift therefore in the Text, must not be taken in the Largest sense, but
even as the Words will bare; to wit, for such a gift as he accepts, and
promises to be an Effectual means of their Eternal Salvation. All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. Mark, They shall come, that are in special given to me, and they
shall by no means be rejected. For this is the Substance of the Text.

Those therefore intended, as the gift, in the Text, they are those that are
given by Covenant to the Son; those that in other places are called the Elect,
the Chosen, the Sheep, and the Children of the promise, etc.

These be they that the Father has given to Christ to keep them; those, that
Christ has promised Eternal Life unto, those to whom he has given his Word,
and that he will have with him in his Kingdom to behold his Glory, as these
Scriptures declare. This is the will of the Father that sent me, that of all
that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the
last day. And I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any man pluck them out of my Hand, my Father that gave them me is
Greater than All; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand. As
thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to
as many as thou have given him. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and
they have kept thy word. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for
those that thou have given me; for they are thine. And all mine are thine, and
thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.

Keep through thine own Name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be
one, as we are. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, may be with
me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me; for thou
lovedst me before the Foundation of the World, John, 6. 39. Chap. 10. 28. Chap.
17. 2, 6, 9, 10, 24.

All these sentences are of the same import with the Text; and the Alls, and
Manies; those, they, etc. in these several sayings of Christ, are the same with
All the given in the Text. All That the Father gives.

So that, (as I said before) the word All, as also other words, must not be
taken in such sort as our foolish fancies, or groundless opinions will prompt
us to, but do admit of an enlargment or a restriction, according to the true
meaning and intendment in the Text. We must therefore diligently consult the
meaning of the Text by compareing it with other the Sayings of God; so shall we
be better able to find out the mind of the Lord, in the Word which he has given
us to know it by.

All that the [ Father] gives.

By this word [ Father] Christ describes the person giving, by which we may
learn several useful things: 1. That the Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is equally concerned with the Son in the Salvation of his People. True,
his acts, as to our Salvation, are diverse from those of the Son, he was not
capable of doing that, or those things for us as did the Son; he Died not, he
Spilt not Blood for our Redemption as the Son; but yet he has a hand, a great
hand in our Salvation too. As Christ says, The Father himself loves you, and
his love is manifest in choosing of us, in giving of us to his Son, yea, and in
giving his Son also to be a ransom for us. Hence he is called, The Father of
Mercies, and the God of all comfort. For here even the Father, has himself
found out, and made way for his grace to come to us through the sides, and the
heart Blood of his well beloved Son, Col. 1. 12. The father therefore is to be
remembered and adored as one having a chief hand in the Salvation of sinners. We
ought to give thanks to the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light: for the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the World, 1 John 4. 14. Col. 1. 12. As also we see in the Text, the
Father gives the sinner to Christ to save him.

Secondly, Christ Jesus the Lord by this word Father, would familiarize this
given to us. Naturally the Name of God is dreadful to us, specially when he is
discovered to us by those names that declare his Justice, Holiness, Power, and
Glory: but now this word Father, is a familiar word, it frighteth not the
sinner, but rather inclines his heart to love, and be pleased with the
remembrance of him. Hence Christ also when he would have us pray with Godly
boldness, puts this word Father into our mouths; Saying, when ye pray, say Our
Father which art in Heaven* concluding thereby, that by the familiarity that by
such a word is intimated, the Children of God may take more boldness to pray
for, and ask great things. I my self have often found that when I can say but
this word Father, it does me more good, than when I call him by any other
Scripture Name; and it is worth your Noting, that to call God by this relative
Title, was rare among the Saints in Old Testament times; seldom do you find him
called by this name, no, sometimes not in three or four whole books: but now,
in New Testament times, he is called by no name so often as this, both by the
Lord Jesus himself, and by the Apostles afterward. Indeed the Lord Jesus was
he that first made this name common among the Saints, and that taught them,
both in their Discourses, their Prayers, and in their Writings, so much to use
it; it being more pleasing to, and discovering more plainly our interest in
God, than any other Expression; for by his one name we are made to understand
that all our Mercies are the offspring of God, and that we also that are
called, are his children by adoption.

All that the Father [giveth.] This word [ giveth] is out of Christ's ordinary
Dialect, and seems to intimate, at the first sound, as if the Fathers gift to
the Son, was not an act that is past, but one that is present and continuing;
when indeed this gift was bestowed upon Christ when the Covenant, the Eternal
Covenant was made between them before all worlds. Wherefore in those other
places when this gift is mentioned, it is still spoken of, as of an act that is
past. As, All that He has given me; to as many as thou have given me; Thou
gave them me; and those which thou have given me. Therefore of necessity this
must be the first and chief sense of the Text. I mean of this word [giveth]:
otherwise the Doctrine of Election, and of the Eternal Covenant which was made
between the Father and the Son (in which Covenant, this gift of the Father is
most certainly comprised) will be shaken, or at leastwise questionable by
erroneous and wicked men.

But again, this word [ giveth] is not to be rejected, for it has its proper
use, and my signify to us;

First, That though the act of giving, among men does admit of the time past,
or the time to come, and is to be only spoken of with reference to the time:
yet with God it is not so. Things past, or things to come, are always present
with God, and with his Son Jesus Christ: He calls things that are not (that
is, to us) as though they were; and again, known unto God are all his works
from the foundation of the world. All things to God are present, and so the
gift of the Father to the Son, although to us it is an act that is past, Romans
4. 17. Acts 15. 10.

Secondly, Christ may Express himself thus, to show, that the Father has not
only given him this portion in the Lump, before the world was; but that those
that he has so given, he will give him again: that is, will bring them to him
at the time of their conversion; for the Father brings them to Christ (Joh.
6. 44.)

As it is said, She shall be brought unto the King, in raiment of needle work.
That is, in the righteousness of Christ, for it is God that imputes that to
these that are saved, Psalm. 45. 14. 1 Cor. 1.

A man gives his daughter to such a man, first in order to marriage, and this
respects the time past; and he gives her again at the day appointed, in
marriage. And in this last sense, perhaps, the Text may have a meaning: that
is, that all that the Father has before the world was, given to Jesus Christ,
he gives them again to him, in the day of their espousals. Or,

Thirdly, In that Christ says [ giveth] instead of has given, he may do it to
show, that this gift of the Father, to him, is now as new, as sweet, as
pleasant and desirable, as if it had never bin given before.

Things that are given among men, are oft-times best at first, to wit, when
they are new; and the reason is, because, all earthly things war old; but with
Christ it is not so: this gift of the Father is not old, and deformed, and
unpleasant in his eyes; and therefore to him it is always new. When the Lord
spoke of giving the Land of Canaan to the Israelites, he says not, that he had
given, or would give it to them; but thus, The Lord thy God gives thee this
good Land, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. not but that he had given it to them, while they were in
their Fathers, Hundreds of Years before. Yet he says now, he gives it to
them, as if they were now also in the very act of taking possession, when as
yet, they were on the other side Jordane. What then should be the meaning? Why,
I take it to be this: That the Land should be to them always as new; as new, as
if they were taking possession thereof but now. And so is the gift of the
Father, mentioned in the Text, to the Son; it is always new, as if it were
always giving.

All that the Father gives [ Me.]

In those words, you find mention made of two persons, the Father and the Son;
the Father giving, and the Son receiving, or accepting of his Gift. This then
in the first place, clearly demonstrateth, that the Father and the Son, though
they, with the Holy Ghost, are one and the same Eternal God; yet as to their
personality are distinct. The Father is one, the Son is one, the Holy Spirit is
one. But because there is in this Text, mention made but of two of the three,
therefore a word about those two. The Giver and Receiver cannot be the same
person, in a proper sense in the same act of giving and receiving. He that
gives, gives not to himself but to an other; the Father gives not to the
Father, to wit, to Himself, but to the Son; the Son receives not of the Son,
to wit, of Himself, but of the Father: so when the Father gives Commandment,
he gives it not to himself but to another; as Christ says, He has given Me a
Commandment, Joh. 12. 49. So again, I am one that bears witness of my self,
and the Father that sent me bears witness of me Jo. 10. 18.

Further, here is something employed that is not expressed, to wit, that the
Father has not given all Men to Christ; that is, in that sense as is intended
in this Text. For then all should be saved: He has therefore disposed of Satan
another way. He gives some up to Idolatry, He gives some up to uncleanness, to
vile affections, and to a reprobate mind. Now these he disposes of in his
Anger, for their destruction ( Acts. 7. 42, Romans 1. 24, 26, 28.) that they may
reap the fruit of their doings, and be filled with the reward of their own
ways* But neither has He thus disposed of all men; he has even of Mercy
reserved some from these Judgments, and those are they that he will Pardon, as
he says, for I will pardon them whom I reserve, Jer. 50. 20. Now these he has
given to Jesus Christ by Will, as a Legaey. Hence the Lord Jesus says, This is
the Fathers Will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, Joh. 36 29.

The Father therefore giving them to Him to save them, must needs by so doing
declare unto us these following things.

1. That he is Able, to answer this design of God, to wit, to save them to the
uttermost Sin, the uttermost temptation, etc. Heb. 7. 25. Hence he is said, To
lay help upon me that is Mighty, Mighty to save: And hence it is again, that
God did even of old promise to send his people a Savior; a great one, Psalm.
89. 19. Isa. 63. 1. To save, is a great work, and calls for Almightyness in the
Undertaker: hence he is called the Mighty God, the Wonderful Counselor, etc.
Sin is strong, Satan is also strong, Death and the Grave are strong, and so is
the Curse of the Law; therefore it follows, that this Jesus must needs be by
God the Father, accounted Almighty, in that he have given his Elect to him, to
save them, and to deliver them from these, and that in despite of all their
Force, and Power.

Yea, he gave us Testimony of this his Might, when he was employed in that part
of our deliverance, that called for a Declaration of it. He abolished Death: He
destroyed him that had the power of Death; he was the Destruction of the Grave;
he has finished Sin, and made an end of it, as to its Damning effect upon the
Persons that the Father has given him. He has vanquished the curse of the
Law, Nailed it to his Cross, Triumphed over them upon his Cross, and made a
show of these things openly, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Hos. 13. 14. Dan. 9.
24. Gal. 3. 13. Col. 2. 14, 15.

Yea, and even now, as a sign of his Triumph and Conquest, he is alive from the
Dead, and has the Keys of Hell and Death in his own keeping, Revel. 1. 18.

2ly. The Fathers giving of them to him to save them, declares unto us that he
is, and will be faithful in his Office, and that therefore they shall be
secured from the fruit or wages of their Sins, which is Eternal Damnation. And
indeed it is said, even by the Holy Ghost himself, That he is faithful to him
that appointed him; that is, to this work of saving those that the Father has
given him, for that purpose; as Moses was faithful in all his House: Yea, and
more faithful too, for Moses was faithful in Gods house, but as a Servant. But
Christ as a Son, over his own house, Heb. 3.

And therefore this Man is counted worthy of more glory than Moses, even upon
this account, because more Faithful than he; as well as because of the dignity
of his person. Therefore in him, and in his truth and faithfulness, God rested
well - pleased, and has put all the government of this People upon his
shoulders. Knowing, that nothing shall be wanting in him, that may any way
perfect this design. And of this, He, to wit the Son, has already given a
proof; for when the time was come, that his Blood was by Divine Justice
required for their Redemption, Washing, and Changing: he as freely poured it
out of his He^^t, as if it had been Water out of a vessel; not sticking to part
with his own Life, that the life which was laid up for them in Heaven, might
not fail to be bestowed upon them. And upon this account (as well as upon any
other) it is, that God calls him his righteous servant, Isa. 53. For his
righteousness could never have been complete, if he had not been to the
uttermost faithful to the work which he undertook; It is also, because he is
faithful, and true, that in Righteousness he does Judge and make Work for his
peoples deliverance. He will faithfully perform this trust reposed in him: The
Father knows this, and has therefore given his Elect unto him.

Thirdly, The Fathers giving of them to Him to save them, declares unto us that
he is, and will be gentle and patient toward them under all their provocations
and miscarriages. It is not to be imagined, the trials and provocations that
the Son of God has all along had with these people that have been given to him
to save them: indeed he is said to be a tried stone, for he has been tried, not
only by the devil, guilt of sin, death, and the curse of the Law, but also by
his peoples ignorance, unruliness falls, into sin, and declining to errors, in
life, in Doctrine. Were we but capable of seeing how this Lord Jesus has been
tried, even by this people, ever since there was one of them in the world, we
should be amazed at his Patience and gentle Carriages to them. It is said
indeed, the Lord is very pitiful, slow to anger, and of great mercy: and
indeed, if he had not so been, he could never have endured their manners, as he
has done from Adam hitherto. Therefore is his pity and bowels toward his
Church, preferred above the pity and bowels of a mother toward her Child. Can
a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the
Son of her Womb? yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, says the
Lord, Isa. 49. 15.

God did once give Moses, as Christ's Servant, an handful of this people to
carry them in his bosom, but no further than from Egypt to Canaan; and this
Moses, as is said of him by the Holy Ghost, was the Meekest man that was then
to be found in the Earth: yea, and he loved the people at a very great rate,
yet neither would his meekness nor love hold out in this work; he failed, and
grew pationate even to the provoking of his God to Anger under this work that
God had laid upon him. And Moses said unto the Lord, wherefore have thou
afflicted thy Servant? But what was the affliction? Why the Lord had said unto
him, carry this people in thy bosom as a nursing father bears the sucking
child, unto the Land that he swear unto their fathers. Not I, says Moses, I am
not able to bear all this people, because it is too heavy for me: if thou deal
thus with me, kill me I pray thee out of hand, and let me not see my
Wretchedness, Numb. 11. 11, 12, 13, 14. God gave them to Moses that he might
carry them in his bosom; that is, that he might show gentleness and patience
toward them; but he failed in the work, he could not exercise, because he had
not that sufficiency of patience toward them: But now, it is said of the
person speaking in the Text, That he shall gather his Lambs with his arm, shall
carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead them that are with young, Isa.
40. 10, 11. Intimating, that this was one of the qualifications that God looked
for, and knew was in him, when he gave his Elect to him to save them.

Fourthly, The fathers giving of them to him to save them, declares to us that
he has a Sufficiency of wisdom to wage with all those difficulties that would
attend him in his bringing of his Sons and Daughters unto glory; He has made
him to us to be Wisdom, yea he is called Wisdom it self; and God says
moreover, that he shall deal prudently. And indeed, he that shall take upon him
to be the Savior of the people, had need be Wise, because their adversaries
are subtle above any. Here they have to encounter with the Serpent, who for
his Subtilty outwitted our Father and Mother when their wisdom was at highest
( Genesis 3.) But if we talk of Wisdom, our Jesus is wise, wiser than Solomon,
wiser than all men, wiser than all the Angels; he is even the Wisdom of God.
Christ the Wisdom of God (1 Col. 1.) And hence it is, that he turns sin,
temptation, persecutions, falls, and all things, for good unto this people, (
Romans 8.)

Now these things thus concluded on, do show us also the great, and wonderful
love of the Father, in that he should choose out one every way so well prepared
for the work of man's Salvation. Herein indeed perceive we the love of God.
Huram gathered, that God loved Israel, because he had given them such a King as
Solomon, (2 Chro. 2. 11.) But how much more may we behold the love that God
has bestowed upon us, in that he has given us to his Son, and also given his
Son for us?

All that the Father gives me [ shall come.]

In these last words, there is closely inserted an answer unto the Fathers end
in giving of his Elect to Jesus Christ. The Fathers end was, that they might
come to him, and be Saved by him; and that, says the Son, shall be done: They
shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Here therefore the Lord Jesus positively determines to put forth a
sufficiency of all Grace that shall Effectually perform this promise. They
shall come. That is, he will cause them to come, by infusing of an effectual
blessing into all the means that shall be used to that end. As was said to the
evil Spirit, that was sent to persuade Ahab, to go and fall at Ramah Gilead.
Go, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also; go forth and do so, 1 King. 22.
22. So will Jesus Christ say to the means that shall be used for the bringing
of those to him that the Father has given him. I say, he will bless it
effectually, to his very end it shall persuade them, and shall prevail also.
Else, as I said, the Fathers end would be frustrate. For the Fathers will is,
that of all that he has given him he should lose nothing, but should raise it
up at the last day, in order next unto himself, Christ the first fruits,
afterward those that are his at his Coming (1 Cor. 15) But this cannot be
done, if there should fail to be a work of grace effectually wrought, though
but in any one of them. But this shall not fail to be wrought in them, even in
all that the Father has given him to save; All that the Father has given me,
shall come to me, etc. But to speak more distinctly to the words; They shall
come. Two things I would show you from these words.

First, What it is come to Christ.

Secondly, What force there is in this promise, to make them come to him.

First, I would show you first what it is to come to Christ: This word come,
must be understood spiritually, not carnally; for many came to him carnally, or
bodily, that had no saving advantage by him; multitudes did thus come unto him
in the days of his flesh, yea innumerable companies. There is also at this day
a Formal, customary Coming to his Ordinances, and ways of Worship, which
avails not any thing: I shall not now meddle, for they are not intended in the
Text. The Coming then, intended in the Text, is to be understood of the Coming
of the (...) unto him, even the moving of the heart toward him. I say, the
moving of the heart toward him, from a sound Sense of the absolute want that a
man has of him for his Justification and Salvation.

This Description of Coming to Christ, divides it self into two heads.

First, That coming to Christ, is a moving of the mind toward him.

Secondly, That it is a moving of the mind toward him from a Sound Sense of
the absolute want that a man has of him for his Justification and Salvation.

To speak to the first, That it is a moving of the mind toward him. This is
evident, because coming hither or thither, if it be voluntary, is by an act of
the will; so coming to Christ, is through the inclining of the will. Thy people
shall be willing, Psalm. 110. 3. This willingness of heart, is it, which sets
the mind a moving after, or toward him. The Church expresses this moving of
her mind toward Christ, by the moving of her bowels: My beloved put in his
hand by the hole of the door, and my Bowels were moved for him Song. 5. 4. My
bowels; the passions of my mind and affections; which passions of the
affections, are expressed by the yerning, and sounding of the bowels. The
yerning or passionate working of them, the Sounding of them, or their making an
Noise for him, Genesis 43. 30. 1 King 3. 26. Isa. 16. 11.

This then is the coming to Christ, even a moving toward him with the mind.
And it shall come to pass, that every thing that lives, which moves
whithersoever the water shall come, shall live. Ezekiel. 47. 9.

The water, in this Text, is the Grace of God, in the Doctrine of it: the
living things, are the Children of men to whom this Grace of God, by the Gospel
is preached: now says he, Every living thing which moves whithersoever the
waters shall come, shall live. Now see how this word moves is Expounded by
Christ himself in the Book of the Revelations: The Spirit and the Bride say,
come. And let him that hears, say, come. And let him that is athirst, come.
And whosever will, that is willing, let him take the water of life freely,
Revel. 22. 17.

So that, to move in thy mind and will after Christ, is to be coming to him.
There are many poor souls that are coming to Christ, that yet cannot tell how
to believe it; because they think, that coming to him, is some strange and
wonderful thing: and indeed so it is; but I mean, they overlook the
inclination of their will; the moving of their mind, and the sounding of their
bowels after him: and count these none of this strange and wonderful thing: when
indeed it is a work of greatest wonder in this world, to see a man who was
sometimes dead in sin, possessed of the devil, an enemy to Christ, and to all
things spiritually good. I say, to see this man moving with his mind after the
Lord Jesus Christ, is one of the highest wonders in the world.

Secondly, It is a moving of the mind toward him, from a Sound Sense of the
absolute want that a man has of him for his Justification and Salvation.
Indeed, without this Sense of a lost condition, without him there will be no
moving of the mind toward him: a moving of their mouth there may be, with
their mouth they show much love, Ezekiel. 32. Such a people as this will come, as
the true people comes; that is in show, and outward appearance: and they will
sit before Gods Ministers, as his people Sit before them; and they will hear
his words too, but they will not do them: that is, will not come inwardly with
their minds; for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart ( or
mind) goes after their Covetousness. Now all this is, because they want an
effectual sense of the misery of their state by nature; for not till they have
that, will they in their mind move after him. Therefore, thus it is said
Concerning the true Comers. At that day the great Trumpet shall be blown, and
They shall come which were ready to perish in the Land of Assyria, and the
outcasts of the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in his Holy Mountain
at Jerusalem, (Isa. 27. 13.) They are then you see, the out casts, and those
that are ready to perish, that indeed have their minds Effectually moved to
come to Jesus Christ. This sense of things, was that which made the three
thousand come, that made Saul come, that made the Jailer come, and that indeed
makes all others come, that come Effectually. Acts 2. Chap. 8 and 16.

Of the true coming to Christ, the three Leapers were a famous Semblance, of
whom you read in 2 King. 7. 3, etc. The famine in those days was sore in the
Land, there was no bread for the people; and as for that Sustinence that was,
which was Asses Flesh, and Doves Dung that was only in Samaria; and of these
the Leapers had no share, for they were thrust without the City. Well, now they
sat in the Gate of the City; and hunger was, as I may say, making his last Meal
of them; and being therefore half dead already, what do they think of doing?
why, first they display the dismal colors of death before each others faces,
and then resolve what to do, saying, If we say we will go into the City, then
the famine is in the City, and we shall die there; if we sit sti here, we die
also; now therefore (...), and let us fall into the Host of the Syrians; if
they save us alive, we shall live; if they kill us, we shall but die. Here now
was necessity at work, and this necessity drove them to go thither for life,
whether else they would never have gone for it. Thus it is with them that in
truth come to Jesus Christ: Death is before them, they see it and feel it; he
is feeding upon them, and will eat them quite up, if they come not to Jesus
Christ; and therefore they come even of necessity, being forced thereto by that
Sense they have of their being utterly and everlastingly undone, if they find
not safety in him.

These then are they that will come: indeed these are they that are invited to
come. Come unto me all ye that Labor, and are Heavy Laden, and I will give you
rest, Matt. 11. 28.

Take two or three things to make this more plain, to wit, that coming to
Christ, flows from a sound sense of the absolute need that a Man has of him,
as before.

1. They shall come with Weeping, and with Supplication will I lead them; I
will cause them to walk by the Rivers of Waters in a plain way, wherein they
shall not stumble, Jer. 31. 9. Mind it, they come with Weeping and
Supplication; they come with Prayers, and Tears. Now Prayers, and Tears, are
the effects of a right Sense of the need of Mercy. Thus a senseless Sinner
cannot Come, he cannot Pray, he cannot Cry, he cannot come sensible of what he
sees not, nor feels. In those Days, and at that time, the Children of Israel
shall come; they and the Children of Judah together, going and weeping: they
shall seek the Lord their God: they shall ask the way to Zion with their Faces
thitherward, saying, come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten, Jer. 50. 4, 5.

Secondly, This coming to Christ, it is called a running to him, as flying to
him; a flying from Wrath to come. By all which Terms, is set forth the sense
of the man that comes, to wit, That he is affected with the sense of his sin,
and the Death due thereto; that he is sensible, that the avenger of Blood
pursues him, and that therefore he is cut off, if he makes not speed to the Son
of God for Life; Mat. 3. 7. Psalm. 143. 9. Flying is the last work of a man in
danger, all that are in danger do not Fly* No, not all that see themselves in
danger: flying is the last work of a man in danger: all that hear of danger
will will not fly. Men will consider if there be no other way of escape, before
they Fly. Therefore, as I said, flying is the last thing. When all Refuge
fails, and a man is made to see that there is nothing left him but Sin Death
and Damnation, unless he flies to Christ for Life: then he flies, and not till
then.

Thirdly, That the true coming is, from a sense of an absolute need of Jesus
Christ to save, etc. is evident by the Outcry that is made by them that come,
even as they are coming to him; Lord save or I perish; Men and Brethren what
shall we do; Sirs what must I do to be saved, and the like. This Language does
sufficiently discover that the truly coming Souls, are Souls sensible of their
need of Salvation by Jesus Christ; and moreover, that there is nothing else
that can help them but Christ.

Fourthly, It is yet further evident, by these few things that follow, it is
said that such are pricked in their Hearts, that is, with the sentence of Death
by the Law, and the least prick in the Heart kills a Man, Acts 2. 37. such are
said, as I said before, to Weep, to Tremble, and to be astonished in themselves
at the evident and unavoidable danger that attends them, unless they fly to
Jesus Christ, Acts 9 chap. 16.

Fifthly, Coming to Christ is attended with an honest, and sincere forsaking of
all for him. If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and
Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple; And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 26, 27.

By these, and the like expressions elsewhere, Christ describes the true
Commer, or the man that indeed is coming to him; he is one that casts all
behind his Back; he leaves all he forsakes all, he hates all things that
would stand in his way to hinder his coming to Jesus Christ. There are a great
many pretended Comers to Jesus Christ in the World. And they are much like to
the man that you read of in ( Matt. 21. 30.) that said at his Fathers bidding,
I go Sir, and went not. I say, there are a great many such Comers to Jesus
Christ; they say, when Christ calls by his Gospel, I come Sir, but still they
abide by their Pleasures, and carnal Delights. They come not at all, only they
give him a Courtly Complement; but he takes notice of it, and will not let it
pass for any more than a Lie. He said, I go Sir, and went not, he dissembled
and lied. Take heed of this, you that flatter your selves with your own
deceivings words will not do with Jesus Christ: coming is coming, and nothing
else will go for coming with him.

Before I spoke to the other Head, I shall answer some Objections that usually
lie in the way of those that in Truth are coming to Jesus Christ.

Objection I.
Though I cannot deny, but my mind runs after Christ, and that too as being
moved thereto from a sight, and consideration of my lost Condition (For I see
without him I perish): yet I fear my ends are not right in coming to him.

Quest. Why? what is thine end, in coming to Jesus Christ?

Answer, My end, is, that I might have Life, and be saved by Jesus Christ.

This is thy Objection; well, let me tell thee, that to come to Christ for
Life, and to be saved: though at prethou have no other end, is a lawful, and
good coming to Jesus Christ. This is evident, because Christ propounds Life,
as the only Argument to prevail with sinners to come to him, and also blames
them because they come not to him for Life. And ye will not Come to me that ye
might have Life, Joh. 5. Besides, there are many other Scriptures whereby he
allureth Sinners to come to him* in which he propounds nothing to them but
their safety. As, He that believes in him, shall not perish; he that
believes, is passed from Death to Life. He that believes, shall be Saved. He
that believes on him is not condemned. And believing, and coming, are all one.
So that you see, to Come to Christ for Life, is a lawful coming, and good.

And let me add over and above, that for a man to come to Christ for Life,
though he comes to him for nothing else but Life: he gives much honor to him.

First, He Honors the Word of Christ, and consents to the Truth of it, and
that in these two general Heads.

1. He Consents to the Truth of all those sayings, that Testifies that Sin
is most abominable in it Self, dishonorable to God, and damnable to the Soul
of Man, Jer. 44. 4. Romans 2. 23. Chap. 6. 23. 2 These. 2. 12.

2. In that he believes, as the Word has said, that there is in the Worlds
best things, Righteousness and all, Nothing but Death and Damnation, Romans 7.
24, 25. Chap. 8. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8.

Secondly, He Honors Christ's Person, in that he believes, that there is
Life in Him, and that he is able to Save him from Death, Hell, the Devil, and
Damnation, Heb. 7. 24, 25.

Thirdly, He Honoreth him, in that he believes that he is Authorized of the
Father to give Life to those that come to him for it, ( Joh. 5. 11, 12. Chap.
17. 1, 2, 3.)

Fourthly, He Honors the Priesthood of Jesus Christ.

1. In that he believes, that he alone has made Atonement for Sin, Romans 5.

2. In that he believes, that Christ has more Power to Save from Sin by the
Sacrifice that he has Offered for it* than has all Law, Devils, Death, or Sin
to Condemn, Acts 13. 38. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Revel. 1. 17, 18.

Thirdly, In that he believes that Christ, according to his office, will be
most faithful, and merciful in the discharge of his office, 1 John 2. 1, 2,
3. Heb. 2. 17, 18.

Fourthly, Further, he that comes to Jesus Christ for life, takes part with
him against Sin, and against all the ragged and imperfect righteousness of the
world; yea, and against false Christ's, and damnable errors that set themselves
against the worthiness of his merits and sufficiency.

Fifthly, Therefore, as Noah, at Gods command, thou preparest this Ark, for the
saving of thy self, by the which also thou condemnest the world, and art become
Heir of the righteousness which is by faith, ( Heb. 11. 7.) Wherefore coming
sinner, be content; he that comes to Jesus Christ, believes too that he his
willing to show mercy to, and to have Compassion upon him (though unworthy)
that comes to him for life. And therefore thy Soul lies not only under a
special Invitation to come, but under a Promise too of being accepted and
forgiven Mat 11. 28.

All these particular parts, and qualities of faith, are in that Soul that
comes to Jesus Christ for Life, as is evident to any indifferent Judgment.

For, will he that Believes not the Testimony of Christ concerning the
baseness of Sin, and the insufficiency of the Righteousness of the World, come
to Christ for Life? No.

He that believes not this Testimony of the word, comes not: He that believes
that there is Life any where else, comes not: He that questions whether the
Father has given Christ power to forgive, comes not: He that thinks that
there is more in Sin, in the Law, in Death, and the Devil, to Destroy, than
there is in Christ to Save, comes not: He also that questions his faithful
Management of his Office of Priesthood for the salvation of sinners, comes not.

Thou then that art indeed the comeing Sinner, believe all this. True,
perhaps thou do not believe with that full Assurance: nor have thou leisure
to take Notice of thy Faith as to these Distinct acts of it: But yet all this
Faith is in him that comes to Christ for Life. And the Faith that thus
Works, is the Faith of the best and purest kind; because this Man comes alone
as a Sinner, and as seeing that Life is, and is to be had, only in Jesus Christ.

Before I conclude my Answer to this Objection, take into thy consideration
these two things.

First, That the Cities of Refuge, were Erected for their sakes that were dead
in Law, and that yet would live by grace; even for those that were to fly
thither for life from the avenger of blood that pursued after them. And it is
worth your Noting, that those that were upon their flight thither, are in a
peculiar manner called the people of God. Cast ye up, Cast ye up, says God,
prepare ye the way, take up the stumbling blocks out of the Way of My people,
Isa. 57. 14. This is meant of preparing the way to the City of refuge, that the
slayers might escape thither, and live; which slayers are here by way of
speciality called the people of God: even those of them that escaped thither
for life.

Secondly, Consider that of Ahab, when Benhadad sent to him for life, saying,
Thus says thy Son Benhadad, I pray thee let me live. Though Benhadad had
sought the Crown Kingdom, yea and also the life of Ahab; yet how effectually
does Benhadad prevail with him. Is Benhadad yet alive? said Ahab, he is my
brother; yea, go, ye, bring him to me: so he made him ride in his Chariot 1
King. 20 chap.

Coming Sinner what think thou? if Jesus Christ, had as little Goodness in
him as Ahab, he might grant an humble Benhadad life; thou neither beggest of
him his Crown or Dignity: Life, eternal life will serve thy turn: how much more
then shall thou have it, since thou have to deal with him who is goodness and
mercy it self; yea since thou art also called upon, yea greatly encourraged by
a promise of life, to come to him for Life. Read also these Scriptures, Numb.
35. 11, 14, 15. Josh. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 6. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Objection 2.
When, I say, I only seek my self, I mean, I do not find that I do design Gods
Glory in mine own Salvation by Christ, and that makes me fear, I do not come
aright.

Answer, Where does Christ Jesus require such a Qualification, of those that
are coming to him for Life? come thou for Life, and trouble not thy head with
such Objections against thy Self, and let God and Christ alone to Glorify
themselves in the Salvation of such a worm as thou art. The Father says to the
Son, Thou art my Servant, O Israel, in whom I will be Gloryfied. God,
propounds Life to Sinners, as the argument to prevail with them to come to
him for Life; and Christ says plainly, I am come, that ye might have Life,
John 10. 10. He has no need of thy designs, though thou have need of his.
Eternal Life, pardon of Sin, and Deliverance from Wrath to come, Christ
propounds to thee, and these be the things that thou have need of; besides, God
will be gracious, and merciful to worthless, undeserving wretches; come then as
such an one. Therefore lay no stumbling blocks in thy way to him, but come to
him for life, and live, Joh. 5. 34. Chap. 10. 10. Chap. 3. 36. Mat. 1. 21.
Prove. 8. 36, 37. 1 These. 1. 10. Joh. 11. 25, 26.

The Jayler was only for knowing at first, what he should do to be Saved: But
Paul did not so much as once ask him, what is your End, in this Question; do
you design the Glory of of God in the Salvation of your Soul? He had more wit;
he knew that such Questions as these would have bin but Fools bables about,
instead of a sufficient salve, to so weighty a Question, as this was. Wherefore
since this poor wretch lacked Salvation by Christ; I mean, to be saved from
Hell and Death, which he knew (now) was due to him for the sins that he had
committed: Paul bids him, like a poor condemned sinner as he was, to proceed
still in this his way of self-seeking: saying, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ
and thou shall be saved. Acts 16. 30, 31, 32.

I know, that afterward, thou will desire to glorify Christ, by walking in
the way of his precepts; but at present thou want life; the avenger of blood
is behind thee, and the devil like a Lion is roaring against thee: well, come
now, and obtain life from these; and when thou have obtained some comfortable
persuasion that thou art made partaker of life by Christ, then, and not tell
then, thou will say, Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless
his holy name. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy
life from destruction, and Crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender
mercies. Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Objection. 3.
But I cannot believe that I come to Christ aright, because, sometimes, I am
apt to question his very Being, and Office to save.

Thus to do is horrible: but may thou not Judge amiss in this matters?

How can I Judge amiss, when I Judge as I feel? Poor Soul! thou may Judge
amiss for all that. Why, I think that these questionings come from my Heart.

Answ. Let me answer. That which comes from thy heart, comes from thy will and
affections, from thy understanding, Judgment and Conscience. For these must
acquiess in thy questioning, if thy questioning be with thy heart. And how
say thou, (for to name no more) do thou with thy Affection and Conscience
thus question?

Answ. No, my Conscience trembles when such thoughts come in to my mind, and my
affections are otherwise inclined.

Then I conclude, that these things are either suddenly injected by the devil,
or else are the fruits of that body of sin and death that yet dwells in thee, or
perhaps from both together.

If they come wholly from the devil, as they seem, because thy Conscience and
affections are against them; or if they come from that body of death, that is
in thee (and be not thou curious in enquiring from whether of them they come,
the safest way is to lay enough at thy own door) nothing of this should hinder
thy coming, nor make thee conclude thou come not aright.

And before I leave thee, let me a little query with thee farther about this
matter.

First, Do thou like these wicked blasphemies?

Answ. No, no: their presence and working kills me.

Secondly, Do thou mourn for them, pray against them, and hate thy self
because of them?

Answ. Yes, yes: but that which afflicts me, is, I do not prevail against them.

Thirdly, Do thou sincerely choose, (might thou have thy choice) that thy
heart might be affected and taken with the things that are best, most heavenly,
and holy?

Answ. With all my heart, and death the next hour, (if it were Gods will)
rather than thus to sin against him.

Well then, thy not liking of them, thy mourning for them, thy praying against
them, and thy loathing of thy self because of them, with thy sincere choosing of
those thoughts for thy delectation that are heavenly, and holy: clearly
declares that these things are not countenanced either with thy Will,
Affections, Understanding, Judgment or Conscience; and so, that thy heart is
not in them, but that rather they come immediately from the devil* or arise from
the body of death that is in thy flesh: of which thou ought thus to Say, Now
then, it is no more I that does it, but sin that dwells in me. Rom 7. 16, 17.

I will give thee a pertinent instance. In Deuteronomy. 22. Thou may read of a
betrothed damsel, one betrothed to her beloved; one that has given him her
heart and mouth, as thou have given thy self to Christ; yet she was met with as
she walked in the field, by one that forced her, because he was stronger than
she. Well, what judgment now does God the righteous judge pass upon the damsel
for this? The man only, that lay with her, says God, shall die; but unto the
damsel thou shall do nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death.
For as when a man rises against his Neighbor, and slays him, even so is this
matter: he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there
was none to save her. Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26, 27.

Thou art this damsel, the man that forces thee with these blasphemous
thoughts, is the devil; and he lights upon thee in a fit place, even in the
field, as thou art wandering after Jesus Christ; but thou cryest out, and by
thy cry, did show that thou abhorrest such wicked leudness. Well, the Judge
of all the earth will do right, he will not lay the Sin at thy door, but at his
that offered the violence: and for thy comfort, take this into consideration
also, That he came to heal them that are oppressed with the devil, Acts 10. 38.

Objection. 4.
But says another, I am so heartless, so slow, and, as I think, so indifferent
in my coming, that, to speak truth, I know not whether my kind of coming, ought
to be called a coming to Christ.

Answ. You know that I told you at first, that coming to Christ, is a moving of
the heart, and affections toward him.

But, says the Soul, my dullness, and indifferency in all holy Duties,
demonstrate my heartlesness in coming: and to come, and not with the heart,
signifies nothing at all.

Answ. The moving of the heart after Christ, is not to be discerned (at all
times) by thy sensible, affectionate performing of duties; but rather by those
secret groanings, and complaints which thy soul makes to God against that sloth
that attends thee in Duties.

Secondly, But grant it to be even as thou say it is, that thou come so
slowly, etc. yet since Christ bids them come, that comes not at all; surely
they may be accepted that come, though attended with those infirmities, which
thou at present groanest under. He says, And him that comes: he says not, if
they come sensibly so fast: But, And him that comes to me I will in no wise
cast out. He says also in the Eighth of the Proverbs, As for him that wants
understanding; that is, an heart, for ofttimes the understanding is taken for
the heart. Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have Mingled.

Thirdly, Thou may be vehement in thy spirit, in coming to Jesus Christ, and
yet be plagued with sensible sloth. So was the Church, when she cried, Draw me,
we will run after thee. And Paul, when he said, When I would do good, evil is
present with me (Song 1. 4. Romans 7.) The works, strugglings and oppositions of
the Flesh, are more manifest, than are the works of the Spirit in our hearts,
and so are sooner felt, than they. What then, let us not be discouraged at the
sight, and feeling of our own infirmities, but run the faster to Jesus Christ
for Salvation.

Fourthly, Get thy heart warmed with the sweet promise of Christ's acceptance,
of the coming sinner, and that will make thee make more have unto him.
Discouraging thoughts, they are like unto cold weather, they benumb the senses,
and make us go ungainly about our business; but the sweet and warm gleads of
the promise, are like the comfortable beams of the Sun, which liven and
refresh. You see how little the Be and Fly do play in the Air in Winter; why,
the cold hinders them from doing of it; but when the Wind and Sun is warm, who
so busy as they?

Fifthly, But again, he that comes to Christ, flies for his life: now there is
no man that Flies for his life, that thinks he speeds fast enough on his
Journey; no, could he, he would willingly take a mile at a step. Oh I come not
fast enough, say thou: Oh my sloth and heartlesness, say thou. O that I
had wings like a dove, for then would I flee away, and be at rest -- I would
hasten mine escape from the windy storm and tempest, Psalm. 55. 6, 8.

Poor coming Soul, thou art like the man that would ride full gallop, whose
horse will hardly trot: now the desire of his mind, is not to be judged of, by
the slow pace of the dull jade he rides on; but by the hitching and kicking and
Spurring, as he sits on his back. Thy flesh is like this dull Jade, it will not
Gallop, after Christ. It will be backward, though thy soul and heaven lies at
stake; but be of good comfort, Christ judges not according to the fierceness
of outward motion ( Mark 10. 17.) but according to the sincerity of the heart,
and inward parts. Joh. 1. 47. Psalm. 51. 6. Mat. 26. 41.

Sixthly, Ziba in appearance came to David much faster than did Mephibosheth:
but yet his heart was not so upright in him to David as was his. It Is true,
Mephibosheth had a Check from David, Why wentest thou not with me Mephibosheth,
said he; but when David come to Remember that Mephibosheth was Lame (for that
was his plea) Thy Servant is Lame, 2 Samuel 19. he was content, and concluded he
would have come after him faster than he did: And Mephibosheth appealed to
David, who was in those days as an Angel of God to know all things that are
done in the earth, if he did not believe that the reason of his backwardness
lay in his Lameness, not his mind. Why poor coming sinner, thou can not come
to Christ with that outward fierceness of Carrear, as many others do; but does
the reason of thy backwardness lie in thy mind, and will, or in the
sluggishness of the flesh? can thou say sincerely, The Spirit truly is
willing, but the flesh is weak? Mat. 26. 41. yea, can thou appeal to the Lord
Jesus, who knows perfectly the very inmost thought of thy heart; that this is
true, then take this for thy comfort, he has said, I will assemble her that
halteth, I will make her that halteth a remnant, and I will save her that
halteth (Mich. 4. 6, 7. Zeph. 3. 19.) what can thou have more from the sweet
lips of the Son of God? But.

Seventhly, I read of some that are to follow Christ in Chains; I say, to come
after him in Chains, Thus says the Lord, the labor of Egypt, and the
Merchandise of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto
thee, and they shall be thine: They shall come after thee; in Chains shall
they come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make
Supplication unto thee; saying, surely there is none else to save. Isa. 45, 14.
Surely they that come after Christ in Chains, come to him in great difficulty,
because their steps, by their chains, are straightened.

And what Chains so heavy, as those that discourage thee; thy Chain which is
made up of guilt and filth is heavy; it is a wretched bond about thy neck, by
which thy strength does fail ( Lam. 1. 14. chap. 3. 17.) But come, though thou
come in chains, it is glory to Christ that a sinner come after him in
Chains. The blind man, though called, surely could not come apace to Jesus
Christ, but Christ could stand still, and stay for him. True, he rides upon
the Wings of the Wind: But yet he is long Suffering, and his long Suffering is
Salvation to him that comes to him. Mark. 10. 49. 2 Pet 3. 9.

Eighthly, Hadest thou seen those that came to the Lord Jesus in the days of
his flesh, how slowly, how hobblingly they come to him by reason of their
infirmities; and also how friendly, and kindly, and graciously he received
them, and gave them the desire of their hearts, thou would not, as thou
do, make such Objections against thy self, in thy coming to Jesus Christ.

Objection 5.
But (says another) I fear I come too late, I doubt I have stayed too long, I
am afraid the Door is Shut.

Answ. Thou can never come too late to Jesus Christ, if Thou do come. This
is manifest, by two instances.

First, By the Man that came to him at the Eleventh Hour. This Man was Idle all
the day long: He had a whole Gospel day to come in, and he played it all away,
save only the last hour thereof. But at last, at the Eleventh Hour he came, and
goes into the Vineyard to Work with the rest of the Laborers, that had born
the Burden, and heat of the day. Well, but how was he received of the Lord of
the Vineyard? Why, when pay - day came, he had even as much as the rest, yea
had his money first. True, the others Murmured at him, but what did the Lord
Jesus Answer them? Is thine Eye Evil because mine is Good? I will give to this
last even as unto thee, Mat. 20.

Secondly, The other instance is, The Thief upon the Cross: He came late also,
even as at an Hour before his Death; yea, he stayed from Jesus Christ, as long
as he had liberty to be a Theif, and longer too; for could he have deluded the
Judge, and by lying words, have escaped his Just Condemnation; for ought I
know, he had not come as yet, to his Savior: but being Convicted, and
Condemned to Die; yea, fastened to the Cross, that he might Die like a Rogue, as
he was in his Life; behold the Lord Jesus, when this wicked one, even now,
desires Mercy at his Hands, tells him, and that without the least reflection
upon him, for his former Misspent Life, To Day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

Let no Man turn this Grace of God into Wantonness; my design is now to
encourage the coming Soul.

Object. But is not the Door of Mercy Shut against some before they Die?

Answ. Yes. And God forbids that Prayers should be made to him for them, Jer.
7. 16. Jud. 22.

Quest. Then, why may not I doubt that I may be one of these?

Answ. By no means, if thou art coming to Jesus Christ; because when God Shuts
the Door upon Men, he gives them no heart, to come to Jesus Christ. None comes,
but those to whom it is given of the Father: But thou come, therefore it is
given to thee of the Father.

But sure therefore, if the Father has given thee an Heart to come to Jesus
Christ, the Gate of Mercy yet stands Open to thee: For it stands not with the
Wisdom of God, To give strength to come to the Birth, and yet to Shut up the
Womb, Isa. 66. 9. to give grace to thee to come to Jesus Christ, and yet Shut
up the Door of his Mercy upon thee. Incline your Ear, says he, come unto me,
hear, and your Souls shall Live; And I will make an Everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3.

Object. But it is said that some knocked when the Door was Shut.

Answ. Yes, But the Texts in which these Knockers are Mentioned, are to be
referred unto the day of Judgment, and not to the coming of the Sinner to
Christ in this Life. (See the Texts, Mat. 25. 11. Luke 13. 24, 25.)

These therefore concern thee nothing at all; that art coming to Jesus Christ,
thou art coming Now! Now is the acceptable time, behold now is the day of
Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. now God is upon the Mercy-Seat, now Christ Jesus Sits
by continually pleading the Virtue of his Blood for Sinners: and now, even as
long as this World lasts, this word of the Text shall still be free, and fully
fulfilled. And him that comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out.

Sinner! the greater Sinner thou art, the greater need of Mercy thou have, and
the more will Christ be gloryfied thereby: come then, come and try, come taste,
and see how good the Lord is to an Undeserving Worthless Sinner.

Objection 6.
But (says another) I am fallen since I began to come to Christ, therefore I
fear I did not come aright, and so - consequently that Christ will not receive
me.

Answ. Falls are dangerous, for they dishonor Christ, wound the conscience,
and cause the Enemies of God to speak reproachfully. But it is no good
argument, I am fallen, therefore I was not coming aright to Jesus Christ. If
David, and Solomon, and Peter had thus objected against themselves, they had
added to their griefs, and yet they had at least, as much cause to do it, as
thou. A Man whose steps are ordered by the Lord, and whose goings the Lord
delights in, may yet be over-taken with a Temptation, that may cause him to
fall, Psalm. 37. 23, 24. Did not Aaron fall, yea Moses himself? what shall we
say of Hezekiah, and Jehosaphat? There are therefore falls, and falls; falls
pardonable, and falls unpardonable; falls unpardonable are falls against Light,
from the Faith to the despising of, and trampling upon Jesus Christ, and his
blessed undertakings, ( Heb. ^. 2, 3, 4, 5. Chap. 10. 28, 29.) Now as for such,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sin: Indeed, they have no heart, no mind,
no desire to come to Jesus Christ for life, therefore they must perish; nay,
says the Holy Ghost, it is impossible that they should be renewed again unto
repentance. Therefore, these God has no Compassion for, neither ought we; but
for other falls, though they be dreadful (and God will Chastise his people for
them) they do not prove thee a graceless man, one not Coming to Jesus Christ
for life.

It is said of the Child in the Gospel, That while he was yet a-coming, the
Devil threw him down, and tore him, Luke 9. 42.

Dejected Sinner, is it a wonder that thou have caught a fall in thy Coming to
Jesus Christ! Is it not rather to be wondered at, that thou have not caught
before this, a thousand times a thousand falls! Considering,

First, What fools we are by nature.

Secondly, What weaknesses are in us.

Thirdly, What mighty powers, the fallen Angels, our implacable Enemies, are.

Fourthly, Considering also how often the Coming-man is be-nighted in his
Journey, and also what stumbling blocks do lie in his way.

Fifthly, Also his familiers (that were so before) now watch for his haulting,
and seek by what means they may, to cause him to fall by the hand of their
strong ones.

What then? must we, because of these Temptations, incline to fall? No. Must we
not fear falls? yes. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.
Yet let him not be utterly cast down. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and
raises up all those that are bowed down. Make not light of falls: yet have
thou fallen? ye have, said Samuel, done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside
from following the Lord, but serve him with a perfect heart, and turn not
aside, for the Lord will not forsake his people (and he counts the coming
sinner one of them) because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people, 1 Samuel 12. 20, 21, 22.

Shall come to me. Now we come to show, what force there is in this Promise to
make them come to him. All that the father gives me shall come to me.

I will Speak to this promise,

First. In general.

Secondly, In particular.

In general. This word [ shall] is confined to these [all] that are given to
Christ. All that the father gives me, shall come to me. Hence I conclude,

First, That coming to Jesus Christ aright, is an effect of their being (of
God) given to Christ before. Mark, they shall come! Who? those that are given;
they come then, because they were given. Thine they were, and thou gave them
me. Now this is indeed a Singular comfort to them that are coming in truth to
Christ. Thus then may the coming Soul reason with himself as he comes. Am I
coming indeed to Jesus Christ? this coming of mine is not to be attributed to
me, or my goodness, but to the grace and gift of God to Christ: God gave first
my Person to him, and therefore has now given me a heart to come to him.

Secondly, This word, shall come, makes thy coming, not only the fruit of the
gift of the Father, but also of the purpose of the Son; for these words are a
divine purpose, they show us the Heavenly determination of the Son. The Father
has given them to me, and they shall, yea, they shall come to me. Christ is as
full in his resolution to save those given to him, as is the Father in the
giving of them.

Thirdly, These words, shall come, make thy coming to be also the effect of an
absolute Promise. Coming sinner, thou art concluded in a Promise; thy coming is
the fruit of the faithfulness of the Promise, of the faithfulness of an
absolute Promise. 'Twas this promise, by the virtue of which thou at first
received'st strength to come: And this is the Promise, by the virtue of which
thou shall be effectually brought to him. It was said to Abraham, At this time,
will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son: this Son was Isaac. Mark, Sarah shall
have a Son; There is the promise: and Sarah had a Son, there was the
fullfilling of the promise. And therefore was Isaac called the child of the
promise, Genesis 17. 19. Chap. 18. 10. Romans 9. 9.

Sarah shall have a Son, but how if Sarah be past age? why still the promise
continues, to say, Sarah shall have a Son. But Abraham's body is now dead; why,
the promise is still the same; Sarah shall have a Son. Thus you see what virtue
there is in an absolute promise. It carries enough in its own bowels to
accomplish the thing promised, whether there be means or no in us to effect it:
wherefore this promise, in the Text, being an absolute promise; by virtue of
it, not by virtue of our selves, or our own enducements, do we come to Jesus
Christ: for so are the words of the Text. All that the Father gives me shall
come to me.

Therefore is every sincere commer to Jesus Christ, called also a Child of the
promise. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the Children of the promise, Sal.
4. 28. That is, we are the Children that God has promised to Jesus Christ, and
given to him; yea, the Children that Jesus Christ has promised shall come to
him. All that the Father gives me, shall come.

Fourthly, This word [ shall-come] engages Christ to Communicate all manner of
Grace to those thus given him, to make them effectually to come to him. They
shall come; that is, not if they will, but if grace, all grace, if power,
wisdom, a new heart and the holy spirit, and all Joining together, can make
them come. I say, this word [ shall-come] being absolute, has no dependence
upon our will, or power, or goodness; but it ingageth for us even God himself,
Christ himself, the Spirit himself. When God had made that Absolute promise to
Abraham, that Sarah should have a Son, Abraham did not at all look at any
qualification in himself, because the promise looked at none, but as God had by
the promise absolutely promised him a Son; so he considered not his own body
now dead, nor yet the barrenness of Sarah's Womb. He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God,
being fully persuaded that what He had promised, He was able to perform, Romans
4. He had promised, and had promised absolutely, Sarah shall have a Son.
Therefore Abraham looks that He, to wit, God must fulfill the condition of it.
Neither is this Expectation of Abraham, disapproved by the Holy Ghost, but
accounted good and laudable, it being that by which he gave Glory to God. The
Father also has given to Christ, a certain number of Souls for him to save,
and he himself has said, They shall come to him. Let the Church of God then
live in a Joyful Expectation of the utmost accomplishment of this promise, for
assuredly it shall be fulfilled, and not one thousandth part of a Tittle
thereof shall fail.

And now, before I go any further, I will more particularly enquire into the
nature of an Absolute Promise.

First, We call that an Absolute promise, that is made without any condition;
or more fully thus. That is an absolute promise of God, or of Christ, which
makes over to this or that man, any Saving Spiritual blessing, without a
condition to be done on our part for the obtaining thereof.

Secondly, An Absolute promise therefore is, as we say, without if, or and;
that is, it requires nothing of us, that it self might be accomplished. It
says not, They shall if they will; but they shall: not they shall, if they use
the means; but they shall. You may say, that a will, and the use of the means,
is supposed, though not expressed. But I answer; No, by no means; that is, as a
condition of this promise: If they be at all included in the promise, they are
included there as the fruit of the Absolute promise, not as if it expected the
qualification to arise from us. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power* Psalm. 110. 3. That is another absolute promise: But does that Promise
suppose a willingness in us, as a condition of Gods making of us willing? they
shall be willing, if they are willing; or they shall be willing, if they will
be willing. This is ridiculous, there is nothing of this supposed. The promise
is absolute, as to us; all that it ingageth for its one accomplishment, is the
mighty power of Christ.

The difference therefore betwixt the absolute, and the conditional promise, is
this.

First, They differ in their terms. The absolute promises say, I will, and you
shall: the other, I will, if you will; or do this, and thou shall live; Jer.
31. 31, 32, 33. Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Heb. 8. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. Jer. 4. 1. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. Mat. 19. 21.

Secondly, They differ in their way of Communicating of good things to men; the
absolute ones Communicate things freely, only of Grace; the other, if there be
that qualification in us, that the promise calls for, not else.

Thirdly, The absolute promises therefore engage God, the other engage us: I
mean God only, us only.

Fourthly, Absolute promises must be fulfilled; Conditional may, or may not be
fulfilled. The absolute ones must be fulfilled, because of the faithfulness of
God; the other may not, because of the unfaithfulness of men.

Fifthly, Absolute promises have therefore a sufficiency in themselves to bring
about their own fulfilling; the Conditional have not so. The absolute promise,
is therefore a big-bellied promise, because it has in it self a fullness of all
desired things for us; and will, when the time of that promise is come, yield
to us mortals, that which will verily save us: yea, and make us capable of
answering of the demands, of the promise that is conditional. Wherefore, though
there be a real, yea an eternal difference in these things (with others)
betwixt the conditional and absolute promise: yet again in other respects there
is a blessed Harmony betwixt them, as may be seen in these particulars.

First, The Conditional promise calls for Repentance, and the absolute promise
gives it, Acts 5. 30, 31.

Secondly, The Conditional promise calls for faith, the absolute promise gives
it, Zeph 3. 12. Romans 15. 12.

Thirdly, The Conditional promise calls for a new heart, the absolute promise
gives it, Ezekiel. 36.

Fourthly, The Conditional promise calls for Holy Obedience, the absolute
promise gives, or causes it, Ezekiel. 36. 27.

And as they Harmoniously agree in this; so again the Conditional promise
blesses the man, who by the absolute promise is endued with its fruit: As for
instance,

First, The absolute promise makes men upright, and then the Conditional
follows saying, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of
the Lord, Psalm. 119. 1.

Secondly, The absolute promise gives to this man, the fear of the Lord; and
then the Conditional follows saying, Blessed is every one that fears the
Lord, Psalm. 128. 1.

Thirdly, The absolute promise gives says, and then this Conditional follows
saying, Blessed is she that believes, Zeph. 3. 12. Luke 1. 45.

Fourthly, The Absolute promise brings free forgiveness of Sins; and then says
the Conditional, Blessed are they, whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, Romans 4. 7, 8.

Fifthly, The Absolute promise says, that Gods elect shall hold out to the end;
then the Conditional follows with his blessing, He that shall endure to the
end, the same shall be saved, 1 Pet 1. 4, 5, 6. Mat. 24.

Thus do the promises gloriously serve one another, and us, in this their
harmonious agreement.

Now the promise under consideration, is an absolute promise; All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me.

This promise therefore is a big-bellied promise, and has in it self all those
things to bestow upon us, that the conditional calls for at our hands. They
shall come! Shall they come? yes, They shall come. But how if they want those
things, those Graces, Power and Heart, without which they cannot come? Why,
Shall come answers all this, and all things else that may in this manner be
objected. And here I will take the liberty a little to amplify things.

Object. But they are dead, dead in Trespasses and Sins, how shall they then
come?

Answ. Why? Shall-come, can raise them from this Death. The hour is coming, and
now is, That the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear, shall Live. Thus therefore is this impediment, by shall-come, swallowed
up, or quite removed out of the way.

Object. 2. But they are Satan's Captives, he takes them Captive at his Will,
and he is stronger than they; How then can they come?

Answ. Why? Shall-come, has also provided an help for this. Satan had bound
that Daughter of Abraham so, that she could by no means lift up her self; but
yet, shall-come, set her free in Body and Soul both. Christ will have them
turned from the Power of Satan to God. But what! Must it be, if they turn
themselves, or do something to Merit of him to turn them! No, he will do it
freely of his own good Will. Alas! Man whose Soul is possessed by the Devil, is
turned whither soever That Governor lists; is taken Captive by him,
notwithstanding his natural Powers, at his Will; but what will he do? will he
hold him, when shall-come puts forth it self (will he then let him) for comeing
to Jesus Christ? No: that cannot be, his Power is but the Power of a fallen
Angel; but shall-come, is the Word of God: therefore shall-come must be
fulfilled, And the Gates of Hell Shall not prevail against it.

There was Seven Devils in Mary Magdalen, too many for her to get from under
the Power of; but when the time was come, that shall-come was to be fulfilled
upon her, they give place, fly from her, and she comes [indeed] to Jesus
Christ. All that the Father gives me shall come to me.

The Man that was possessed with a Legien (Mark 5.) was too much, by them,
captivated, for him by humane force; yea, had he had (to boot) all the men
under Heaven to help him, had he that said, he shall-come, withheld his mighty
power: but when this promise was to be fulfilled upon him, then he comes, nor
could all their power hinder his coming. It was also this shall-come, that
preserved him from death, when by these evil spirits he was hurled hither and
thither; and 'twas by the virtue of shall-come, that at last he was set at
liberty from them, and enabled indeed to come to Christ. All that the father
gives me shall come to me.

Object. 3. They shall (you say) but how if they will not! man cannot come
without his will: but if he will not, he will not; and if so, then what can
shallcome, do?

Answ. True there are some men say, we are Lords, we will come no more unto
thee, Jer. 2. 31. But as God says in another case (if they are Concerned in
shall-come to me) They shall know whose word shall stand, mine or theirs, Jer.
44. 28. Here then is the case, we must now see who will be the liar, he that
says, I will not, or he that says, he shall come to me. You shall come, says
God. I will not come says the sinner. Now as sure as he is concerned in this
shall-come, God will make that man eat his own words: for I will not, is but
the unadvised Conclusion of a Crazy-headed sinner: but shall-come, was spoken
by him that is of power to perform his word. Son, go work to day in my
vineyard, said the Father: but he answered and said, I will not. What now? Will
he be able to stand to his refusal, will he pursue his desperate denial! No: He
afterward repented, and went. But how came he by that repentance? Why it was
wrapped up, for him, in the absolute promise; and therefore not withstanding he
said, I will not, he afterward repented and went. By this parable, Jesus
Christ sets forth the obstinacy of the sinners of the world, as touching their
coming to him; they will not come, though threatened, yea though life be offered
them upon condition of coming.

But now when, shall-come, the absolute promise of God, comes to be fulfilled
upon them, then they come; because by that promise is provided against the
rebellion of their will; Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power,
Psalm. 110. 3.

He that had seen Paul in the midst of his outrage against Christ, his Gospel,
and people: would hardly have thought that he would ever have been a follower
of Jesus Christ, specially since he went not against his Conscience in his
persecuting of them. He thought verily that he ought to do what he did. But we
may see, what shall-come can do, when it comes to be fulfilled upon the Soul of
a rebellious sinner he was a Chosen vessel, given by the Father to the Son; and
now the time being come, that shall-come, was to take him in hand, behold he is
over-mastered, astonished, and with trembling, and reverence, in a Moment
becomes willing to be obedient to the Heavenly call, Acts 9.

And were not they far gone (that you read of in Acts the second) who had their
hands and hearts in the Murder of the Son of God; and to show their
resolvedness never to repent of that horrid fact, said, His Blood be on us and
our Children? But must their obstinacy rule, must they be bound to their own
ruin by the rebellion of their Stubborn wills? No: not those of these that the
Father gave to Christ, wherefore at the times appointed, shall-come Brakes in
amongthem; the absolute promise takes them in hand, and then they come indeed,
crying out to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall
we do? No Stubborness of man's will can stand, when God has absolutely said the
contrary, shall-come, can make them come as doves to their windows.

The Lord spoke unto Manasseth, and to his people (by the Prophets) but he
would not hear, no, he would not: but shall Manasseth come off thus? no, he
shall not. Therefore, he being also one of those whom the Father had given to
the Son, and so falling within the bounds and reach of shall-come: At last he
comes indeed. He comes Bowing, and Bending; He humbled himself greatly, and
made Supplication to the Lord, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of
him, and had mercy upon him, 2 Chro. 33.

The Thief upon the Cross, at first, did rail, with his fellow, upon Jesus
Christ; but he was one that the Father had given to him, and therefore
shallcome, must handle him, and his rebellious will. And behold, so soon as he
is dealt with all, by virtue of that absolute promise, how soon he buckleth,
leaves his railing, falls to Supplicating of the Son of God for mercy; Lord,
says he, remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom, Mat. 27. 44. Luke
23. 40, 41, 42.

Object. 4. They shall come, say you, but how if they be blind, and see not the
way; for same are kept off from Christ, not only by the obstinacy of their
will, but by the blindness of their mind: now if they be blind, how shall they
come.

Answ. The question is not, Are they blind? but, are they with in the reach,
and power of shall come; if so, That Christ, that said they shall-come, will
find them eyes, or a guide, or both, to bring them to himself. If they
shall-come, they shall-come: no impediment shall hinder.

The Thessalonians darkness did not hinder them from being the Children of
Light: I am come, said Christ that they that see not, might see. And if he
says, See ye blind, that have eyes, who shall hinder it? Ephesians. 5. 8. Joh. 9.
39. Isa. 29. 18. Chap. 43. 8.

This promise therefore, is, as I said, abig-bellied promise, having in the
bowels of it, all things that shall accur to the complete fulfilling of it
self. They shall-come. But it is objected that they are blind: well, shall-come,
is still the same, and continues to say, they shall-come to me. Therefore he
says again, I will bring the blind by a way that they know not, I will lead
them in paths that they have not known. I will make darkness light before them,
and Crooked things straight, these things will I do unto them, and not forsake
them, Isa. 42. 16.

Mark, I will bring them though they be blind, I will bring them by a way they
know not; I will, I will, and therefore they shall-come to me.

Object. 5. But how if they have exceeded many in sin, and so made themselves
far more abominable? They are the Ring-leading Sinners in the County, the Town
or Family.

Answ. What then? Shall that hinder the execution of shall-come? It is not
Transgressions, nor Sins, nor all their Transgressions, in all their sins (if
they by the Father are given to Christ to save them) that shall hinder this
promise, that it should not be fulfilled upon them. In those days, and at that
time, says the Lord, the iniquities of Israel shall be fought for, and there
shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, Jer. 32. 30.
Not that they had none, (for they abounded in Transgression, 2 Chronicles. 33. 9.
Ezekiel. 16. ^8.) but God would pardon, cover, hide, and put them away, by virtue
of his absolute promise, by which they are given to Christ to save them. And I
will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me;
and I will pardon all their iniquity, whereby they have Transgressed against
me. And it shall be to me for a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all
the Nations of the Earth, which shall hear of all the good that I do unto them;
and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness, and all the prosperity
that I procure to it, Jer. 33. 8, 9.

Object 6. But how if they have not Faith and Repentance? how shall they come
then?

Answ. Why? he that says they shallcome, shall he not make it good? If they
shall-come, they shall-come; and he that has said, they shall-come, if faith
and repentance be the way to come, as indeed they are, then faith and
repentance shall be given to them: for shallcome, must be fulfilled on them.

First, Faith shall be given them; I will also leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted, and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. There
shall be a Root of Jesse, and he shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; and in
him shall the Gentiles trust, Zeph. 3. 12. Romans 15. 12.

Secondly, They shall have repentance: He is exalted to give repentance; They
shall come weeping and seeking the Lord their God. And again, with Weeping and
Supplication will I lead them, Acts 5. 30, 31. Jer. 31. 9. Chap. 50. 5.

I told you before, that an absolute promise, has all conditional ones in the
belly of it, and also provision to answer all those qualifications that they
propound to him that seeks for their benefit: And it must be so, for if
shall-come be an absolute promise, as indeed it is, then it must be fulfilled
upon every of those. concerned therein. I say, it must be fulfilled, if God can
by Grace, and his absolute Will, fulfill it. Besides, since Coming, and
Believing is all one (according to Joh. 6. 35.) He that comes to me shall
never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.

Then, when he says, they shall come, it is as much as to say, they shall
believe, and consequently repent to the saving of the Soul. So then the present
want of faith and repentance, cannot make this promise of God of none effect;
because that this promise has in it to give, what others call for and expect.
I will give them an heart, I will give them my spirit, I will give them
repentance, I will give them faith. Mark these words, If any man be in Christ,
he is a new Creature. But how came he to be a new Creature, since none can
Create but God? why, God indeed does make them new Creatures. Behold, says he,
I make all things new. And hence it follows, even after he had said, they are
new Creatures; And all things are of God: that is, all this new Creation
stands in the several operations, and special workings of the Spirit of
grace, who is God, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18.

Object. 7. But how shall they escape all those dangerous, and damnable
opinions, that like rocks, and quick* sands, are in the way in which they are
going?

Answ. Indeed this age, is an age of errors, if ever there was an age of errors
in the world; but yet the gift of the Father, laid claim to by the Son in the
Text, must needs escape them, and in conclusion come to him. There are a
company of shall-comes in the Bible, that does secure them. Not but that they
may be assaulted by them; yea, and also for the time, entangled and detained by
them from the Bishop of their Souls: but these Shall-comes, will break those
Chains and Fetters, that those given to Christ are entangled in, and they
shall-come, because he has said they shall-come to him.

Indeed, errors are like that whore, of whom you read in the Proverbs, that
sits in her seat on the High Places of the City, To call Passingers who go
right on their way, (Pro. 9. 13, 14, 15, 16.) But the persons, as I said, that
by the Father are given to the Son to save them, are at one time or other,
secured by, Shall-come to me.

And therefore, of such it is said; God will guide them with his eye, with his
counsels, by his spirit, and that in the way of peace; by the springs of water,
and into all truth, Psalm. 32. 8. Psalm. 73. 24. Joh. 16. 13. Luke 1. 79. Isa.
47. 10. So then, he that has such a guide (and all that the Father gives to
Christ, shall have it) he shall escape those dangers, he shall not Err in the
way; yea, though he be a fool, he shall not Err therein ( Isa 35.) for of every
such an one it is said, Thine cars shall hear a word behind thee, saying; This
is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left, Isa 30. 21.

There were Thieves and Robbers before Christ's coming, as there are also now:
But, says he, The sheep did not hear them.

And why did they not hear them, but because they were under the power of shall
come: that absolute promise, that had that grace in it self to bestow upon
them, as could make them able rightly to distinguish of voices. My sheep hear
my voice. But how came they to hear it? why, to them it is given to know and to
hear, and that distinguishingly, Joh. 10. 8, 16. Chap. 5. 25. Ephesians. 5. 14.

Further, the very plain Sentence of the Text makes provision against all these
things; for, says it, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; that
is, shall not be stopped, or be allured to take up any where short of Me; nor
shall they turn aside, to abide, with any besides Me.

Shall Come [to me.] To me!] By these words there is further insinuated (though
not expressed) a double cause of their coming to him.

First, There is in Christ, a fullness of Al-sufficiency of that, even of all
that which is needful to make us happy.

Secondly, Those that indeed come to him, do therefore come to him that they
may receive it at his hand.

For the first of these, There is in Christ a fullness of all Sufficiency of all
that, even of all that which is needful to make us happy. Hence it is said,
For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. And again, Of
his fullness, all we have received, and grace for grace, Colos. 1. 19. Joh. 1.
16. It is also said of him, that his riches is unsearchable, The unsearchable
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. Hear what he says of himself, Riches and honor
are with Me, even durable riches and righteousness; my fruit is better than
Gold, yea than sine Gold; and My revenue than Choice silver: I lead in the way
of Righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment, that I may cause them
that love Me to inherit Substance. And I will fill their treasures, Prove. 8.
18. 19, 20. 21.

This in general, but more particularly.

First, There is that Light in Christ, that is Sufficient to lead them out of*
and from all that darkness, in the midst of which all others, but them that
come to him, stumble, and fall, and perish: I am the light of the world, says
he; he that follows me shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the Light
of Life, Joh. 8. 12. Man by nature is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, for darkness has blinded his eyes; neither can any
thing but Jesus Christ, lead men out of this darkness; Natural Conscience
cannot do it; the Ten Commandments, though in the heart of man, cannot do it:
this prerogative belongs only to Jesus Christ.

Secondly* There is that life in Christ, that is to be found no where else,
Joh. 5. 40. Life as a principle in the Soul, by which it shall be acted and
enabled to do that which through him is pleasing to God. He that believes in,
or comes, to me, says he, as the Scriptures have said, out of his belly shall
flow Rivers of Living Water, Joh. 7. 38. Without this life a man is dead,
whether he be bad, or whether he be good, that is good in his own, and other
men's esteem. There is no true and Eternal life, but what is in the Me that
speaks in the Text.

There is also life for those, that come to him, to be had by faith in his
flesh, and blood. He that eats Me, even he shall live by Me, Joh. 6. 57.

And this is a life against that Death, that comes by the guilt of sin, and the
curse of the Law, under which all men are, and forever must be, unless they
eat the Me, that speaks in the Text. Whosoever finds Me, says he, finds life;
deliverance from that everlasting death, and destruction, that without Me he
shall be devoured by, Prove. 8.

Nothing is more desirable than life, to him that has in himself the Sentence
of Condemnation; and here only is life to be found. This life, to wit, Eternal
life* this life is in his Son. That is, in him that says in the Text, All that
the Father has given Me shall come to Me, 1 John 5. 10.

Thirdly, The person speaking in the Text, is he alone by whom poor sinners
have Admittance with, and Acceptance to the Father, because of the Glory of his
righteousness, by and in which he presents them amiable, and spotless in his
sight; neither is there any way besides him, so to come to the Father; I am the
way, says he, the truth, and the life; no man comes to the Father but by Me,
Joh. 14. 6. All other ways to God, are dead and damnable, the destroying
Cherubins, stand with flaming swords turning every way to keep all others from
his presence, ( Genesis 3. 24.) I say, all others but them that come by him.

I am the door, by Me, says he, if any man enter in, he shall be saved, Joh.
10. 1, 2.

The person speaking in the Text, is He, and only He, that can give stable, and
everlasting peace; therefore, says he, My peace I give unto you. My peace,
which is a peace with God, peace of Conscience, and that of an everlasting
duration. My peace, peace that cannot be Matched, net as the world gived give I
unto you; for the worlds peace is but Carnal, and Transitory; but mine is
Divine and Eternal. Hence it is called, the peace of God, and That passes all
understanding.

Fourthly, The person speaking in the Text, has enough of all things truly
Spiritually good, to satisfy the desires of every longing Soul. And Jesus
stood, and Cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
And to him that is athirst, I will give of the fountain of the water of life
freely, Joh. 7. 37. Rev. 21. 6.

Fifthly, With the person speaking in the Text, is power to perfect and defend,
and deliver those that come to him for safeguard. All power, says he, in
heaven, and earth, is given unto Me, Mat. 28. 18.

Thus might I multiply instances of this nature in abundance. But

Secondly, they that in truth, do come to him, do therefore come to him, that
they may receive it at his hand. They come for light, they come for life, they
come for reconciliation with God; they also come for peace, they come that
their Soul may be satisfied with Spiritual good, and that they may be protected
by him against all Spiritual and Eternal damnation; and he alone is able to
give them all this, to the filling of their joy to the full, as they also find,
when come to him.

This is evident,

First, From the plain declaration of those that already are come to him. Being
Justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access with boldness into this grace, wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.

Secondly, It Is evident also, in that while they keep their eyes upon him, they
never desire to change him for another, or to add to themselves, some other
thing, together with him to make up their Spiritual Joy. God forbid, said Paul,
that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea and I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things; and do count them but
dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him; not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is thorough the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Philipians 3. 7, 8, 9.

Thirdly, It Is evident also by their earnest desires, that others might be made
partakers of their blessedness. Brethren, said Paul, my hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved, that is, that way that
he expected to be saved himself, as he says also to the Galatians. Brethren,
says he, I beseech you, be as I am, for I am as ye are. That is, I am a sinner
as you are; now I beseech you seek for life, as I am seeking of it: as who
should say, For there is a sufficiency in the Lord Jesus both for me and you.

Fourthly, It Is evident also, by the Triumph that such men make over all their
enemies, both Bodily, and Ghostly: Now, thanks be to God, said Paul, who
causes us always to triumph in Jesus Christ. And who shall separate us from
the Love of Christ our Lord. And again, O death where is thy sting! O Grave,
where is thy victory! The sting of death is Sin, and the strength of sin, is
the Law; but thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. 35. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56.

Fifthly, It Is evident also, for that they are made, by the Glory of that which
they have found in him, to suffer, and endure what the Devil and Hell it self
has or could invent, as a means to separate them from him. Again, Who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or Sword (as it is written, for
thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter)? Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the
Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, Rom 8.

Shall come [to Me.] O the heart attracting glory that is in Jesus Christ,
(when he is discovered) to draw those to him that are given to him of the
Father. Therefore, those that come of old rendered this, as the cause of their
coming to him. And we beheld his glory, as of the only begotten of the Father,
Joh. 1. 14. And the reason why others come not, but perish in their sins, is
for want of a sight of his glory. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, lest the Glorious Light of the Gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4.

There is therefore heart-pulling glory in Jesus Christ, which, when
discovered, draws the man to him; wherefore, by, shall-come to Me, Christ may
mean; when his glory is discovered, then they must come, then they shall-come
to Me. Therefore, as the True Comers come with Weeping and Relenting, as being
sensible of their own Vileness; so again it is said, That the Ransomed of the
Lord shall return, and come to Zion, with Singing and Everlasting Joy upon
their Heads; they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall
fly away: That is, at the Sight of the Glory of that Grace, that shows it self
to them now, in the Face of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Hopes that they
now have of being with Him in the Heavenly Tabernacles. Therefore, it says
again; With Gladness and Rejoicing shall they be brought; they shall enter into
the King's Palace, Isa. 35. 10. Chap. 51. 11. Psalm. 45. 15.

There is therefore Heart-attracting Glory in the Lord Jesus Christ; which,
when discovered, subjects the Heart to the Word, and Makes us Come to him.

It Is said of Abraham, That when he dwelt in Mesopotamia, the God of Glory
appeared unto him, (Act. 7. 2.) saying, Get thee out of thy Country. And what
then? why, away he went from his House and Friends, and all the World could not
stay him. Now, as the Psalmist says, Who is the King of Glory? He answers. The
Lord mighty in Battle: And who was that, but He that spoiled Principalities and
Powers, when he did Hang upon the Tree, Tryumphing over them thereon? And who
was that, but Jesus Christ, even the Person speaking in the Text? Therefore, he
said of Abraham, He saw his Day; Yea, says he to the Jews, Your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my Day; and he saw it, and was Glad, Psalm. 24. 8. Col. 2. 14,
15. Jam. 1. 1. Joh. 8. 56.

Indeed, the Carnal Man says (at least) in his Heart, There is no Form or
Comeliness in Christ; and when he shall see him, there is no Beauty that he
should desire him; But he lies: This he speaks, as having never seen him. But
they that stand in his House, and looks upon him through the Glass of his Word,
by the Help of his Holy Spirit, they will tell you other things. But we, say
they, all with open Face beholding, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. They see
Glory in his Person, Glory in his Undertakings, Glory in the Merit of his
Blood, and Glory in the Perfection of his Righteousness; yea, Heart-affecting,
Heart-changing Glory!

Indeed, his Glory is veiled, and cannot be seen, but as discovered by the
Father ( Matthew. 11. 27.) It is veiled with Flesh, with Meanness of Descent from
the Flesh, and with that Ignomy and Shame that attended him in the Flesh; but
they that can, in God's Light, see through these things, they shall see Glory
in him; yea, such Glory, as will draw, and pull their Hearts unto him.

Moses was the Adopted Son of Pharoah's Daughter; and, for ought I know, had
bin King at last, had he now conformed to the present Vanities that was there
at Court; but he could not, he would not do it: Why? what was the matter? Why?
he saw more in the worst of Christ, (bear with the Expression) than he saw in
the best of all the Treasures of the Land of Egypt. He refused to be called the
Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People
of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season: Esteeming the Reproach
of Christ greater Riches, than the Treasures in Egypt; for he had respect to
the Recompense of Reward. He forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King:
But what emboldened him thus to do? Why? he endured; for he had a Sight of the
Person speaking in the Text: He endured, as seeing Him who is Invisible. But, I
say, would a Sight of Jesus have thus taken away Moses's Heart from a Crown,
and a Kingdom, etc. had he not by that Sight seen more in Him, than was to be
seen in them, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.

Therefore, when he says, Shall come to Me, he means, They shall have a
Discovery of the Glory of the Grace that is in Him; and the Beauty and Glory of
that is of such Virtue, that it constrains, and forces, with a Blessed
Violency, the Hearts of those that are given to Him.

Moses, of whom we spoke before, was no Child, when he was thus taken with the
Beauteous Glory of this Lord: He was Forty Years old, and so consequently was
able, being a Man of that Wisdom and Opportunity as he was, to make the best
Judgment of the Things, and of the Goodness of them that was before him in the
Land of Egypt. But he, even he it was, that set that low Esteem upon the Glory
of Egypt, as to count it not worth the meddling with, when he had a Sight of
this Lord Jesus Christ. This wicked World thinks, that the Fancies of a Heaven,
and a Happiness hereafter, may serve well enough to take the Heart of such, as
either have not the Worlds good Things to delight in; or that are Fools, and
know not how to delight themselves therein: But let them know again, that we
have had Men of all Ranks and Qualities, that have been taken with the Glory of
our Lord Jesus, and have left All to follow Him: As Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac; Jacob, Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon; and who not, that had
either Wit or Grace to savor Heavenly things? Indeed, none can stand off from
Him, nor any longer out against Him, to whom he Reveals the Glory of his Grace.

And him that comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out. By these Words, our
Lord Jesus does set forth (yet more amply) the great Goodness of his Nature
toward the Coming Sinner. Before he said, They Shall come; and here he
declares, That with Heart and Affections he will receive them. But by the way,
let me speak one Word or two, to the Conditionality of this Promise, with which
now I have to do. And him that comes to Me, I will not cast out: Where it is
evident (may some say), That Christ's Receiving us to Mercy, depends upon our
Coming; and so our Salvation by Christ is Conditional: If we Come, we shall be
Received; if not, we shall not: for that is fully intimated by the Words. The
Promise of Reception is only to him that Comes: And him that comes. I Answer;
That the Coming in these Words mentioned, as a Condition of being Received to
Life, is, that which is promised, yea, concluded to be effected in us by the
Promise going before. In those latter Words, Coming to Christ is implicitly
required of us; and in the Words before, that Grace is positively promised to
us. It is, as if he should say; All that the Father gives Me, shall come to
Heaven; and him that comes to Heaven, I will in no wise cast out thence. We
come to Christ, because it is said, We Shall come; because it is given to us to
Come: So that, the Condition which is expressed by Christ in these later Words,
is absolutely promised in the Words before. And indeed, the Coming here
intended, is nothing else but the Effect of, Shall come to Me.

And him that comes.] To speak to these Words,

1. In general. 2. More particularly.
In general: They suggest unto us these four Things:

First, That Jesus Christ does build upon it; that since the Father gave his
People to him, they shall be enabled to Come unto him. And him that comes: As
who should say; I know, that since they are Given to Me, they shall be enabled
to Come unto Me. He says not, If they come, or I Suppose they will Come; but,
And him that comes. By these Words therefore he shows us, that he addresseth
himself to the Receiving of them whom the Father gave to him, to save them: By
which, as I said, he concludes or builds upon it, that they shall indeed
Come to Him.

Secondly, Christ also suggesteth by these Words, That he very well knows who
are given to him; not by their Coming to him, but by their being Given to him.
All that the Father gives Me, shall come to Me: And him that comes, etc. This
Him he knows to be one of them, that the Father has Given him; and
therefore, he Receives him, even because the Father has Given him to Him. I
know my Sheep, says he: Not only those, that already have Knowledge of him;
but those too, that yet are ignorant of him. Other Sheep have I (said he) which
are not of this Fold: Not of the Jewish - Church; but those that lie in their
Sins, even the Rude and Barbarous Gentiles. Therefore, when Paul was afraid to
stay at Corinth, from a Supposition, that some Mischief might befall him there:
Be not afraid (said the Lord Jesus to him) but speak; and hold not thy peace,
for I have much People in this City, Joh. 10. 16. Act. 18. 9, 10. The People
that the Lord here speaks of, were not at this time accounted His, by reason of
a Work of Conversion that already had passed upon them; but by Virtue of the
Gift of the Father, for he had given them unto him: Therefore, was Paul to stay
here, to speak the Word of the Lord to them; that by his Speaking, the Holy -
Ghost might effectually work out their Souls, to the causing them to Come; who
was also ready with Heart and Soul, to receive them.

Thirdly, Christ by these Words also suggesteth, That no more came unto Him,
than indeed was given him of the Father: For the Him in this place, is one of
the All, that by Christ, was mentioned before. All that the Father gives Me,
shall come to Me; and every Him, of that All, I will in no wise cast out. This
the Apostle insinuates, where he says; He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ: Till we All come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man, unto the Measure of the
Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Mark, As in the Text, so here, he speaks of All; Until we All come. We All!
All who? Doubtless, All that the Father gives to Christ. This is further
insinuated, because he calls this All, The Body of Christ, the Measure of the
Stature of the Fullness of Christ: By which he means, the Universal Number
given, to wit, The true Elect Church; which is said to be his Body and Fullness,
Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.

Fourthly, And Christ Jesus by these Words further suggesteth, That he is well
content with this Gift of the Father to him. All that the Father gives Me,
shall come to Me; and him that comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out. I will
heartily, willingly, and with great Content of Mind receive him. They show us
also, that Christ's Love in Receiving, is as large as his Father's Love in
Giving, and no larger. Hence he thanks him for his Gift; and also thanks him
for hiding of Him, and his Things, from the rest of the Wicked, Mat. 11. 25.
Luke 10, 21.

But, Secondly, and more particularly. And [ him] that comes. And [ him!] This
word Him; By it, Christ looks back to the Gift of the Father; not only in the
Lump, and whole of the Gift, but to every Him of that Lump. As who should say;
I do not only accept of the Gift of my Father in the General, but have a
special Regard to every of them in Particular; and will secure not only some,
or the greatest part; but Every Him, every Dust: Not an Hooff of all shall be
lost, or left behind. And indeed, in this he consents to his Father's Will;
which is, That of All that he has given him, he should lose Nothing, Joh. 6.
39.

And him.] Christ Jesus also, by his thus dividing the Gift of his Father into
Hims* and by his speaking of them in the Singular Number, shows, what a
particular Work shall be wrought in each one, at the time appointed of the
Father. And it shall come to pass in that Day, says the Prophet, that the Lord
shall beat off from the Channel of the River, to the Stream of Egypt; and ye
shall be gathered one by one, O ye Children of Israel, Isa. 27. 12. He shows
also hereby, That no Lineage, Kindred, or Relation, can at all be profited by
any Outward or Carnal Union, with the Person that the Father has given to
Christ. It Is only Him, the Given Him, the Coming Him, that he intends
absolutely to secure.

And him.] There are diverse sorts of Persons, that the Father has given to
Jesus Christ: They are not all of one Rank, of one Quality. Some are High, some
Low; some are Wise, some Fools; some are more Civil, and Complying with the
Law; some more Profane, and averse to Him, and his Gospel. Now, since those
that are given to him, are in some sense so diverse; and again, since he yet
says, And Him that comes, etc. He by that does give us to understand, that he
is not, as Men, for picking and choosing, to take a Best, and leave a Worst;
but he is for Him, that the Father has given him; and that comes to him. He
will not alter nor change it; a Good for a Bad, or a Bad for a Good, Levit. 27.
9, 10.

There is many a sad Wretch given by the Father to Jesus Christ; but not one of
them all is despised, or slighted by him.

It is said of those that the Father has given to Christ, That they have done
worse than the Heathen; That they were Murderers, Thieves, Drunkards, Unclean
Persons, and what not? But he has Received them, Washed them, and Saved them. A
fit Emblem of this Sort, is that wretched Instance mentioned in the Sixteenth
of Ezekiel, that was cast out in a Stinking Condition, to the loathing of its
Person in the day that it was Born: A Creature in such a wretched Condition,
that no Eye pitied, to do any of the Things there mentioned unto it, or to
have Compassion upon it: No Eye, but his that speaks in the Text.

And Him.] Let him be as red as Blood, let him be as red as Crimson: Some men
are blood-Red sinners, Crimson sinners, Sinners of a double die; dipped, and dipped
again before they come to Jesus Christ. Art thou that read these Lines, such
an one? speak out man, Art thou such an one? and art thou now coming to Jesus
Christ for the Mercy of Justification, that thou might be made white in his
Blood, and be covevered with his Righteousness? Fear not; for as much as this
thy coming betokens, that thou art of the number of them, that the Father
has given to Christ; for he will in no wise cast thee out. Come now, says
Christ, and let us reason together; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow; though they be as Red as Crimson, they shall be as wool.
Isa. 1, 18.

And him] There was many a strange him came to Jesus Christ, in the days of his
flesh; but he received them all, without turning any away. Speaking unto them
of the Kingdom of God, and Healing such as had need of healing, Luke 9. 11.
Chap. 4. 40. These words And him, are therefore words to be wondered at: That
not one of them, who by virtue of the Fathers gift, and drawing, are coming to
Jesus Christ; I say, that not one of them, what ever they have been, what ever
they have done, should be rejected, or set by, But admitted to a share in his
saving grace. It Is said in Luke, that the people wondered at the gracious words
that proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4. 22. Now, this is one of his gracious
words; these words are like drops of honey, as it is said; Pleasant words are
as an Honeycomb, sweet to the Soul, and health to the bones. These are
gracious words indeed, even as full as a faithful, and a merciful High Priest
could speak them. Luther says, When Christ speaks, he has a mouth as wide
as Heaven and Earth: That is, to speak fully to the encouragement of every
sinful him, that is coming to Jesus Christ. And that his word is certain, hear
how himself confines it: Heaven and Earth, says he, shall pass away; but my
word shall not pass away, Isa. 63. 1. Mat. 24. 35.

It is also confirmed by the testimony of the Four Evangelists, who gave
faithful relation of his loving reception of all Sorts of coming sinners,
whether they were publicans, harlots, thieves possessed of Devils, Bedlams, and
what not? Luke 19, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Mat. 21. 21. Luke 15. Chap. and
Chap. 23. 41, 42. Mark. 19. 9. Chap. 5. 1, 2, 3, to 9.

This then shows us,

First, The greatness of the merits of Christ.

Secondly, The willingness of his heart to impute them for Life to the great,
if coming, sinners.

First, This shows us the greatness of the Merits of Christ; for it must not be
supposed, that his words are bigger than his worthyness. He is Strong to
execute his word; he can Do, as well as Speak. He can do exceeding abundantly
more than we ask or think, even to the uttermost, and out side of his word, (
Ephesians. 3. 20.)

Now then, since he concludes Any Coming Him: it must be concluded, that he
can save to the uttermost Sin, Any coming* Him.

He speaks in Righteousness, in very faithfulness, when he began to build
this blessed Gospel Fabric, the Text: It was for that, he had first sat down,
and counted the cost; and for that he knew he was able to finish it. What Lord,
Any him! Any him, that comes to thee! This is a Christ worth looking after,
this is a Christ worth coming to.

This then, should learn us diligently to consider the Natural force of every
word of God: and to judge of Christ's ability to save; not by our sins, or by
our shallow apprehensions of his Grace; but by his word, which is the true
measure of Grace.

And if we do not judge thus, we shall dishonor his Grace, lose the benefit of
his word, and needlessly fright our selves into many Discouragements, though
coming to Jesus Christ. Him, any him that comes, has from this word of
Christ, to feed himself with hopes of Salvation. As thou art therefore coming*
O thou coming sinner, Judge thou, whether Christ can savethee, by the true
Sense of his words? Judge, coming sinner, of the Efficacy of his Blood, of the
perfection of his Righteousness, and of the prevailancy of his intercession, by
his word. And him, says he, that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. In
no wise, that is, for no Sin: Judge therefore by his word, how able he is to
save thee? It is said of Gods Sayings to the Children of Israel; There failed
not ought of any good thing, which the Lord had spoken to the house of Israel;
all came to pass. And again; Not one thing has failed of, of all the good
things which the* Lord your God, spoke concerning you all are come to pass unto
you; and not one thing has failed thereof, Josh. 21. 45. Chap. 23. 14.

Coming sinner, what promise thou find in the word of Christ, strain it
whether thou can, so thou do not corrupt it, and his Blood and Merits will
answer all, what the word says, or any true Consequence that is drawn
therefrom, that we may boldly venture upon; As here in the Text, he says; And
Him that comes; indefinitetively; without the least intimation of the
rejection of any, though never so great, if he be a coming-sinner. Take it then
for granted, that thou, whoever thou art, if coming, art intended in these
words: neither shall it injure Christ at all, if, as Benhadad's Servants served
Ahab, thou shall catch him at his word. Now, says the Text, The Men did
diligently observe whether any thing would come from him; to wit, any word of
grace; and did hastily catch it: And it happened, that Ahab called Benhadad,
his brother. The men replied therefore, Thy brother Benhadad? catching him at
his word, 1 King 20. 33. Sinner, coming sinner, serve Jesus Christ thus, and he
will take it kindly at thy hands. When he in his argument called the
Canaanitish woman, Dog, she caught him at it, and said; Truth Lord, yet the
Dogs eat of the Crumbs that fall from their Masters Table. I say, she caught
him thus in his words, and he took it kindly; saying, O woman, great is thy
faith! be it unto thee even as thou will, Mat. 15. 26. Catch him, coming
sinner, catch him.

Secondly, The other thing that I told you, is showed us from these words, is
this; The willingness of Christ's heart, to impute his merits for Life to the
great, if coming, sinner. And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

The awakned coming sinner, does not so easily question the power of Christ, as
his willingness to save him. Lord, if thou will, thou can, said one, Mar. 1.
40. He did not put the If upon his power, but upon his will: he concluded, he
could; but he was not as fully of persuasion, that he would. But we have the
same ground to believe, he will, as we have to believe he can; and indeed,
ground for both, is the Word of God. If he was not willing, why did he promise?
why did he say, he would receive the coming sinner? Jacob took him there; Thou
said, says he, I will surely do thee Good, Genesis 32. 12. For, from this
promise he concluded, that it followed in reason, He must be willing.

The Text also gives some ground for us, to draw the same conclusion. And him
that comes to me, I Will in no wise cast out. Here is his willingness
asserted, as well as his power suggested. It is worth your observation, that
Abraham's Faith considered rather his power, than his willingness; that is, he
drew this Conclusion, I shall have a Child, from the Power that was in God to
fulfill the Promise to him: for he concluded, he was willing give him one, else
he would not have promised one. He staggered not at the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; being fully persuaded,
that what he had promised, he was able to perform, Romans 4. 20, 21. But was not
his faith exercised, or tried, about his willingness too? No, there was no show
of reason for that, because he had promised it; indeed, had he not promised it,
he might Lawfully have doubted it; but since he had promised it, there was left
no ground at all for doubting; because his willingness to give a Son, was
demonstrated in his promising him a Son. These words therefore, are sufficient
ground to encourage any coming sinner, that Christ is willing to his power, to
receive him; and since he has power also to do what he will, there is no
ground at all left to the coming sinner, any more to doubt; but to come in full
hope of acceptance, and of being received unto grace and mercy. And him that
[cometh.] He says not, And him that is Come; but, and him that Comes; that
is, and him, whose heart begins to move after me, who is leaving all for my
sake; him, who is looking out, who is on his Journey to me. We must therefore
distinguish betwixt coming, and being come to Jesus Christ. He that is come to
him, has attained of him more sensibly, what he felt before he wanted; than he
has, that but yet is coming to him.

A Man that is come to Christ, has the advantage of him that is but coming to
him; and that in seven things.

First, He that is come to Christ, is nearer to him, than he that is but coming
to him; for he that is but coming to him, is yet, in some sense, at a distance
from him; as it is said of the coming prodigal; And while he was yet a great
way off, Luke 15. Now, he that is nearer to him, has the best sight of him;
and so, is able to make the best Judgment of his wonderful grace and beauty,
as God says; Let them come near, then let them speak. And as the Apostle John
says; And we have seen, and do testify, that God sent his Son to be the
Savior of the world, Isa. 41. 1. 1 John 4. 14. He that is not yet come, though
he is acoming, is not fit* not being indeed capable, to make that Judgment of
the worth and glory of the Grace of Christ, as he is that is come to him, and
has seen and beheld it.

Secondly, He that is come to Christ, has the advantage of him that is but
coming, in that he is eased of his burden; for he that is but coming, is not,
Mat. 11. 28. He that is come, has cast his burden upon the Lord; by Faith he
has seen himself released thereof: but he that is but coming, has it yet, as
to sense, and feeling, upon his own shoulders. Come unto me, all ye that Labor,
and are heavy Laden, implies, that their burden, though they are coming, is yet
upon them; and so will be, till indeed they are come to him.

Thirdly, He that is come to Christ, has the advantage of him that is but
coming: in this also, namely; He has drank of the Sweet, and Soul-refreshing
Water of Life; but he that is but coming, has not: If any man thirst, let him
Come unto me and drink.

Mark, he must Come to him, before he drinks; according to that of the Prophet:
Ho every one that thirsts, Come ye to the Waters. He drinks not as he
comes, but when he is come to the Waters, Joh. 7. 37. Isa. 45. 1.

Fourthly, He that is come to Christ, has the advantage of him, that as yet is
but coming: in this also, to wit, He is not so terrified with the noise, and,
as I may call it, Hue and Cry; which the Avenger of blood makes at the heels of
him, that yet, is but coming to him. When the Slayer was upon his flight to the
City of his refuge, he had the noise or fear of the Avenger of blood at his
heels; but when he was come to the City, and was entered there-into, that noise
ceased: Even so it is with him, that is but coming to Jesus Christ; he hears
many a dreadful Sound in his ears; sounds of death and damnation; which he that
is come, is at present freed from. Therefore he says; Come, and I will give
you rest: And so he says again; We that have believed, do enter into rest, as
he said, etc. Now the believing there intended, is a believing on Christ; as
come unto him for rest, is only found in him, by them that are Come to him.

Fifthly, He therefore that is come to Christ, is not so subject to those
dejections, and castings down, by reason of the rage and assaults of the evil
one; as is the man, that is but coming to Jesus Christ (tho he has Temptations
too.) [ And while he was yet a coming, the Devil threw him down, and Lore him,
Luke 9. 42.] For he has, though Satan still Roareth upon him, those
experimental comforts, and refreshments (to wit) in his treasury, to present
himself with, in times of Temptation and Conflict; which he that is but coming,
has not.

Sixthly, He that is come to Christ, has the advantage of him that is but
coming to him: in this also, to wit, He has upon him the Wedding Garment, etc.
But he that is coming, has not. The Prodigal, when coming home to his Father,
was clothed with nothing but Rags, and was tormented with an empty belly: but
when he was come, the best Robe is brought out; also, the Gold Ring, and the
shoes; yea, they are put upon him, to his great rejoicing. The fatted Calf was
killed for him; the music was struck up, to make him merry: and thus also the
Father himself Sang of him; This my Son was dead, and is alive again; was lost,
and is found, Luke 15. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Seventhly, In a word, he that is come to Christ, his groans, and tears, his
doubts, and fears, are turned into Songs and Praises; for that he has now
received the atonement, and the earnest of his inheritance: But he that is but
yet a coming, has not those Praises, nor Songs of deliverance with him; nor
has he as yet, received the atonement, and earnest of his Inheritance, which
is, the Sealing testimony of the Holy Ghost, through the sprinkling of the
Blood of Christ upon his Conscience; for he is not come: Romans 5. 11. Ephesians. 1.
13. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

And him that [Cometh] There is further to be gathered from this word [
Comes,] these following particulars.

First, That Jesus Christ has his Eye upon, and takes notice of the First
Moving of the Heart of a Sinner after himself: Coming-Sinner, thou. can not
move with Desires after Christ, but he sees the Working of those Desires in thy
Heart. All my Desires, said David, are before thee, and my Groanings are not
hid from thee, Psalm. 38. 9. This he spoke, as he was coming (after he had back
sliden) to the Lord Jesus Christ. 'Tis-said of the Prodigal, That while he was
yet a great way off, his Father saw him, had his Eye upon him, and upon the
going out of his Heart after him, Luke 15. 20.

When Nathaniel was come to Jesus Christ, the Lord said unto them that stood
before him; Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no Guile. But
Nathaniel answered him, Whence know thou me. Jesus answered, Before that
Philip called thee, when thou wast under the Fig Tree, I saw thee. There, I
suppose, Nathaniel was pouring out of his Soul to God for Mercy, or that he
would give him good Understanding about the Messiah to come: And Jesus saw all
the Workings of his honest Heart at that time, Joh. 1. 47, 48.

Zacheus also had some secret Movings of Heart, such as they was, toward Jesus
Christ; when he ran before, and climbed up the Tree to see him; and the Lord
Jesus Christ had his Eye upon him: Therefore, when he was come to the Place, he
looked up to him, bids him come down; For to Day (said he) I must abide at thy
House: To wit, in order to the further Completing the Work of Grace in his
Soul, Luke 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Remember this, Coming-Sinner!

Secondly, As Jesus Christ has his Eye upon; so he has his Heart open, to
receive the Coming Sinner. This is verified by the Text: And him that comes to
Me, I will in no wise cast out. This is also discovered by his preparing of the
Way, in his making of it Easy (as may be) to the Coming-Sinner; which
Preparation is manifest by them Blessed Words, I will in no wise cast out: Of
which, more when we come to the Place. And while he was yet a great way off,
his Father saw him, and had Compassion on him; and ran, and fell on his Neck,
and kissed him (Luke 15. 20.) All these Expressions do strongly prove, that the
Heart of Christ is open to receive the Coming - Sinner.

Thirdly, As Jesus Christ has his Eye upon, and his Heart open to receive; so
he has resolved already, that nothing shall alienate his Heart from receiving
the Coming-Sinner. No Sins of the Coming-Sinner, nor the Length of the Time
that he has abode in them, shall by any Means prevail with Jesus Christ to
reject him. Coming - Sinner, thou art coming to a loving Lord Jesus!

Fourthly, These Words therefore are dropped from his Blessed Mouth, on purpose,
that the Coming Sinner might take Encouragement to continue on his Journey,
until he be come indeed to Jesus Christ. It was doubtless, a great
Encouragement to Blind Bartlimeus, that Jesus Christ stood still, and called
him, when he was crying; Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy on me: Therefore,
it is said, He cast away his Garment, Rose up, and Came to Jesus, Mark 10. 46,
etc. Now, if a Call to come has such Encouragement in it, what is a Promise of
Receiving such, but an Encouragement much more? And observe it, though he had a
Call to come, yet not having a Promise, his Faith was forced to work upon a
mere Consequence: Saying, He calls me; and surely, since he calls me, he will
grant me my Desire. Ah! but Coming-Sinner, thou have no need to go so far
about, as to draw (in this Matter) Consequences; because thou have plain
Promises: And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Here is full,
plain; yea, what Encouragement one can desire: For, suppose thou was admitted
to make a Promise thy self, and Christ should attest, that he would fulfill it
upon the Sinner, that comes to him; Could thou make a better Promise?
Could thou invent a more full, free, or larger Promise? A Promise, that
looks at the first Moving of the Heart after Jesus Christ! A Promise, that
declares, yea, that ingageth Christ Jesus to open his Heart, to receive the
Coming-Sinner: Yea, further; A Promise, that Demonstrateth that the Lord Jesus
is resolved freely to receive, and will in no wise cast out, nor means to
reject the Soul of the Coming sinner. For all this lies fully in this Promise,
and does naturally flow therefrom. Here thou need not make use of
far-fetcht Consequences, nor strain thy Wits, to force encouraging Arguments
from the Text. Comming-Sinner, the Words are plain; And him that comes to Me,
I will in no wise cast out.

And Him that [Cometh.] There are two Sorts of sinners that are coming to Jesus
Christ.

First, Him that has never, while of late, at all, began to come.

Secondly, Him that came formerly, and after that went back; but has since
bethought himself, and is now coming again.

Both these sorts of sinners are intended by the Him in the Text, as is
evident; because, Both are now the coming Sinners.

And Him that comes, etc. For the first of these; the sinner that has never,
while of late, began to come, his way is more easy: I do not say, more plain,
and open, to come to Christ, than is the other, (those last not having the Clog
of a guilty Conscience, for the sin of Backsliding hanging at their Heels.)
But all the encouragement of the Gospel, (with what invitations are therein
contained) to coming sinners, are as free, and as open to the one as to the
other; so that they may with the same freedom and liberty, as from the word,
both alike claim interest in the promise. All things are ready: All things, for
the coming back-sliders, as well as for the others: Come to the Wedding: And
let him that is a thirst, come, Mat. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4. Revel. 22. 17.

But having spoken to the first of these already, I shall here pass it by; and
shall speak a word or two to him that is coming, after backsliding, to Jesus
Christ for life.

Thy way, O thou sinner of a double dye, thy way is open to come to Jesus
Christ: I mean, thee whose heart, after long backsliding, does think of
turning to him again. Thy way, I say, is open to him, as is the way of the
other sorts of Comers; as appears by what follows.

First, Because the Text makes no Exception against thee; it does not say, And
any him; But, a back-slider; any him, But him: The Text does not thus object,
but indifinitively opens wide its Golden Arms, to every coming soul, without
the least Exception. Therefore thou may come.

Secondly, Nay, the Text is so far from excepting against thy coming, that it
strongly suggesteth, that thou art one of the souls intended, O thou coming
back-slider: Else, what need that Clause. have been so inserted, I will in no
wise cast out: No, as who should say, though those that come now, are such as
have formerly back-sliden. I will in No wise cast a way the Fornicator, the
Covetous, the Railer, the Drunkard, or other common Sinners; nor yet the
Back-slider neither.

Thirdly, That the Back-slider is intended, is evident,

First, For that he is sent to By Name: Go, tell his Disciples, and Peter, Mark
16. 7. But Peter was a Godly Man: True; but he was also a Back-slider: yea, a
desperate Back-slider. He had Denied his Master once, twice, thrice; Cursing
and Swearing, that he knew him not. If this was not Backsliding; if this was
not an High and Eminent Backsliding; yea, a higher Backsliding than thou art
capable of, I have thought amiss.

Again, When David had back-sliden, and had committed Adultery and Murder in
his Backsliding, he must be sent to by Name. And, says the Text, the Lord
sent Nathan to David. And he sent him to tell him, after he had brought him to
unfeigned Acknowledgment of his Fact; The Lord has also put away, or forgiven
Thy Sin, 2 Samuel 12. 1.

This Man also was far gone; He took a Man's Wife, and Killed her Husband; and
endeavored to cover all with wicked dissimulation he did this, I say, after
God had exalted him, and showed him great favor, wherefore his Transgression
was greatned also by the Prophet with mighty aggravations: yet, he was
accepted, and that with gladness, at the first step he took in this returning
to Christ; for the first step of the back-sliders return, is to say sensibly,
and unfeignedly, I have sinned: But he had no sooner said this, but a pardon
was produced, yea thrust into his bosom. And Nathan said unto David, the Lord
has also put away Thy sin.

Secondly, As the person of the back-slider is mentioned by Name, so also is
his Sin, that if possible thy Objections against thy returning to Christ, may
be taken out of thy way. I say it is mentioned, and mixed as mentioned with
words of grace and favor. I will heal their backsliding, and love them freely,
( Hos. 14, 4.). What say thou now back-slider!

Thirdly, Nay further, thou art not only mentioned by name, and thy sin by the
nature of it, but thou thy self who art a returning back - slider, put

First, Among Gods Israel. Return O backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: For I am merciful, says the Lord,
and will not keep anger for ever, Jer. 3. 12.

Secondly, Thou art put among his Children, among his Children to whom he is
married. Turn O backsliding Children, for I am married unto you, verse. 14.

Thirdly, Yea after all this, as if his heart was so full of Grace for them,
that he was pressed until he had uttered it before them, he adds, Return ye
backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings.

Fourthly, Nay further, the Lord has considered, that the shame of thy sin
has stopped thy mouth, and made thee almost a prayer-less man; and therefore
he says unto thee, Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, and say unto
him, take away all iniquity and receive us graciously: See his grace! that
himself should put words of encouragement into the heart of a back-slider: As
he says in another place, I taught Ephraim to go, taking him by the Arms. This
is teaching him to go indeed, to put words into his mouth, to hold him up by
the Arms, by the Chin, as we say, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 11. 3.

From what has been said I conclude, even as I said before, that the Him in
the Text, And him that comes, includes both these sorts of Sinners, and
therefore both should freely come.

Question, But where does Jesus Christ, in all the words of the New -
Testament, Expressly speak to a returning back-slider with words of Grace and
Peace? For what you have urged as yet, from the New Testament, is nothing but
Consequences drawn from this Text. Indeed it is a full Text for carnal ignorant
sinners that come, but to me who am a back-slider it yields but little relief.

Answ. First, How! but little encouragement from the Text, when it says, I
will in no wise cast out? What more could have been said? what is here omitted
that might have been inserted, to make the promise more full and free? Nay,
take all the promises in the Bible, all the freest promises, with all the
variety of expressions of what nature or extent soever, and they can but amount
to the expressions of this very promise; I will in no wise cast out: I will for
nothing, by no means, upon no account, however they have sinned, however they
have back-sliden, however they have provoked, cast out the coming sinner. But,

Secondly, Thou say, where does Jesus Christ in all the words of the
New Testament, speak to a returning backslider with words of Grace and Peace?
that is, under the name of a backslider.

Answ. Where there is such plenty of examples in receiving back-sliders, there
is the less need of Express words to that intent; one promise, as the Text is,
with those Examples that are annexed, are instead of many promises. And
besides, I reckon that the Act of receiving, is of as much, if not of more
encouragement, than is a bare promise to receive; for receiving is as promise,
and the fulfilling of it too: So that in the Old Testament thou have the
promise, and in the New, the fulfilling of it: and that in diverse examples.

1 In Peter. Peter denied his Master, once, twice, thrice, and that with open
oath; yet Christ receives him again without any the least hesitation or stick.
Yea he slips, stumbles, falls again, in down right Dissimulation, and that to
the hurt and fall of many others; but neither of this does Christ make a bar to
his Salvation, but receives him again at his return, as if he knew nothing of
the fault, Gal. 2.

Secondly, The rest of the disciples, even all of them, backslide and leave the
Lord Jesus in his greatest straights: Then all the Disciples forsook him and
fled, they returned, (as he had foretold) every one to his own, and left him
alone; but this also, he passes over as a very light matter; not that it was so
indeed, in it self, but the abundance of grace that was in him did lightly role
it away; for after his Resurrection, when at first he appeared unto them, he
gives them not the least check for their perfidious dealing with them, but
salutes them with words of Grace, saying; All hail, be not afraid, Peace be to
you; All Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto me. True, he rebuked them for
their unbelief, for the which thou also deservest the same; for, it is unbelief
that alone puts Christ and his benefits from us, Mat. 26. 56. Joh. 16. 32. Mat.
28. 9, 10, 18. Luke 24. 36. Mar. 16. 14.

Thirdly, The man that after a large profession, lay with his Fathers Wife,
committed a high Transgression, even such an one, that at that day was not
heard of, no, not among the Gentiles. Wherefore this was a desperate.
backsliding; yet at his return, he was received, and accepted again to Mercy, 1
Cor. 5. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8.

Fourthly, The Thief that stole, was bid to steal no more; not at all doubting
but that Christ was ready to forgive him this Act of backsliding, Ephesians. 4. 28.

Now all these are Examples, particular instances of Christ's readiness to
receive the Backsliders to Mercy; and observe it, examples and proofs that he
has done so, are to our unbelieving hearts, stronger encouragements, than bare
Promises, that so he will do. But again, the Lord Jesus has added to those for
the encouragement of returning Backsliders, to come to him,

First, A Call to come, and he will receive them, Revel. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14,
15, 16, 20, 21, 22. Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Wherefore, New Testament Backsliders have encouragement to come.

Secondly, A Declaration of readiness to receive them that Come, as here in the
Text, and in many other places is plain: Therefore, Set thee up these Marks,
make thee these high heaps (of the golden Grace of the Gospel,) set thine heart
toward the highway, even the way that thou wentest (when thou did
backslide) turn again, O Virgin of Israel; turn again to these thy Cities, Jer.
31. 21.

And him that [ Comes.] He says not, And him that talks, that professes,
that makes a show, a noise, or the like, but him that Comes. Christ will take
leave to judge, who, among the many that make a Noise, they be that indeed are
coming to him. It is not him that says he comes, nor him of whom others affirm
that he comes; but him that Christ himself shall say does Come; that is
concerned in this Text. When the Woman that had the bloody Issue came to him
for Cure, there were others as well as she, that made a great bussle about him,
that touched, yea thronged him; Ah, but Christ could distinguish this woman
from them all. And he looked round about upon them all, to see her that had
done this thing, Mar. 25. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. He was not concerned with
the thronging, or touchings of the rest; for theirs were but accidental, or, at
best, void of that which made her touch acceptable. Wherefore Christ must be
Judge who they be that in Truth are coming to him; Every man's way is right in
his own Eyes, but the Lord weighs the Spirits: It stands therefore every
one in hand to be certain of their coming to Jesus Christ; for as thy coming
is, so shall thy Salvation be: If thou come indeed, thy Salvation shall be
indeed; but if thou come but in outward appearance, so shall thy Salvation
be: But of coming see before, as also afterward in the Use and Application.

And him that comes [ to me.] These words [ to me,] are also well to be
heeded; for by them, as he secureth those that come to him, so also he shows
himself unconcerned with those that in their coming rest short, or turn aside
to others; For you must know, that every one that comes, comes not to Jesus
Christ; some that come, came to Moses, and to his Law, and then take up for
Life; with these Christ is not concerned; with these this Promise has not to
do. Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by
the Law, ye are falen from grace, Gal. 5. 3, 4. Again, some that came, come no
farther than to Gospel Ordinances, and there stay, they come not through them
to Christ; with these neither is he concerned; nor will their Lord, Lord, avail
them any thing in the great and dismal day. A man may come too, and also go
from the place and Ordinances of Worship, and yet not be remembered by Christ.
So I saw the wicked buried, said Solomon, who had come and gone from the place
of the Holy, and they were forgotten in the City; when they had so done, this
is also Vanity, Eccles. 8. 10.

[ To me.] These words therefore, are by Jesus Christ very warily put in, and
serve for caution, and encouragement: for caution, lest we take up, in our
coming, any where short of Christ; and for encouragement to those that shall in
their coming, come past all, till they come to Jesus Christ; And him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Reader, If thou love thy Soul, take this Caution kindly at the hands of
Jesus Christ. Thou see thy Sickness, thy Wound, thy necessity of Salvation;
well, go not to King Jareb, for he cannot Heal thee, nor Cure thee of thy Wound
( Hos. 5. 13.) Take the Caution, I say, lest Christ, instead of being a Savior
to thee, becomes a Lion, a young Lion to tare thee, and go away, verse. 14.

There is a coming, but not to the most High; there is a coming, but not with
the whole Heart, but as it were feignedly; therefore take the Caution kindly,
Jer. 3. 10. Hos. 7. 16.

And him that comes [ To me.] Christ, as a Savior, will stand alone, because
his own Arm above has brought Salvation unto him; He will not be joined with
Moses, nor suffer John Baptist to be tabernacled by him: I say, they must
vanish, for Christ will stand alone, ( Luk 9. 28, 36.) yea, God the Father will
have it so; therefore, they must be parted from him, and a Voice from Heaven
must come to bid the Disciples hear, only the beloved Son. Christ will not
suffer any Law, Ordinance, Statute, or Judgment, to be partners with him in
the salvation of the Sinner. Nay, he says not, And him that comes to my Word;
but, And him that comes to me. The words of Christ, even his most blessed and
free Promises, such as this in the Text, are not the Savior of the World; for
that is Christ himself; Christ himself only. The Promises therefore, are but to
encourage the coming sinner to come to Jesus Christ, and not to rest in them
short of Salvation by him.

And him that comes [ To me.] The man therefore that comes aright, casts all
things behind his back; and looks at, nor has his expectation from ought but
the Son of God alone, as David said; My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for my
expectation is from him: He only is my Rock, and my Salvation; he is my
Defense, I shall not be moved, Psalm. 62. 5. His Eye is to Christ, his Heart is
to Christ, and his expectation is from him, from him only.

Therefore, the man that comes to Christ, is one that has had deep
Considerations of his own sins, slighting thoughts of his own Righteousness,
and high thoughts of the Blood and Righteousness of Jesus Christ; yea he sees,
as I have said, more virtue in the Blood of Christ to save him, than there is
in all his sins to damn him. He therefore sets Christ before his Eyes, there
is nothing in Heaven or Earth, he knows, that can save his Soul, and secure him
from the Wrath of God, but Christ; that is, nothing but his personal
Righteousness, and Blood.

And him that comes to me, I will [in no wise] cast out. In no wise: By these
words there is something expressed, and something employed. That which is
expressed, is Christ Jesus his unchangable Resolution to Save the Coming
sinner; I will in no wise reject him, or deny him the benefit of my Death and
Righteousness. This word therefore is like that which he speaks of the
everlasting damnation of the sinner in Hellfire, He shall by no means depart
thence; that is, never, never, never come out again; no, not to all Eternity,
Mat. 5. 25. chap. 25. 46. So that, as he that is condemned into Hellfire, has
no ground of hope for his deliverance thence; so him that comes to Christ,
has no ground to fear he shall ever be cast in thither.

Thus says the Lord, If Heaven above can be measured, or the Foundation of the
Earth searched out beneath, I will also cast away all the seed of Israel, for
all that they have done, says the Lord, Jer. 31. 37.

Thus says the Lord, if my Covenant be not with Day and Night, and if I have
not appointed the Ordinances of Heaven, and Earth, then will I cast away the
Seed of Jacob. But Heaven can not be measured, not the Foundations of the Earth
searched out beneath; his Covenant is also with day and night, and he has
appointed the Ordinances of Heaven; therefore he will not cast away the Seed of
Jacob, who are the coming ones; but will certainly save them from the dreadful
Wrath to come, Jer. 33. 25, 26. chap. 50. 4, 5. By this therefore it is
manifest, that it is not the greatness of sin, nor thy long continuance in it,
no, nor yet thy backsliding, nor the pollution of thy Nature, that can put a
bar in against, or be an hinderance of the Salvation of the coming sinner. For,
if indeed this could be, then would this solemn and absolute Determination of
the Lord Jesus, of its self fall to the ground, and be made of none effect: But
his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure. That is, his pleasure
in this; for this promise, this irreversible conclusion, arises of his
Pleasure; and he will stand to it, and will fulfill it, because it is his
pleasure.

Suppose that one man had the sins, or as many sins as an hundred, and another
should have an hundred times as many as he; yet if they come, this word, I will
in no wise cast out, secures them both alike.

Suppose a man has a desire to be saved, and for that purpose is coming in
truth to Jesus Christ, but he by his debauched Life, has damned many in hell:
why, the door of hope is by these words set as open for him, as it is for him
that has not the thousandth part of his Transgressions. And him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out.

Suppose a man is coming to Christ to be Saved, and has nothing but sin, and
an ill-spent life to bring with him; Why, let him come, and welcome to Jesus
Christ, And he will in no wise cast him out, Luke 7. 41. Is not this Love that
passes knowledge? is not this Love the wonderment of Angels? and is not this
Love worthy of all acceptance at the hands and hearts of coming sinners?

Secondly, That which is employed in the words, is

First, The coming Souls has those that continually lie at Jesus Christ, to
cast them

Secondly, The coming Souls are afraid, that these will prevail with Christ to
cast them off.

For these words are spoken to satisfy us, and to stay up our Spirits against
these two dangers: I will in no wise cast out.

First, For the First, Coming Souls have those that continually lie at Jesus
Christ to cast them off.

And there are three things, that thus bend themselves against the coming
sinner.

First, There is the Devil, that Accuser of the brethren, that accuses them
before God, day and night, Revel. 12. 10. This Prince of Darkness is unwearied
in this work; he does it, as you see day and night, that is, without ceasing:
He continually puts in his Caveats against thee, if so be he may prevail. How
did he ply it against that good man Job, if possible he might have obtained his
destruction in Hell fire? He objected against him, that he served not God for
naught, and tempted God to put forth his Hand against him; urging, that if he
did it, he would Curse him to his face; and all this, as God witnesses, He did
without a Cause, Job 1. 9, 10, 11. chap. 2. 4. 5. How did he ply it with Christ
against Joshua the high Priest? And he showed me Joshua, said the Prophet, the
high Priest, standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his
right hand to resist him, Zech. 3. To resist him; that is, to prevail with the
Lord Jesus Christ to resist him: Objecting, the uncleanness and unlawful
Marriage of his Sons with the Gentiles; for that was the Crime that Satan laid
against them, Ezra 10. 18. Yea, and for ought I know, Joshua was also guilty of
the fact; but if not of that, of Crimes no whit inferior; for he was Clothed
with filthy Garments, as he stood before the Angel: neither had he one word to
say in vindication of himself, against all that this wicked one had to lay
against him: But notwithstanding that, he came off well; but he might for it,
thank a good Lord Jesus, because he did not resist him; but contrariwise took
up his cause, pleaded against the Devil, excused his infirmity, and put
justifying Robes upon him before his Adversaries Face.

And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord Rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem Rebuke thee. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the
Fire. And he answered and spoke to those that stood before him, saying, Take
away the filthy Garments from him; and to him he said, Behold, I have caused
thine iniquities to pass from thee, and will Cloth thee with chang of Raiment.

Again, how did Satan ply it against Peter, when he desired to have him that he
might sift him as Wheat; that is, if possible, sever all Grace from his heart,
and leave him nothing but flesh and filth, to the end he might make the Lord
Jesus loath and abhor him; Simon, Simon, said Christ, Satan has desired to
have you, that he might sift you as Wheat. But did he prevail against him? No,
But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. As who should say, Simon,
Satan has desired me that I would give thee up to him, and not only thee, but
all the rest of thy Brethren (for that the word you, imports); but I will not
leave thee in his hand, I have prayed for thee, thy says shall not sail: I
will secure thee to the Heavenly Inheritance, Luke 22. 30, 31, 32.

Secondly, As Satan, so every sin, of the coming-sinner, comes in with a Voice
against him, if perhaps they may prevail with Christ to cast off the Soul. When
Israel was coming out of Egypt to Canaan, how many times had their sins thrown
them out of the mercy of God, had not Moses as a Type of Christ, stood in the
breach to turn away his Wrath from them, Psalm. 106. 23. our Iniquities testify
against us, and would certainly prevail against us, to our utter rejection and
Damnation, had we not an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

The sins of the old World cried them down to Hell, the sins of Sodom fetched
upon them Fire from Heaven, which devoured them; the sins of the Egyptians
cried them down to Hell, because they came not to Jesus Christ for Life.
Coming-sinner, thy sins are no whit less than any; Nay, perhaps, they are as
big as all theirs: Why is it then that thou live when they are dead, and
that thou have a promise of Pardon when they had not? Why thou art coming to
Jesus Christ, and therefore sin shall not be thy ruin.

Thirdly, As Satan, and Sin; so the Law of Moses, as it is a Perfect Holy Law,
has a Voice against thee before the Face of God: There is one that accuses
you* even Moses's Law, Jo. 5. Yea, it accuses all Men of Transgression, that
have sinned against it; for as long as Sin is Sin, there will be a Law to
accuse for Sin: But this Accusation shall not prevail against the
Coming-Sinner; because it is Christ that dyed, and that ever lives, to make
Intercession for them that Come to God by him, Romans 8. Heb. 7. 25.

These things, I say, do accuse us before Christ Jesus; yea, and also to our
own Faces, if perhaps they might prevail against us. But these words, I will in
no wise cast out, secureth the Coming-Sinner from them all.

The Coming-Sinner is not saved because there is none comes in against him; but
because the Lord Jesus will not hear their Accusations; will not cast out the
Coming-Sinner.

When Shimei came down to meet King David, and to ask for Pardon for his
Rebellion; up starts Abishai, and puts in his Caveat, saying; Shall not Shimei
dye for this? This is the Case of him that comes to Christ; He has this
Abishai, and that Abishai, that presently steps in against him, saying; Shall
not this Rebel's Sins destroy him in Hell? Read further; But David answered;
What have I to do with you, ye Sons of Zeruiah, that you should this day be
Adversaries to me? Shall there any Man be put to Death this Day in Israel? for
do not I know, that I am King this Day over Israel? 2 Samuel 19. 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22.

This is Christ's Answer by the Text, to all that accuse the Coming- Shimeis;
What have I to do with you, that accuse the Coming-Sinners to me? I count you
Adversaries, that are against my showing Mercy to them. Do not I know, that I
am Exalted this Day to be King of Righteousness, and King of Peace. I will in
no wise cast them out.

Secondly, But again; These Words do closely imply, that the Coming-Souls are
afraid, that these Accusers will prevail against them; as is evident, because
the Text is spoken for their Relief and Succor: For that need not be, if they
that are coming, were not subject to fear, and despond upon this account. Alas!
there is Guilt, and the Curse lies upon the Conscience of the Coming-Sinner!

Besides, He is Conscious to himself, what a Villain, what a Wretch he has
been against God, and Christ. Also, he now knows, by woeful Experience, how he
has been at Satan's Beck, and at the Motion of every Lust. He has now also,
new Thoughts of the Holiness, and Justice of God: Also, he feels, that he
cannot forbear sinning against him; For the Motions of Sin, which are by the
Law, do work in his Members, to bring forth Fruit unto Death, (Romans 7.) But
none of this needs be, since we have so Good, so Tenderhearted, and so
Faithful a Jesus to come to; who will rather overthrow Heaven and Earth, than
suffer a little of this Text to fail: And him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out.

Now, We have yet to enquire into, two things that lie in the Words, to which
there has yet been nothing said: As,

1. What it is to cast out. 2. How it appears, that Christ has Power to Save,
or to Cast out.
For the First of these, What it is to Cast out; to this I will speak,

1. Generally. 2. More Particularly.
More Generally;

First, To cast out, Is to Slight, and Despise, and Contemn; as it is said of
Readiness Shield, It was vilely cast away; that is; Slighted and Contemned. Thus
it is with the Sinners, that come not to Jesus Christ; He Slights, Despises,
and Contemns them; that is, Casts them away, 2 Samuel 1. 2.

Secondly, Things cast away, are reputed as Menstruous Clothes, and as the Dirt
of the Street, Isa. 3. 22. Psalm. 18. 42. Matthew. 5. 13. Chap. 15. 17. And thus
it shall be with the Men, that come not to Jesus Christ; they shall be counted
as Menstruous, and as the Dirt in the Streets.

Thirdly, To be cast out, or off; it is, To be abhorred, not to be pityed; but
to be put to perpetual Shame, Psalm. 44. 9. Psalm. 89. 38. Amos 1. 11.

But more particularly, To come to the Text: The Casting-out here mentioned, is
not limited to this, or the other Evil: Therefore, it must be extended to the
most extreme and utmost Misery; Or thus:

He that comes to Christ, shall not want any thing, that may make him Gospelly
Happy in this World, or that which is to come: Nor shall he want any thing,
that comes not, that may make him Spiritually and Eternally Miserable!

But further: As it is to be Generally taken, so it respects Things that are
now; and also, Things that shall be hereafter.

For the Things that are now; they are either,

1. More General; 2. Or more Particular.
First, More General, thus*

It is To be cast out of the Presence and Favor of God.

Thus was Cain cast out: Thou have driven (or cast) me out this Day from thy
Presence; and from thy Face (that is, from thy Favor) shall I be hid. A
dreadful Complaint! but the Effect of a more dreadful Judgment! Genesis 4. 13,
14. Jer. 23. 39. I Chron. 28. 9.

Secondly, To be cast out, is to be cast out of God's Sight: God will look
after them no more, care for them no more; nor will he watch over them any more
for Good, (2 King. 17. 20. Jer. 7. 15.) Now, they that are so, are left like
Blind Men, to wander, and fall into the Pit of Hell: This therefore, is also a
sad Judgment! Therefore, here is the Mercy of him that Comes to Christ; He
shall not be left to wander at Uncertainties: The Lord Jesus Christ will keep
him, as a Shepherd does his Sheep, Psalm. 23. Him that comes to me, I will in
no wise cast out.

Thirdly, To be cast out, Is to be denied a Place in God's House; and to be
left as Fugitives and Vagabonds, to pass a little time away in this Miserable
Life; and after that, to go down to the Dead, Gal. 4. 30. Genesis 4. 13, 14. Chap.
21. 10. Therefore, here is the Benefit of him that Comes to Christ; He shall
not be denied a Place in God's House: They shall not be left, like Vagabonds in
the World. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; See Prove. 14. 26.
Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.

Fourthly, In a word; To be cast out, Is to be Rejected, as are the Fallen
Angels: For, their Eternal Damnation began at their being cast down from Heaven
to Hell. So then, Not to be cast out, Is to have a Place, a House, and
Habitation there; and to have a Share in the Privileges of Elect Angels.

These Words therefore, I will not cast out, will prove great Words one Day, to
them that come to Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Joh. 12. 31. Revel. 12. Luke 20.
35.

Secondly, and more Particularly.

First, Christ has Everlasting Life for him that comes to him, and he shall
never Perish; For he will in no wise cast him out: But for the rest, they are
Rejected, Cast out; and must be Damned, Joh. 10. 27, 28.

Secondly, Christ has Everlasting Righteousness, to cloth them with, that
come to him; and they shall be covered with it, as with a Garment: But the rest
shall be found in the Filthy Rags of their own stinking Polutions, and shall be
wrapped up in them, as in a Winding Sheet; and so bear their Shame before the
Lord, and also, before the Angels, Dan. 9. 24. Isa. 57. 2. Revel. 3. 4, 18.
Chap. 15. 16.

Thirdly, Christ has precious Blood, that like an open Fountain, stands free
for him to wash in, that comes to him for Life; And he will in no wise cast him
out: But they that come not to him, are Rejected from a Share therein, and are
left to ireful Vengeance for their Sins, Zech. 13. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Job.
13. 8. Chap 3. 36.

Fourthly, Christ has precious Promises; and they shall have a Share in them,
that come to him for Life: For he will in no wise cast them out. But they that
come not, can have no Share in them; because they are True only in him: For in
Him, and only in Him, all the Promises are Yea, and Amen. Wherefore, they that
come not to him, are no whit the better for them, Psalm. 50. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 20,
21.

Fifthly, Christ has all Fullness of Grace in himself, for them that come to
him for Life; And he will in no wise cast them out: But those that come not to
him, are left in their Graceless State; and as Christ leaves them, Death, Hell,
and Judgment finds them. He that finds me (says Christ) finds Life, and
shall obtain Favor of the Lord; but he that sins against me, wrongeth his own
Soul: All that hate Me, love Death* Prove. 8. 33, 34, 35, 36.

Sixthly, Christ is an Intercessor; and ever lives to make Intercession for
them, that come to God by him: But their Sorrows shall be multiplied, that
hasten after another (or other) Gods, (their Sins and Lusts;) Their
Drink Offerings will he not offer, nor take up their Names into his Lips, Psalm.
16. 4. Heb. 7. 25.

Seventhly, Christ has wonderful Love, Bowels, and Compassions, for those that
come to him! For, He will in no wise cast them out. But the rest will find him
a Lion Rampant; he will, one Day, tear them all to pieces. Now, Consider this
(says he) ye that forget God; lest I tare you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22.

Eighthly, Christ is He, by, and for whose sake, those that come to him, have
their Persons and Performances accepted of the Father; And he will in no wise
cast them out: But the rest must fly to the Rocks and Mountains, for Shelter,
but all in vain, to hide them from his Face, and Wrath, Revel. 6. 15, 16, 17.

But again; These Words [ Cast out] have a special Look to what will be
hereafter; even at the Day of Judgment: For then, and not till then, will be
the great Anathema, and Casting out, made manifest, even manifest by Execution.
Therefore, here to speak to this, and that under these two Heads; As,

1. Of the Casting out it self. 2. Of the Place into which they shall be cast,
that shall then be cast out.
First, The Casting out it self, stands in two Things;

1. In a Preparitory Work. 2. In the manner of Executing the Act.
The Preparitory Work stands in these three Things:

First, It stands in their Separation, that have not come to him, from them
that have, at that Day: Or thus; At the Day of the great Casting out, those
that have not ( now) come to him, shall be separated from them that have; for
them that have, He will not cast out. When the Son of Man shall come in his
Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him, then he shall sit upon the Throne of
his Glory; and before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate
them one from another, as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, Matthew.
25. 31, 32.

This dreadful Separation, therefore, shall then be made, betwixt them that (
now) come to Christ, and them that come not: And good Reason; for since they
would not with us come to him, now they have time; Why should they stand with
us, when Judgment is come?

Secondly, They shall be placed before him according to their condition; they
that have come to him, in great Dignity, even at his right hand, For he will in
no wise cast them out: but the rest shall be set at his left hand, the place of
disgrace and shame; for they did not come to him for Life.

Distinguished also shall they be, by fit terms: Those that came to him, he
calls Sheep, but the rest are Frowish Goats. And he shall separate them one
from another, as the Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats; and the Sheep
will he set on the right hand (next Heaven. Gate, for they came to him); but
the Goats on his left, to go from him into Hell, because they are not of his
Sheep.

Thirdly, Then will Christ proceed to conviction of those that came not unto
him, and will say, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in, or did not come
unto me. Their excuse of themselves, he will slight as dirt, and proceed to
their final Judgment. Now when these wretched rejectors of Christ shall thus be
set before him in their sins, and convicted, this is the preparitory work upon
which follows the manner of Executing the Act which will be done.

First, In the presence of the Holy Angels.

Second. In the presence of all them that in their lifetime came to him, by
saying unto them. Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; with this Reason annexed to it; For you were cruel to
me and mine, particularly discovered in these words; For I was an hungered, and
ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a Stranger, and ye
took me not in; Naked, and ye Clothed me not; Sick, and in Prison, and ye
visited me not, Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43.

Lastly, Now it remains, that we speak of the place into which these shall be
cast, which in the general you have heard already, to wit, the Fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels: but in particular, it is thus described.

First, It is called Tophet: For Tophet is ordained of Old, yea, for the King
(the Lucifer) It is prepared, he has made it deep and large, the pile thereof
i^ Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone
does kindle it, Isa. 30. 32.

Secondly, It is called Hell, It is better for thee to enter into Life halt, or
lame, than having two feet to be cast into Hell, Mar. 9. 45.

Thirdly, It is called the Wine Press of the Wrath of God. And the Angel thrust
in his Sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Vine of the Earth (that is them
that did not come to Christ) and cast them into the great Wine press of the
Wrath of God, Rev. 14. 19.

Fourthly, It is called a Lake of Fire. And whosoever was not found written in
the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire, Rev. 20. 15.

Fifthly, It is called a Pit. Thou have said in thy Heart, I will Ascend into
Heaven, I will Exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will sit also upon the
Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the North -- Yet thou shall be
brought down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit, Jsa. 14. 13, 14, 15.

Sixthly, It is called a bottomless Pit, out of which the smoke and the Locust
came, and into which the great Dragon was cast; and it is called Bottomless; to
show the endlesness of the fall that they will have into it, that come not, in
the acceptable time to Jesus Christ; Rev. 9. 1, 2. chap. 20 3.

Seventhly, It is called Outer Darkness: Bind him hand and foot, and cast him
into outer Darkness; and cast ye the unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness,
there shall be Weeping, and Nashing of Teeth, Mat. 22. 13. chap. 25. 30.

Eighthly, It is called a Furnace of Fire. As therefore the Tares are gathered
and burned in the Fire, so shall it be in the end of this World: the Son of Man
shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom, all
things that Offend, and them that do Iniquity; and shall cast them into a
Furnace of Fire, there shall be Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth: And again, So
shall it be in the end of the World, the Angels shall come forth, and sever the
wicked from among the just, and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire; there
shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth, Matt. 13. 41, 42, 43, 48, 49, 50.

Lastly, It may not be amiss, if in the conclusion of this, I show in few
words, to what the things that torment them in this state, are compared. Indeed
some of them have bin occasionally mentioned already; as that they are compared,

1. To wood that burns. 2. To Fire. 3. To Fire and Brimstone: But 4. It is
compared to a Worm, a gnawing Worm, a never dying gnawing Worm: They are cast
into Hell, where their Worm dies not, Mar. 9. 44.
Fifthly, It is called unquenchable Fire, He will gather his Wheat into his
Garner: but will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire, Matt. 3. 12. Luke 3.
17.

Sixthly, It is called everlasting destruction. The Lord Jesus shall descend
from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking Vengance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; Who
shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.

Seventhly, It is called Wrath without mixture, and is given them in the Cup of
his Indignation. If any man Worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of God, which is powered out without mixture, in the Cup of his
Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence
of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14. 9, 10.

Eighthly, It is called the second Death, And death and hell were cast into the
Lake of Fire, this is the second Death. Blessed and holy is he that has part
in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no Power, Rev. 20. 14.
chap. 2. v. 6.

Ninthly, It is called Eternal Damnation, But He that shall blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of Eternal Damnation.

Oh These three Words!

Everlasting Punishment!

Eternal Damnation!

And for Ever and Ever!

How will they gnaw, and eat up all the expectation of the end of the misery of
the Castaway sinners. And the smoke of their Torment, ascended up for Ever,
and Ever, and they have no rest Day nor Night, etc. Rev. 14. 11.

Their behavior in Hell, is set forth but by four things as I know of.

1. By calling for Help and Relief in Vain. 2. By Weeping. 3. By Wailing. 4. By
gnashing of Teeth.
And now we come to the second thing that is to be enquired into Namely,

How it appears that Christ has Power to save, or to Cast out: For by these
words, I will in no wise cast out, he declares that he has power to do both.

Now this enquiry admits us to search into two things.

1 How it appears that he has power to save. 2 How it appears that he has
power to cast out.
That he has power to save, appears by that which follows.

First, To speak only of him as he is Mediator: He was Authorized to this
blessed work by his Father before the World began. Hence the Apostle says, He
has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World; that is, chosen us
in him to be Saved by him, as Ephesians the first makes manifest. Hence it is
again, that we are said to be Blessed in him before the Foundation of the
World, with all those things that effectually will produce our Salvation. Read
the same Chapter, with 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Secondly, He was promised to our first Parents, that he should in the fullness
of time, bruise the Serpents Head; and as Paul expounds it, redeem them that
were under the law: hence since that time, he has bin reckoned as slain for
our Sins, by which means all the Fathers under the first Testament were secured
from the wrath to come; hence he is called, The Lamb slain from the Foundation
of the World. Rev. 13. 8. Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 4. 4, 5.

Thirdly, Moses gave Testimony of him by the Types and Shaddows, and Bloody
Sacrifices, that he commanded from the Mouth of God, to be in use for the
support of his peoples Faith, until the time of Reformation; which was the time
of this Jesus his Death. Heb. 9. and 10th. Chapters.

Fourth, At the time of his Birth, it was Testified of him by the Angel, That
he should Save his People from their Sins. Mat. 1. 20, 21.

Fifth, It is Testified of him in the days of his Flesh, that he had Power on
Earth to forgive Sins. Mark 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Sixth, It is Testified also of him by the Apostle Peter; that God has exalted
him with his own Right Hand to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins. Acts 5. 30, 31.

Seventh, In a word, This is every where Testified of him, both in the Old
Testament and in the New.

And good reason, that he should be acknowledged and trusted in, as a Savior.

1. He came down from Heaven to be a Savior, Joh. 6. 38, 39, 40. 2. He was
Anointed, when on Earth to be a Savior, Luke 3. 22. 3. He did the Works of a
Savior. As First, He Fulfilled the Law, and became the End of it for
Righteousness, for them that believe in him, Romans 10. 3, 4.
Secondly, He laid down his Life as a Savior, He gave his Life as a Savior,
He gave his Life as a Ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. Mar. 10. 45. 1 Timothy 2. 6.

Thirdly, He has Abolished Death, Destroyed the Devil, put away Sin, got the
Keys of Hell and Death, is Ascended into Heaven; is there accepted of God,
exalted of God, and bid Sit at his Right Hand as Savior, and that because his
Sacrifice for our Sins pleased God, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 7,
8. Joh. 16. 10, 11. Acts 5. 30, 31. Heb. 10. 12, 13.

Fourthly, God has sent out, and proclaimed him as Savior, and tells the
World that we have redemption through his Blood, that he will Justify us if we
believe in his Blood, and that he can Faithfully, and Justly do it. Yea, God
does beseech us to be reconciled to him by his Son; which could not be, if he
were not Anointed by him to this very End, and also if his Works and
undertakings were not accepted of him as considered a Savior, Romans 3. 24, 25.
2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Fifthly, God has received already Millions of Souls into his Paradise,
because they have received this Jesus for a Savior, and is resolved to cut him
off, and to cast him out of his presence, that will not take him for a Savior,
Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

I intend brevity here; therefore a word to the Second, and so conculde.

How it appears that he has Power to cast out.

This appears also by what follows.

First, The Father (for the service (...) he has done him as Savior) (...)
made him Lord of all, even Lord (...) Quick and Dead. For to this (...) Christ
both Died, and Rose, and Revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and
Living, Romans 14. 9.

Secondly, The Father has left it with him, to quicken whom he will, to wit,
with saving Grace, and to cast out whom he will, for their Rebellion against
Him, Joh. 5. 21.

Thirdly, The Father has made him Judge of Quick and Dead, has committed all
Judgment unto the Son, that all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father, Joh. 5. 22.

Fourthly, God will Judge the World by this Man; the day is Appointed for
Judgment, and he is Appointed for Judge. He has Appointed a day in the which
he will Judge the World in Righteousness by that Man, Acts 17. 31, 32.

Therefore we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive for the things done in the Body, according to what they have
done. If they have closed with Him, Heaven and Salvation; if they have not,
Hell and Damnation.

And for these Reasons he must be Judge.

First, Because of his Humiliation, because of his Fathers Word he humbled
himself, and he became Obedient unto Death; even the Death of the Cross:
Therefore God has highly Exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name;
that at the Name of Jesus, every Knee should bow; both of things in Heaven, and
things on Earth, and things under the Earth; and that every Tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

This has respect to his being Judge, and his Sitting in Judgment upon Angels
and Men, Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 14. 10, 11.

Secondly, That all Men might honor the Son, even as they honor the Father.
For the Father Judges no Man, but has Committed all Judgment unto the Son;
that all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 22,
23.

Thirdly, Because of his Righteous Judgment, this work is fit for no Creature;
it is only fit for the Son of God. For he will reward every Man according to
his Ways, Rev. 22.

Fourthly, Because he is the Son of Man. He has given him authority to execute
Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man, Joh. 5. 27.

Thus have I in brief passed through this Text by way of explication; my next
Work is, to speak to it by way of Observation: but I shall be also as brief in
that, as the Nature of the thing will admit.

All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes to me I
will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37.

ANd now to come to some Observations, and a little briefly to speak to them,
and then conclude the whole.

The words thus Explained, affords us many, some of which are these:

First, That God the Father, and Christ his Son, are two Distinct Persons in
the Godhead.

Secondly, That by them (not Excluding the Holy Ghost) is contrived, and
determined, the Salvation of some of fallen Man - kind.

Thirdly, That this contrivance, resolved it self into a Covenant between these
Persons in the Godhead, which stands in giving, on the Fathers part; and
Receiving, on the Sons. All that the Father gives me, etc.

Fourthly, That every one that the Father has given to Christ (according to
the mind of God in the Text) shall certainly come to him.

Fifthly, That coming to Jesus Christ, is therefore not by the will, wisdom, or
power of man: but by the gift, promise, and drawing of the Father. [All that
the Father gives me, shall come.]

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ will be careful to receive, and will not in any
wife reject, those that come, or are coming to him. [And him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast out.]

There are besides these, some other Truths, employed, in the Words: As

Seventhly, They that are coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times heartily afraid
that he will not receive them.

Eighthly, Jesus Christ would not have them, that in Truth are Coming to him,
once think, that he will cast them out.

These Observations, lie, all of them in the Words, and are plentifully
confirmed by the Scriptures of Truth; but I shall not at this time speak to
them all, but shall pass by the first, second, third, fourth, and sixth; partly
because, I design brevity, and partly because they are touched upon, in the
Explicatory part of the Text. I shall therefore begin with the Fifth
Observation, and so make that the first in order, in the following discourse.

First, Then, Coming to Christ, is not by the will, wisdom, or power of Man,
but by the gift, promise, and drawing of the Father. This Observation stands
of two parts.

First, that coming to Christ, is not by the Will, Wisdom, or Power of Man.

Secondly, But by the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of the Father. That the Text
carries this Truth in its bosom, you will find, if you look into the
Explication of the first part thereof, before; I shall therefore here follow
the Method propounded.

First, That coming to Christ is not by the will, wisdom, or power of man: this
is true, because the Word does flatly deny it:

First, It denies it to be by the Will of man. Not of blood, nor of the Will
of the flesh, nor of the Will of man. And again, It is not of him that Wills,
nor of him that Runs. Joh. 1. 13. Romans 9. 16.

Secondly, It denies it to be of the Wisdom of man, as is manifest from these
considerations.

First, In (...) Wisdom of God it pleased him, that the World by Wisdom
should not know him: Now if by their Wisdom they cannot know him, it follows,
by that Wisdom, they cannot come unto him; for coming to him, is not before,
but after some knowledge of him, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Acts 13. 27. Psalm. 9. 10.

Secondly, The Wisdom of Man, in Gods Account, as to the Knowledge of Christ,
is reckoned foolishness. Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World?
and again, the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God. If God has made
Foolish, the Wisdom of this World; and again, if the Wisdom of this World is
Foolishness with Him: then verily it is not likely, that by that, a Sinner
should become so Prudent, as to come to Jesus Christ: especially if you
Consider,

Thirdly, That the Doctrine of a Crucified Christ, and so of Salvation by him,
is the very thing, that is counted foolishness, to the Wisdom of this World;
Now, if the very Doctrine of a Crucified Christ, be counted foolishness by the
Wisdom of this World, it cannot be, that by that Wisdom, a man should be drawn
out, in his Soul, to come to him, 1 Cor. ^^. 20. Chap. 2. 14. Chap. 3. 19.
Chap. 1. 18, 23.

Fourthly, God counts the Wisdom of this World, one of his greatest Enemies,
therefore by that Wisdom no man can come to Jesus Christ. For it is not likely
that one of Gods greatest Enemies, should draw a man to that which best of all
pleases God, as coming to Christ does. Now, that God counts the Wisdom of
this World, one of his greatest Enemies, is evident.

First, For that it casts the greatest contempt upon his Sons undertakings,
as before is proved, in that it counts his Crucifixion foolishness; Though That
be one of the Highest Demonstrations of Divine Wisdom, Ephesians. 1. 7, 8.

Secondly, Because God has threatened to destroy it, and bring it to naught,
and cause it to perish; Which surely he would not do, was it not an Enemy;
would it direct men to, and cause them to close with Jesus Christ. See Isa. 29.
14. 1 Cor. 1. 19.

Thirdly, He has rejected it from helping in the Ministry of his Word, as a
fruitless business, and a thing that comes to naught. 1 Cor. 2. 4, 6, 12, 13.

Fourthly, Because it causes to perrish, those that seek it, and pursue it, 1
Cor. 1. 18, 19.

Fifthly, And God has proclaimed, That if any man will be wise in this World,
he must be a fool in the Wisdom of this World; and that is the way to be wise in
the Wisdom of God, If any man will be wise in this World, let him become a
fool, that he may be wise. For the Wisdom of this World is foolishness with
God, 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19, 20.

Thirdly, Coming to Christ, is not by the power of man. This is evident, partly,

First, From that which goes before: For man's power, in the puttings forth of
it, in this matter, is either stirred up by Love, or sense of Necessity: but
the Wisdom of this World, neither gives man love to, or sense of a need of
Jesus Christ; therefore his power lies still, as from that.

Secondly, What power has he, that is dead, as every natural man, spiritually,
is; Even dead in Trespasses and sins. Dead, even as dead to Gods
New Testament things; as he that is in his Grave, is Dead to the things of this
World. What power has he then, whereby to come to Jesus Christ. Joh. 5. 25.
Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13.

Thirdly, God forbids the mighty man's glorying in his strength, and says
positively, By strength shall no man prevail: and again, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, Jer. 9. 23, 24. 1 Samuel 2, 9. Zech. 4,
6. 1 Cor. 1, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

Fourthly, Paul acknowledges that man, nay, converted man of himself, has not
a Sufficiency of power in himself to think a good thought; if not to do that
which is least, for to think, is less than to come; then no man by his own
power can come to Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 3. 5.

Fifthly, Hence we are said to be made willing to come, by the power of God; to
be raised from a state of sin to a state of Grace, by the power of God; and to
believe, that is, to come, through the exceeding working of his mighty power,
Psalm. 110. 3. Col. 2, 12. Ephesians. 1. 18, 20. See also Job 40. 6 -- 14.

But this needed not, if either man had power, or will, to come; or so much, as
graciously to think of, willing to come (of themselves) to Jesus Christ.

I Should now come to the proof of the Second part of the Observation, but that
is occasionally done already, in the Explicatory part of the Text; To which I
referr the Reader: For I shall here only, give thee a Text or two more to the
same purpose, and so come to the use and application.

First, It is Expressly said, No man can come to me, Except the Father which
has sent me, draw him. By this Text, there is not only insinuated, that in man
is want of power, but also of will, to come to Jesus Christ, they must be
drawn; they come not, if they be not drawn: and observe, it is not man, no nor
all the Angels in Heaven, that can draw one sinner to Jesus Christ. No man
comes to me, except the Father which has sent to me, draw him. Joh. 6. 44.

Secondly, Again, No man can come to me, except it were given him of my Father.
Joh. 6. 65. It is an heavenly gift that makes man come to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Again, It is written in the Prophets, they shall be all Taught of
God; every one therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes to
me. Joh. 6. 45.

I shall not enlarge; but shall make some use and application, and so come to
the next Observation.

First, Is it so? Is coming to Jesus Christ, Not by the will, wisdom, or Power
of man; but by the gift, promise, and drawing of the Father? Then they are to
blame, that cry up the will, wisdom, and power of man, as things Sufficient to
bring men to Christ.

There are some men, who think they may not be Contradicted, when they plead
for the will, wisdom, and power of man, in reference to the things that are of
the Kingdom of Christ: But I will say to such a man, he never yet came to
understand, that himself is, what the Scripture teaches Concerning him:
Neither did he ever know, what coming to Christ is, by the teaching, gift, and
drawing of the Father. He is such an one that has set up Gods Enemy in
opposition to him, and that continues in such acts of defiance; and what his
end, without a new birth, will be, the Scripture teaches also: But we will
pass this.

Secondly, Is it so? Is coming to Christ, by the gift, promise, and drawing of
the Father? then let Saints here learn, to ascribe their coming to Christ; to
the gift, promise, and drawing of the Father. Christian man, bless God, who
has given thee to Jesus Christ, by promise; and again, bless God for that he
has drawn thee to him. And why is it thee! Why not another! O that the glory
of Electing love, should rest upon thy head; and that the glory of the
Exceeding grace of God, should take hold of thy heart, and bring thee to Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, Is it so? that coming to Christ is by the Father, as aforesaid; then
this should teach us to set an high esteem upon them that indeed are coming to
Jesus Christ: I say, an high esteem on Them, for the sake of him, by virtue of
whose grace, they are made to come to Jesus Christ.

We see, that when men, by the help of humane abilities, do arrive to the
Knowledge of, and bring to pass, that which, when done, is a wonder to the
World: how he that did it, is esteemed and commended. Yea, how are his wits,
parts, industry, and unweariedness in all, admired; and yet the man, as to
this, is but of the World, and his work, the effect of natural ability: The
things also attained by him, end in vanity, and vexation of Spirit. Further,
perhaps in the pursuit of this his Accheivement, he sins against God, wastes his
time vainly, and at long run loses his Soul, by neglecting of better things:
Yet he is admired! But, I say, if this man's parts, labor, diligence, and the
like, will bring him to such applause, and esteem in the World; what esteem
should we have, of such an one that is by the Gift, promise, and power, of God,
coming to Jesus Christ.

First, This is a man, with whom God is, in whom God works and walks; a man
whose motion is Governed and Steared by the mighty hand of God, and the
effectual working of his power. Hear's a Man!

Secondly, This man by the power of Gods might, which works in him, is able
to cast a whole World behind him, with all the lusts, and pleasures of it; and
to Charge through all the difficulties that Men and Devils can set against him.
Hear's a Man!

Thirdly, This man is Traveling to Mount Zion, the Heavenly Jerusalem: The
City of the living God; And to an innumerable company of Angels; And the
Spirits of Just men made Perfect; to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus. Hear's
a Man!

Fourthly, This man can look upon death with comfort, can laugh at destruction,
when it comes; and longs to hear the Sound of the last Trump; And to see his
Judge coming in the Clouds of Heaven. Hear's a Man indeed!

Let Christians then esteem each other as such: I know you do it; but do it
more, and more. And that you may, consider these two or three things:

First, These are the Objects of Christ's esteem. Mat. 12. 48. chap. 15. 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Luke 7. 9.

Secondly, These are the Objects, of the esteem of Angels. Dan. 9. 22. chap.
10, 11. chap. 12. 4. Heb. 1. 14.

Thirdly, These have been the Objects of the esteem of Heathens, when but
convinced about them. Dan. 5. 10. Acts 5. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.

Let each of you, then, esteem other better than themselves, Philip. 3. 2.

Fourthly, Again, Is it so? that no man comes to Jesus Christ, by the will,
wisdom, and power of man; But by the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of the Father.
Then this shows us how horribly ignorant of this such are, who make the man
that is coming to Christ, the Object of their contempt and rage. These are also
unreasonable, and wicked men, men in whom is no faith, 1 These. 3, 2.

Sinners, did you but know what a blessed thing it is, to come to Jesus Christ,
and that by the help, and drawing of the Father, they do indeed come to him;
You would Hang and Burn in Hell, a Thousand years, before you would turn your
spirit, as you do, against him that God is drawing to Jesus Christ, and also
against the God that draws him.

But faithless Sinners, let us a little Expostulate the matter. What has this
man done against thee, that is coming to Jesus Christ? why do thou make him
the Object of thy scorn; does his coming to Jesus Christ offend thee? Does his
pursuing of his own Salvation offend thee? Does his forsaking of his sins, and
pleasures offend thee?

Poor Coming man! Thou Sacrificest the abomination of the Egyptians before
their eyes; and will they not stone thee? Exodus 8. 26.

But I say, why offended at this? is he ever the worse, for coming to Jesus
Christ, or for his loving, and serving of Jesus Christ? Or is he ever the more
a fool, for flying from that which will dround thee in Hell fire, and for
seeking Eternal life? Besides, pray Sirs, consider it, this he does, not of
himself, but by the drawing of the Father. Come, let me tell thee in thine ear,
thou that will not, come to him thy self, and him that would, thou hindrest.

First, Thou shall be judged for one, that has hated, maligned, and reproached
Jesus Christ, to whom this poor sinner is coming.

Secondly, Thou shall be judged too, for one that has hated the Father, by
whose powerful drawing, this sinner does come.

Thirdly, Thou shall be taken, and judged for one that has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace, in him, that is by its help, coming to Jesus Christ. What
say thou now? Will thou stand by thy doings, will thou continue to contemn,
and reproach the living God? Think thou, that thou shall weather it out well
enough, at the day of Judgment. Can thy heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong in the day, that I shall deal with thee, says the Lord. Joh. 15. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Jude 14. 14, 15. 1 These. 4. 8. Ezekiel. 22. 14.

Fifthly, Is it so? That no man comes to Jesus Christ by the will, Wisdom and
power of man, but by the gift, promise, and drawing of the Father: Then this
shows us, how it comes to pass, that weak means is so powerful as to bring
men out of their sins, to a hearty pursuit after Jesus Christ: When God bid
Moses speak to the people, he said, I will speak with thee, Exodus 19. When God
speaks, when God works, Who can let it? None, none. Then the work goes on.
Elias threw his Mantle upon the Shoulders of Elisha: and what a wonderful work
followed. When Jesus fell in with the crowing of a Cock, what work was there! O
when God is in the Means, then shall that Means, (be it never so weak, and
contemptible in it self) work wonders, 1 Kings 19. 19. Matt. 26. 74, 75. Mar.
14. 71, 72. Luke 22. 60, 61, 62.

The World understand not, nor believe that the walls of Jerico shall fall at
the Sound of Rams Horns; but when God will Work, the means must be effectual. A
word weakly spoken, spoken with difficulty, in Temptation, and in the midst of
great contempt and scorn, works Wonders; If the Lord thy God will say so too.

Sixthly, Is it so? does no Man come to Jesus Christ, by the Will, Wisdom, or
Power of Man; but by the Gift, Promise, and Drawing of the Father: Then here is
room for Christians to stand and admire, to stand and wonder, at the effectual
working of Gods Providence, that he has made use of, as means to bring them
to Jesus Christ.

For although Men are drawn to Christ by the Power of the Father: yet that
Power puts forth it self in the use of means; and that means, is Diverse;
sometimes this, sometimes that: for God is at liberty to work, by which, and
when, and how he will; but let the means be what it will, and as Contemptible
as may be; yet God that Commanded the Light to Shine out of Darkness, and that
out of Weakness, can make Strong; can, nay, does ofttimes make use of very
unlikely means, to bring about the Conversion and Salvation of his People.
Therefore, you that are come to Christ, (and that by unlikely means,) stay your
selves, and wonder; and wondering, magnify all mighty Power, by the working of
which, the Means has bin made effectual to bring you to Jesus Christ.

What was the providence, that God made use of, as a Means either more remote,
or more near, to bring thee to Jesus Christ? Was it the Removing of thy
Habitation, the change of thy Condition, the Loss of Relations, Estate, or the
like? was it thy casting of thine Eye upon some good Book, thy hearing of thy
Neighbors talk of Heavenly Things, the beholding of Gods Judgments, as
executed upon others, or thine own Deliverance from them; or thy being strangly
cast under the Ministry of some Godly Man? O take notice of such providence, or
providence! They were sent and managed by mighty Power, to do thee good. God
himself, I say, has Joined himself unto this Chariot: Yea, and so blessed it,
that it failed not to accomplish the thing for which he sent it.

God blesses not every one his Providence in this manner: How many Thousands
are there in this world, that pass every day under the same Providence? but
God is not in them, to do that work by them, as he has done for thy poor Soul,
by his effectual working with them. O! That Jesus Christ should meet thee in
this Providence, that Dispensation, or the other Ordinance! This is Grace
indeed! At this, therefore, it will be thy Wisdom to admire, and for this to
bless God.

Give me leave, to give you a taste of some of those Providence, that have been
effectual, through the Management of God, to bring Salvation to the Souls of
his People.

First, The first shall be, That of the Woman of Samaria. It must happen, that
she must needs go out of the City to draw Water (not before, nor after, but)
just when Jesus Christ her Savior was come from far, and set to rest him
(being weary) upon the Well: What a blessed Providence was this? Even a
Providence Managed by Almighty Wisdom, and Almighty Power, to the Conversion
and Salvation of this poor Creature. For by this Providence, was this Poor
Creature, and her Savior, brought together; that that blessed Work might be
fulfilled upon the Woman, according to the purpose before determined by the
Father, Joh 4.

Secondly, What a Providence was it, that there should between a Tree in the
way, for Zachus to climb, thereby to give Jesus an opportunity to call that,
Chief of the Publicans, home to himself, even before he came down therefrom?
Luke 19.

Thirdly, was it not also wonderful, that the Thief, which you read of in the
Gospel, should by the providence of God be cast into prison, to be condemned,
even at that Sessions that Christ himself was to die; Nay, and that it should
happen too, that they must be hanged together, that the Thief might be in
hearing and observing of Jesus in his last words, that he might be converted by
him before his death? Luke 23.

Fourthly, What a strange providence was it, and as strangly managed by God,
that Onesimus, when he was run away from his Master, should be taken, and, as I
think, cast into that very prison, where Paul lay bound for the word of the
Gospel; that he might there be by him converted, and then sent home again to
his Master, Philem. Behold, all things work together for Good; to them that
love God; to them, who are the called according to his purpose, Romans 8.

Nay, I have, my self, known some that have been made to go to hear the Word
preached, against their wills: others have gone, not to hear; but to see, and
be seen; nay, to jear and flout others; again, to catch and carp at things.
Some also to feed their adulterous eyes, with the sight of beautiful Objects,
and yet God has made use, even of these things, even of the wicked, and
sinful proposals of sinners, to bring them under that grace, that might save
their souls.

Seventhly, Does no man come to Jesus Christ, but by the drawing, etc. of the
Father? then let me here caution those poor sinners, that are spectators of the
change, that God has wrought in them that are coming to Jesus Christ, not to
attribute this work and change, to other things and causes.

There are some poor sinners in the World, that plainly see a change, a mighty
change in their Neighbors, and Relations, that are coming to Jesus Christ: But
as I said, they being ignorant, and not knowing whence it comes, and whither it
goes ( For so is every one that is Born of the Spirit, John, 3. 8.)

Therefore, they Attribute this Change to other Causes; as,

1. To Melancholy. 2. To sitting alone. 3. To overmuch Reading. 4. To their
going to too many Sermons. 5. To too much studying, and musing on what they
hear.
Also, they conclude on the other side;

First, That it is for want of merry company.

Secondly, For want of Physic, and therefore they advise them to leave off
Reading, going to Sermons, the company of sober People, and to be merry, to go
a Gossipping, to busy themselves in the things of this World, not to sit
musing alone, etc.

But come poor ignorant sinner, let me deal with thee, it seems thou art
turned Counselor for Satan: I tell thee, thou know not what thou do. Take
heed of spending thy judgment after this manner; thou judge foolishly, And
say in this, to every one that passes by, that thou art a Fool.

What! count Convictions for sin, mournings for sin, and Repentance for sin,
Melancholy! This is like those that on the otherside, said, These men are Drunk
with new Wine, etc. as he that said, Paul was Mad, Acts 2. 13. chap. 26. 24.

Poor ignorant sinner, can thou judge better. What! Is sitting alone,
pensive under Gods Hand; Reading the Scriptures, and hearing of Sermons, etc.
the way to be undone! The Lord open thine Eyes, and make thee to see thine
Error: Thou have set thy self against God, thou have despised the Operation of
his Hands, thou attemptest to Murder Souls. What! can thou give no better
Counsel touching those whom God has VVounded, than to send them to the
Ordinances of Hell for help; thou biddest them be merry and lightsome: but do
thou not know that The heart of Fools is in the House of Laughter, Eccles. 7.
4. Thou bidest them shun the hearing of Thundering Preachers; But is it not
better to hear the Rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the Song of
Fools. verse 5. Thou bidst them busy themselves in the things of this World:
but do thou not know that the Lord bids, First seek the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof? Matt. 6. 36.

Poor ignorant sinner, hear the Counsel of God to such, and learn, thy self, to
be wiser. If any be afflicted, let him Pray, is any merry let him sing Psalms.
Blessed is he that hears me, and hear for time to come: Save your selves from
this untoward Generation; search the Scripture, give attendance to Reading. It
is better to go to the House of Mourning, than to the House of Feasting, Jam.
5. 13. Prove. 8. 32, 33. Acts 2. 40. Joh. 5. 39. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Eccles. 7. 1, 2,
3.

And will thou judge him that does thus, art thou almost like Elemas the
Sorcerer, that sought to turn the Deputy from the Faith, thou seek to
pervert the right ways of the Lord; take heed, lest some heavy judgment
overtake thee, Acts 13. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

What! Teach men to quench convictions; take men off from a serious
consideration of the evil of sin, of the Terrors of the world to come, and of
how they shall escape the same! What! Teach men to put God and his Word out
of their minds by running to merry Company, by running to the World, by
Gossipping, etc. This is as much as to bid them say to God, Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; Or, what is the Almighty that we should
serve Him! Or, what profit have we, if we keep his Ways? Here Is a Devil in
Grain! What: bid men walk according to the course of this world, according to
the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children
of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.

Object. But we do not know, that such are coming to Jesus Christ, truly we
wonder at them, and think they are Fools.

Answ. First, Do you not know that they are coming to Jesus Christ? then they
may be coming to him for ought you know, and why will you be worse than the
Brute, to speak evil of the things ye know not? What! are ye made to be taken
and destroyed, must ye utterly Perish in your own Corruptions? 2 Pet. 2. 12.

Secondly, Do you not know them? let them alone then. If you cannot speak good
of them, speak not bad. Refrain from these Men, and let them alone; for if this
Council, or this Work, be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found, even to fight against God. Acts
5. 38 39.

Thirdly, But why do you wonder at a work of Conviction, and Conversion; know
you not, that this is the Judgment of God upon you, ye despisers? To behold,
and wonder, and perish. Acts. 13. 40, 41.

Fourthly, But why wonder, and think they are Fools? Is the way of the just an
abomination to you, see that passage and be ashamed, He that is upright in the
way is an Abomination to the wicked, Pro. 29. 27.

Fifthly, Your wondering at them, argues, that you are strangers to your selves,
to conviction for sin, and to hearty desires to be saved: as also to coming to
Jesus Christ.

But how shall we know, that such men are coming to Jesus Christ?

Ans. Who can make them see that Christ has made blind! ( Joh. 9. 39.)
Nevertheless, because I endeavor thy Conviction, Conversion, and Salvation,
Consider,

1. Do they cry out of Sin, being burdened with it, as of an exceeding bitter
thing?

2. Do they fly from it, as from the Face of a deadly Serpent?

3. Do they Cry out of the insufficiency of their own Righteousness, as to
justification in the sight of God?

4. Do they Cry out after the Lord Jesus, to save them?

5. Do they see more Worth, and Merit, in one drop of Christ's Blood to save
them, than in all the sins of the World to Damn them?

6. Are they tender of sinning against Jesus Christ?

7. Is his Name, Person, and Undertakings, more precious to them, than is the
Glory of all the World?

8. Is his Word most Dear unto them?

9. Is Faith in Christ, (of which they are convinced by Gods Spirit, of the
want of; and that without it, they can never close with Christ;) Precious to
them?

10. Do they savor Christ in his Word, and do they leave all the World for
his Sake; and are they willing (God helping them) to run all hazzards, for his
Name, for the love they bear to him?

11. Are his Saints precious to them?

If these things be so, whether thou see them or no, these men are coming to
Jesus Christ, Romans 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 38. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Heb.
6. 18, 19, 20. Isa. 64. 6. Phil. 3. 7, 8. Psalm. 54. 1. Psalm. 109. 26. Acts 16.
30. Psalm. 51. 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Romans 7. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Acts. 5. 41.
Jam. 2. 7. Phil. 3. 7, 8. Song. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm. 119. Joh. 13.
35. 1 John 4. 7. chap. 3. 14. Joh. 16. 9. Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6. Psalm. 19.
10, 11. Jer. 15. 16. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27. Acts. 20. 22, 23, 24. chap. 21.
13. Tit. 3. 15. 2 John 1. Ephesians. 4. 16. Phil. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 24.

The Second Observation.

I come now to the Second Observation propounded to be spoken to; to wit,

That they that are coming to Jesus Christ are oft-times heartily afraid, that
Jesus Christ will not receive them.

I told you, that this Observation is employed in the Text, and I gather it from
the largeness, and openness of the Promise [ I will in no wise cast out]. For
had there not been a proneness in us to fear Casting out, Christ needed not to
have, as it were, waylaid our fear, as he does, by this great and strange
Expression, In no wise; [ And him that Comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out.] There needed not, as I may say, such a Promise, be invented by the
Wisdom of Heaven, VVorded at such a Rate, as it were, on purpose to dash in
pieces at one blow, all the Objections of Coming Sinners; if they were not
prone to admit of such Objections, to the discouraging of their own Souls. For
this Word, in no wise; cutteth the Throat of all Objections; and it was dropped
by the Lord Jesus, for that very end; and to help the Faith that is mixed with
Unbelief.

And it is as it were, the sum of all Promises: neither can any Objection be
made, upon the unworthyness that thou find in thee, that this Promise will
not asoile.

But I am a great sinner, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I am an old sinner, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I am a hard hearted sinner, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I am a backsliding sinner, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I have served Satan all my days, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I have sinned against Light, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I have sinned against mercy, say thou.

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

But I have no good thing to bring with me, say thou:

I will in no wise cast out, says Christ.

Thus I might go on, to the end of things, and show you, that still this
promise was provided to answer Objections; And does answer them: But I say,
what need it be, if they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are not sometimes,
yea oft-times, heartily afraid, that Jesus Christ, will cast them out.

I will give you, now, two instances, that seem to imply the truth of this
observation.

In the Nineth of Matthew, at the Second Verse, you read of a man, that was
sick of the Palsy; and he was coming to Jesus Christ, being born upon a bed by
his Friends: He also was coming himself, and that upon another account than any
of his friends was aware of; even for the pardon of sins, and the Salvation of
his Soul. Now so soon as ever he was come into the presence of Christ, Christ
bids him be of good cheer; it seems then, his heart was fainting, but what was
the cause of this fainting, but the guilt, and burden of his sins; therefore he
proceeds, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

I say, Christ saw him sinking in his mind, about how it would go with his most
Noble part; and therefore, first, he applies himself to him, upon that account.
For though his friends, had Faith enough as to the cure of the Body, yet he
himself had little enough as to the Cure of his Soul: Therefore, Christ takes
him up as a man falling down, saying, Son, be of good Cheer, thy Sins are
forgiven thee.

That about the Prodigal, seems pertinent also to this matter; When he was
come to himself, he said, how many hired Servants of my Father have Bred
enough, and to spare, and I perish for Hunger. I will arise now and go to my
Father. Heartily spoken. But how did he perform his Promise? I think, not so
well as he promised to do: And my ground for my Thoughts is, because his
Father, so soon as he was come at him, fell upon his Neck and Kissed him:
Implying methinks, as if the Prodegal by this time was dejected in his mind;
and therefore, his Father gives him the most sudden and familiar token of
Reconciliation.

And Kisses were of old time often used to remove Doubts and Fears. Thus Laban,
and Esau, Kiss Jacob. Thus Joseph, Kissed his Brethren, and thus also David,
Kissed Absalom, Genesis 31. 55. chap. 33. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. chap. 48. 9, 10. 2 Samuel 14. 33.

It Is true, as I said, at first setting out, he spoke heartily, as sometimes
Sinners also do in their beginning to come to Jesus Christ: But might not he,
yea, in all probability he had, (between the first step he took, and the last,
by which he accomplished that journey) many a thought, both this way, and that;
as whether his Father would receive him, or no? As thus; I said, I would go to
my Father: but how, if when I come at him, he should ask me, Where I have all
this while bin; What must I say then? Also, if he asks me, What is become of
the portion of Goods that he gave me; What shall I say then? If he asks me,
Who have bin my Companions; What shall I say then? If he also shall ask me,
What has bin my Preferment in all the time of mine absence from him; What
shall I say then? Yea, and if he ask me, Why I came home no sooner; What shall
I say then? Thus, I say, might he reason with himself; And being Conscious to
himself, that he could give but a bad Answer to any of these Interogatories; no
marvel, if he stood in need first of all, of a Kiss from his Fathers Lips. For,
had he answered the first, in Truth he must say, I have bin a haunter of
Taverns, and Alehouses; and as for my Portion, I spent it in Riotous Living; my
Companions, were Whores, and Drabs: As for my preferment, the highest was, that
I became a Hoggard: and as for my not coming home till now, Could I have made
shift to have staid abroad any longer, I had not lain at thy Feet for Mercy now.

I say, these things considered, and considering again, how prone poor man is,
to give way, when truly awakned, to despondings, and heart-misgiveings; no
marvel if he sink in his mind, between the time of his first setting out, and
that of his coming to his Father.

3. But Thirdly, methinks I have for the confirmation of this Truth, the
consent of all the Saints that are under Heaven, to wit, That they that are
Coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times heartily afraid that he will not receive
them.

Quest. But what should be the Reason?

I will Answer to this Question thus.

First, It is not for want of the revealed Will of God, that manifests
grounds for the Contrary, for that there is a sufficiency of; yea, the Text it
self, has laid a sufficient Foundation, for encouragement, for them that are
Coming to Jesus Christ.

And him that Comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Secondly, It is not for want of an Invitation to Come, for that is full, and
plain, Come unto me, all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give
you Rest, Mat. 11. 28.

Thirdly, Neither is it, for want of a manifestation of Christ's willingness to
receive, as those Texts above named, with that which follows, declares. If any
man Thirst, let him come unto me and drink, Joh. 7. 37.

Fourthly, It is not for want of exceeding great and precious Promises, to
receive them that Come. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.

Fifthly, It is not for want of Solemn Oath, and Engagement, to save them that
come: For, because he could swear by no Greater, he swore by Himself; -- That
by Two Immutable Things, in which it was impossible that God should Lie, we
might have a strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the
Hope set before us, Heb. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Sixthly, Neither is it for want of great Examples of God's Mercy, that have
come to Jesus Christ, of which we Read most plentifully in the Word.

Therefore, it must be concluded, It is for want of that which follows:

First, It is for want of the Knowledge of Christ: Thou know but little of
the Grace and Kindness that is in the Heart of Christ: Thou know but little
of the Virtue and Merit of his Blood: Thou know but little of the
Willingness, that is in his Heart to save thee; And this is the reason of the
Fear that arises in thy Heart, and that causes thee to doubt, that Christ
will not receive thee. Unbelief is the Daughter of Ignorance: Therefore, Christ
says; O Fools, and slow of Heart to Believe, Luke 24. 25.

Slowness of Heart to believe, flows from thy Foolishness in the Things of
Christ: This is evident to all that are acquainted with themselves, and that
are seeking after Jesus Christ: The more Ignorance, the more Unbelief; the more
Knowledge of Christ, the more Faith. They that know thy Name, will put their
Trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 10. He therefore, that began to come to Christ but the
other day, and has yet but little Knowledge of him, he fears that Christ will
not receive him: But he that has been longer acquainted with him, he is
Strong, and has overcome the Wicked One, 1 John 2.

When Joseph's Brethren came into Egypt to buy Corn, it is said; Joseph knew
his Brethren, but his Brethren knew not him. What follows? Why, great Mistrust
of Heart about their speeding well; specially, if Joseph did but answer them
Roughly; calling them Spies, and questioning their Truth, and the like. And
observe it; So long as their Ignorance about their Brother remained with them,
whatsoever Joseph did, still they put the worst Sense upon it: For instance;
Joseph upon a time, bids the Steward of his House bring them Home, to Dine with
him, to Dine even in Joseph's House: And how is this resented by them? Why,
they were afraid: And the men were afraid, because they were brought into
(their Brother) Joseph's House. And they said, He seeks occasion against us,
and will fall upon us, and take us for Bondmen, and our Asses, Genesis 42. Chap.
43. What! Afraid to go to Joseph's House? He was their Brother; He intended to
Feast them; to Feast them, and Feast with them. Ah! but they were ignorant,
That he was their Brother: And so long as their Ignorance lasted, so long their
Fear terrifyed them. Just thus it is with the Sinner, that but of late is
coming to Jesus Christ: He is ignorant of the Love and Pity that is in Christ
to Coming-Sinners: Therefore he doubts, therefore he fears, therefore his Heart
mis-gives him.

Coming-Sinner, Christ inviteth thee to Dine and Sup with him: He inviteth thee
to a Banquet of Wine; yea, to come into his Wine-Cellar, and his Banner over
thee shall be Love, Revel. 3. 20. Song 2. Chap. 5. But I doubt it, says the
Sinner: But it is answered; He calls thee, invites thee to his Banquet, to his
Flaggons, Apples; to his Wine, and to the Juice of his Pomgranate. O I fear, I
doubt, I mistrust! I tremble in Expectation of the contrary! Come out of the
Man, thou Dastardly* Ignorance! Be not afraid Sinner, only Believe: He that
comes to Christ, he will in no wise cast out.

Let the Coming - Sinner therefore seek after more of the good Knowledge of
Jesus Christ: Press after it; Seek it as Silver; and dig for it, as for hid
Knowledge. This will embolden thee: This will make thee wax Stronger and
Stronger. I know, whom I have Believed; I know him, said Paul: And what
follows? Why, And I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him, against that Day, 2 Timothy

What had Paul committed to Jesus Christ? The Answer is, He had committed to
him his Soul. But why did he Commit his Soul to him? Why, because he knew him:
He knew him to be Faithful, to be Kind: He knew, he would not fail him, nor
forsake him; And therefore, he laid his Soul down at his Feet; and committed it
to him, to keep against that Day. But,

Secondly, Thy Fears, that Christ will not receive thee, may be also a
Consequent of thy earnest, and strong Desires after thy Salvation by him. For
this I observe; That strong Desires to have, are attended with strong Fears of
missing. What a Man most sets his Heart upon, and what his Desires are most
after, he (oft-times) most fears, he shall not obtain. So the Man, the Ruler of
the Synagogue, had a great desire, that his Daughter should live; and that
Desire was attended with Fear, that she should not: Wherefore, Christ says
unto him, Be not afraid, Mark 5. 36.

Suppose a Young Man should have his Heart much set upon a Virgin, to have her
to Wife: If ever he Fears he shall not Obtain, it is when he begins to love;
now, thinks he, some body will step in betwixt my Love, and the Object of it;
either they will find Fault with my Person, my Estate, my Conditions, or
something.

Now thoughts begin to work, she does not like me, or something. And thus it is
with the Soul at first Coming to Jesus Christ; thou love him, and thy love
produces Jealousy, and that Jealousy, oft-times, beget Fears.

Now thou fear the Sins of thy Youth, the Sins of thine old Age, the Sins of
thy Calling, the Sins of thy Christian Duties, the Sins of thy Heart, or
something: thou think something or other will alienate the Heart and
Affections of Jesus Christ from thee; thou think he sees something in thee,
for the sake of which he will refuse thy Soul.

But be content, a little more Knowledge of him, will make thee take better
heart, thy earnest desires shall not be attended with such burning Fears: Thou
shall hereafter say, This is mine Infirmity. (Psalm. 77.)

Thou art Sick of Love; a very sweet Disease, and yet every Disease has some
weakness attending of it; yet I wish this Distemper (if it be lawful to call it
so) was more Epidemical. Dye of this Disease, I would gladly do; it is better
than Life it self, though it be attended with Fears. But thou cryest, I cannot
obtain: Well, be not too hasty in making Conclusions: If Jesus Christ had not
put his Finger in at the Hole of the Lock, thy Bowels would not have been
troubled for him, ( Song 5.) Mark how the Prophet has it: They shall walk
after the Lord; he shall Roar like a Lion: When he shall Roar, the Children
shall Tremble from the East: They shall Tremble like a Bird out of Egypt, and
as a Dove out of the Land of Assyria, Hos. 11. 10, 11.

When God Roars, (as oft-times the Coming Soul hears him Roar) what Man, that
is coming, can do otherwise than Tremble? ( Amos 3. 8.) But Trembling he comes:
He sprang in, and came Trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, Act. 16.

Should you ask him that we mentioned but now; How long is it, since you began
to fear you should miss of this Damosel you Love so? The Answer would be; Ever
since I began to Love her: But did you not fear it before? No; nor should I
fear it now, but that I vehemently Love her. Come Sinner, let us apply it: How
long is it since thou begannest to Fear, that Jesus Christ will not Receive
thee? Thy Answer is; Ever since I began to desire, that he would save my Soul.
I began to Fear, when I began to Come: And the more my Heart burns in Desires
after him, the more I feel my Heart fear, I shall not be Saved by him.

See now; Did not I tell thee, That thy Fears were but the Consequence of
strong Desires? Well, fear not, Coming-Sinner; Thousands of Coming-Souls are in
thy Condition, and yet they will also get safe into Christ's Bosom. Say (says
Christ) to them that are of a fearful Heart, Be strong, fear not; -- Your God
will come and Save you, Isa. 35. 4. Chap. 63* 1.

Thirdly, Thy Fear that Christ will not Receive thee, May arise from a Sense of
thine own Unworthyness. Thou see what a poor, sorry, wretched, worthless
Creature thou art; And seeing this, thou fear Christ will not Receive thee.
Alas, say thou, I am the Vilest of all Men; a Town-Sinner, a Ringleading
Sinner! I am not only a Sinner my self, but have made others twofold worse the
Children of Hell also. Besides, Now I am under some Awakenings, and Stirrings
of Mind after Salvation; even now I find my heart Rebellious, Carnal, Hard,
Treacherous, Desperate, prone to Unbelief, to Despair: It forgets the Word;
it wandreth, it runs to the Ends of the Earth. There is not (I am persuaded)
one in all the World, that has such a desperate wicked Heart, as mine is: My
Soul is careless to do Good; but none more earnest to do that which is Evil.

Can such an one as I am, Live in Glory? Can an Holy, a Just, and Righteous
God, once think (with Honor to his Name) of Saving such a Vile Creature as I
am? I fear it. Will he show Wonders to such a dead Dog as I am? I doubt it.

I am cast out, to the loathing of my Person; yea, I loath my self: I stink in
mine own Nostrils. How can I then be accepted by an Holy and Sin-abhorring God?
(Psalm. 38. 5, 6, 7. Ezekiel. 16. Chap. 20. 42, 43, 44.) Saved I would be; and, Who
is there, that would not, were they in my Condition? Indeed, I wonder at the
Madness and Folly of others, when I see them so Merry in their Chains; while I
see them Leap and Skip so carelessly about the Mouth of Hell. Bold Sinner, How
dare thou tempt God, by Laughing at the Breach of his Holy Law? But Alas!
They are not so bad one way, but I am worse another: I wish, my Self were any
Body but my Self: And yet here again, I know not what to wish. When I see such,
as I believe, are coming to Jesus Christ; O I bless them! But am confounded in
my self, to see how unlike (as I think) I am to every good Man in the World.
They can Hear, Read, Pray, Remember, Repent; be Humble, and Do every thing
better than so Vile a Wretch as I.

I, Vile Wretch, am good for nothing, but to burn in Hellfire; and when I
think of that, I am confounded too.

Thus the Sense of Unworthyness, creates and heightens Fears in the Hearts of
them that are coming to Jesus Christ; But indeed, it should not: For, who needs
the Physician, but the Sick? Or, who did Christ come into the World to Save,
but the Chief of Sinners? ( Mar. 1. 17. 1 Timothy 1. 15.) Wherefore, the more thou
feast thy Sins, the faster fly thou to Jesus Christ. And let the Sense of thy
own Unworthyness, prevail with thee yet to go faster. As it is with the Man
that carries his broken Arm in a Sling to the Bone-setter; still as he thinks
of his broken Arm, and as he feels the Pain and Anguish, he hastens his Pace to
the Man: And if Satan meets thee, and asks, Whether go thou? Tell him,
Thou art Maimed, and art going to the Lord Jesus. If he objects thine own
Unworthiness, Tell him; That even as the Sick seeks the Physician, and as he
that has broken Bones, seeks him that can Set them: So thou art going to Jesus
Christ for Cure and Healing, for thy Sin-sick-Soul.

But it often times happens to the Coming-Soul, as it happens to him that
flies for his Life; He despairs of Escaping, and therefore delivers up himself
into the Hand of the Purfuer. But, up, up, Sinner; be of good cheer, Christ
came to Save the Unworthy Ones: Be not Faithless, but Believe. Come away Man;
the Lord Jesus calls thee, saying; And him that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out.

Fourthly, Thy Fear that Christ will not Receive thee, may arise from a Sense
of the exceeding Mercy of being Saved. Sometime Salvation is in the Eyes of him
that desires it, so great, so huge, so wonderful a thing, that the very
Thoughts of the Excellency of it, ingenders Unbelief about obtaining it, in the
Heart of those that unfeignedly desire it. Seems it to you (said David) a
Light thing, to be a King's Son-in-Law, 1 Samuel 18. 23. So the Thoughts of the
Greatness and Glory of the Thing propounded; as Heaven, Eternal Life, Eternal
Glory, to be with God, and Christ, and Angels: These are great Things; Things
too Good, (says the Soul, that is little in his own Eyes:) Things too Rich,
(says the Soul, that is truly poor in Spirit) for me.

Besides, the Holy Ghost has a way to greaten Heavenly things, to the
understanding of the coming sinner; yea, and at the same time to greaten too
the sin, and unworthiness of that sinner. Now the Soul staggeringly wonders,
saying; What! to be made like Angels, like Christ! To live in Eternal bliss,
joy and felicity! This is for Angels, and for them that can walk like Angels.

If a Prince, a Duke, or Earl, should send (by the Hand of his Servant) to some
poor, sorry, beggarly scrub, to take her for his Master, to wife; and the
Servant should come and say, My Lord and Master, such an one, has sent me to
thee, to take thee to him to wife; he is rich, beautiful; and of excellent
qualities; he is Loving, Meek, Humble, Well-spoken, etc. What now would this
poor, sorry, beggarly Creature think? what would she say, or how would she
frame an answer? When King David sent to Abigail upon this account, and though
she was a rich woman, yet she said, Behold, Let thine hand maid be a Servant to
wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord. (1 Samuel 25. 40, 41.) She was
confounded, she could not well tell what to say, the offer was so great, beyond
what could in reason be expected.

But suppose this great person should Second his Suit, and send to this Sorry
Creature again; What would she say now? Would she not say, you Mock me? But
what if he affirms that he is in good earnest, and that his Lord must have her
to wife; yea, suppose he should prevail upon her to Credit his Message, and to
address her self for her Journey: Yet behold, every thought of her pedigree
confounds her; also her sense of want of beauty, makes her ashamed: and if she
does but think of being embraced, the unbelief that is mixed with that thought,
whirls her into tremblings: And now she calls her self fool for believing the
Messenger, and thinks not to go: If she thinks of being bold, she Blushes, and
the least thought that she shall be rejected, when she comes at him, makes her
look as if she would give up the Ghost.

And is it a wonder then, to see a Soul that is drowned with the sense of
glory, and a sense of its own nothingness, to be confounded in it self, and to
fear that the glory apprehended, is too great, too good, and too rich for such
an one.

That thing, Heaven and Eternal Glory, is so great; and I that would have it,
so small, so sorry a Creature, that the thoughts of obtaining, confounds me.

Thus, I say, does the greatness of the things desired, quite dash and
overthrow the mind of the desirer: O it is too bigg, it is too big! It is too
great a mercy.

But coming sinner, let me reason with thee, Thou say it is too bigg, too
great. Well, will things that are less, satisfy thy Soul? will a less thing
than Heaven, than Glory, and Eternal life, answer thy desires? No, nothing
less: yet I fear they are too big, and too good for me, ever to obtain. Well,
as big, and as good as they are, God gives them to such as thou; They are not
too big for God to give. No, not too big to give freely: be content, let God
give like Himself; he is that Eternal God, and he gives like himself. When
Kings give, they do not use to give as poor men do. Hence it is said, that
Nabal made a feast in his house, Like the feast of a King: And again, All these
things did Araunah, as a King, give unto David, 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 24. Now God
is a great King, let him give like a King; Nay, let him give like himself, and
do thou receive like thy self: He has all, and thou have nothing. God told his
people of old, that he would save them in truth, and in righteousness; and that
they should return to, and enjoy the Land, which before, for their sins, had
spued them out: and then adds, under a supposition of their counting the mercy
too good, or too big: If it be mavelous in the eyes of the remnant of this
people in these days, should it also be Mavelous in mine eyes, says the Lord
of hosts, Zech. 8. 6.

As who should say, they are now in Captivity, and little in their own eyes;
therefore they think the mercy of returning to Canaan, is a mercy too
marvellously big for them to enjoy; but if it be so in their eyes, it is not so
in mine: I will do for them, like God, if they will but receive my bounty, like
sinners.

Coming sinner, God can give his heavenly Canaan, and the glory of it unto
thee; yea none ever had them, but as a gift, a free gift: He has given us his
Son, how shall he not then with him also freely give us all things? Rom 8.

It was not the worthiness of Abraham, or Moses, or David, or Peter, or Paul:
But the mercy of God that made them inheritors of Heaven. If God thinks thee
worthy, judge not thy self unworthy; but take it, and be thankful. And it is a
good sign, he intends to give thee, if he has drawn out thy heart to ask. O
Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart,
thou will incline thine car, (Psalm. 10. 17.)

When God is said to incline his ear, it implies an intention to bestow the
mercy desired: Take it therefore, thy Wisdom will be to receive, not sticking
at thine own unworthiness. It is said, He raises up the poor out of the dust,
and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to
make them inherit the thrown of glory. Again, He raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts some needy Out of the dunghill, that he may set him with
Princes, even with the Princes of his people. 1 Samuel 2. 8. Psalm. 113. 7, 8.

You see also, when God made a Wedding for his Son, he called not the great,
nor the rich, nor the mighty, but the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the
blind, (Mat. 22. Luke 14.)

Fifthly, Thy fears that Christ will not receive thee, may arise from the
hideous Roarings of the Devil, who pursues thee. He that hears him Roar, must
be a mighty Christian, if he can, at that time, deliver himself from fear. He
is called a Roaring Lion, and then, to alude to that in Isaiah, if one look
into them, they have darkness and sorrow, and the Light is darkened in their
very Heaven, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Isa. 5. 30.

There are two things, among many, that Satan uses to Roar Out, after them,
that are coming to Jesus Christ.

1. That they are not Elected. Or, 2. That they have sinned the sin against the
Holy Ghost.
To both these I answer briefly.

First, Touching election, out of which thou fear thou art excluded: Why
coming sinner, even the Text it self affords thee help against this doubt,
and that by a double argument.

First, That coming to Christ, is by virtue of the gift, promise, and drawing
of the Father; but thou art a coming, therefore God has given thee, promised
thee, and is drawing thee to Jesus Christ. Coming sinner, hold to this: and
when Satan begins to Roar again, Answer: but I feel my heart moving after
Jesus Christ; but that would not be, if I were not given by promise, and
drawing, to Christ by the power of the Father.

Secondly, Jesus Christ has promised, that him that comes to Him, he will in
no wise cast out: And if he has said it, will he not make it good; I mean,
even thy Salvation? for, as I have said already; Not to cast out, is to
receive, and admit to the benefit of Salvation: if then the Father has given
thee, as is manifest by thy coming; and if Christ will receive thee, thou
coming Soul; as it is plain he will, because he has said, he will in no wise
cast thee out: Then be confident, and let those conclusions, that as naturally
flow from the Text, as light from the Sun, or water from the fountain, stay
thee.

If Satan therefore objecteth, but thou art not elected; Answer. But I am
coming; Satan, I am coming; and that I could not be, but that the Father draws
me; and I am coming to such a Lord Jesus, as will in no wise cast me out.
Further, Satan, were I not elect, the Father would not draw me, nor would the
Son so graciously open his bosom to me. I am persuaded, that not one of the
non-elect, shall ever be able to say (no, not in the day of judgment) I did
sincerely come to Jesus Christ. Come they may feignedly, as Judas and Magnus
did; But that is not our question: Therefore, O thou honest-hearted coming
sinner, be not afraid, but come!

As to the Second part of the Objection, about sinning the sin against the Holy
Ghost: The same argument overthrows that also. But I will argue thus.

First, Coming to Christ, is by virtue of a special gift of the Father; but the
Father gives no such gift to them that have sinned that sin; therefore thou
that art coming, have not committed that sin. That the Father gives no such
gift to them that has sinned this sin; Is evident,

1. Because such have sinned themselves out of God's Favor, They shall never
have Forgiveness, Matthew. 12. 32. But it is a special Favor of God to give unto
a Man, to come to Jesus Christ; because thereby he obtains Forgiveness:
Therefore, he that comes, has not sinned that Sin.

2. They that have sinned the Sin against the Holy Ghost, have sinned
themselves out of an Interest in the Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood;
There remains for such, no more Sacrifice for Sin: But God gives not Grace to
any of them to come to Christ, that have no share in the Sacrifice of his Body
and Blood: Therefore, thou that art coming to him, have not sinned that Sin;
Heb. 10. 26.

Secondly, Coming to Christ, is by the Special Drawing of the Father: No Man
comes to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: But the Father
draws not him to Christ, for whom he has not allotted Forgiveness by his
Blood. Therefore, they that are coming to Jesus Christ, have not sinned that
Sin; because he has allotted them Forgiveness by his Blood, Joh. 6. 44.

That the Father cannot draw them to Jesus Christ, for whom he has not allotted
Forgiveness of Sins, is manifest to Sense: For that would be a plain Mockery, a
Flam; neither becoming his Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, nor Goodness.

Thirdly, Coming to Jesus Christ, lays a Man under the Promise of Forgiveness,
and Salvation: But it is impossible, that he that has sinned that Sin, should
ever be put under a Promise of these. Therefore, he that has sinned that Sin,
can never have Heart to come to Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, Coming to Jesus Christ, lays a Man under his Intercession; For he
ever Lives to make Intercession for them that come, Heb. 7. 25. Therefore, he
that is coming to Jesus Christ, cannot have sinned that Sin.

Christ has forbidden his People, to pray for them that have sinned that Sin;
and therefore, will not pray for them himself: But he prays for them that come.

Fifthly, He that has sinned that Sin, Christ is to him of no more Worth, than
is a Man that is Dead; For he has Crucified to himself, the Son of God: Yea,
and has also counted his Precious Blood, as the Blood of an Unholy Thing; Heb.
6. chap. 10. Now, he that has this low Esteem of Christ, will never come to
him for Life: But the Coming-Man has an high Esteem of his Person, Blood, and
Merits. Therefore, he that is coming, has not Committed that Sin.

Sixthly, If he that has sinned this Sin, might yet come to Jesus Christ; then
must the Truth of God be overthrown: which says in one Place; He has never
Forgiveness: and in another, I will in no wise cast him out: Therefore, that he
may never have Forgiveness, he shall never have Heart to come to Jesus Christ.
It is impossible, that such an one should be Renewed, either to, or by
Repentance, Heb. 6. Wherefore, never trouble thy Head, nor Heart, about this
Matter: He that comes to Jesus Christ, cannot have sinned against the Holy
Ghost.

Sixthly, Thy Fears that Christ will not Receive thee, may arise from thine own
Folly, in Inventing; yea, in thy Chalking out to God a way to bring thee Home
to Jesus Christ. Some Souls that are coming to Jesus Christ, are great
Tormentors of themselves upon this account: They conclude, that if their Coming
to Jesus Christ is right, they must needs be brought Home thus and thus: As to
instance;

1. Says one, If God be bringing of me to Jesus Christ, then will he load me
with the Guilt of Sin, till he makes me Roar again.

2. If God be indeed a bringing of me home to Jesus Christ, then must I be
assaulted with dreadful Temptations of the Devil.

3. If God be indeed a bringing of me to Jesus Christ; then even when I come at
him, I shall have wonderful Revelations of him.

This is the way that some Sinners appoint for God: But, perhaps, he will not
walk therein; yet will he bring them to Jesus Christ: But now, because they
come not the Way of their own Chalking out, therefore they are at a loss. They
look for Heavy Load and Burden; but, perhaps, God gives them a Sight of their
lost Condition, and adds not that heavy Weight and Burden. They look for
fearful Temptations of Satan; but God sees, that yet they are not fit for them:
Nor is the Time come, that he should be Honored by them in such a Condition.
They look for great and glorious Revelations, of Christ, Grace and Mercy: But
perhaps, God only takes the Yoke from off their Jaws, and lays Meat before
them. And now again, they are at a loss, yet a-coming to Jesus Christ: I drew
them (says God) with the Cords of a Man, with the Bands of Love: I took the
Yoke from off their Jaws, and laid Meat unto them, Hos. 11. 4.

Now, I say, if God brings thee to Christ, and not by the Way that thou have
appointed, then thou art at a loss; and for thy being at a loss, Thou may
thank thy self. God has more ways than thou know of, to bring a Sinner to
Jesus Christ: But he will not give thee beforehand an Account, by which of
them he will bring thee to Christ; Isa. 40. 13. Job 33. 13.

Sometimes, he has his Way in the Whirlwind; but sometimes the Lord is not
there, Nah. 13. 1 King. 19. 11.

If God will deal more gently with thee, than with others of his Children,
grudge not at it: Refuse not the Waters that go softly, lest he bring upon thee
the Waters of the Rivers, strong and many; even these two smoking Firebrarnds,
the Devil, and Guilt of Sin; Isa. 8. 6, 7. He said to Peter, Follow me: And
what Thunder did Zacheus hear or see? Zacheus, come down, said Christ; and he
came down (says Luke) and Received him Joyfully.

But had Peter, or Zacheus, made the Objection that thou have made; and
Directed the Spirit of the Lord, as thou have done; they might have looked long
enough, before they had found themselves coming to Jesus Christ.

Besides, I will tell thee; That the greatness of Sense of Sin, the hideous
Roarings of the Devil, yea, and abundance of Revelations, will not prove that
God is bringing the Soul to Jesus Christ: As Balaam, Cain, Judas, and others
can witness.

Further; Consider, that what thou have not of these things now, thou may
have another time, and that to thy Distraction: Wherefore, instead of being
discontent, because thou art not in the Fire, because thou hear not the
Sound of the Trumpet, and Alarm of War; Pray, that thou enter not into
Temptation: Yea, come boldly to the Throne of Grace, and obtain Mercy, and find
Grace to help in that time of need; Psalm. 88. 15. Matthew. 26. 40, 41. Heb. 4. 16.

Poor Creature! Thou criest, If I were Tempted, I could come faster, and with
more Confidence to Jesus Christ: Thou say thou know not what. What says
Job? Withdraw thy Hand from me, and let not thy Dread make me afraid: Then
call thou, and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me, Job 13. 21.
It is not the overheavy Load of Sin, but the Discovery of Mercy; not the
Roaring of the Devil, but the Drawing of the Father, that makes a Man come to
Jesus Christ: I my self know all these Things.

True, sometimes, yea, most an end* they that come to Jesus Christ, come the
Way that thou desire; the Laden, Tempted Way: But the Lord also leads some
by the Waters of Comfort. If I was to choose, when to go a long Journey; to wit,
Whether I would go it in the Dead of Winter, or in the Pleasant Spring, (though
if it was a very profitable Journey, (as that of coming to Christ is) I would
choose to go it through Fire and Water, before I would lose the Benefit) I would
choose to go it in the Pleasant Spring; because the Way would be more
Delightsome, the Days longer and Warmer, the Nights shorter, and not so Cold.
And it is observable, that that very Argument that thou usest to weaken thy
Strength in the Way, that very Argument Christ Jesus uses to encourage his
Beloved to come to him: Arise (says he) my Love, my Fair One, and come away;
(Why?) For lo, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the Flowers
appear in the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the Voice of
the Turtle is heard in our Land. The Fig Tree puts forth her Green Figs, and
the Vine, with her tender Grapes, give a good Smell: Arise my Love, my Fair
One, and come away, Song 2. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Trouble not thy self therefore, Coming-Sinner. If thou see thy lost
Condition by Original and Actual Sin; if thou see thy Need of the spotless
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; if thou art willing to be found in him, and to
take up thy Cross and follow him: Then pray for a fair Wind, and good Weather,
and come away. Stick no longer in a Muse and Doubt about Things, but come away
to Jesus Christ: Do it, I say, lest thou tempt God to lay the Sorrows of a
Traveling Woman upon thee. Thy Folly in this thing, may make him do it. Mind
what follows: The Sorrows of a Traveling Woman shall come upon him: Why? He is
an unwise Son; so he should not stay long in the Place of the breaking forth of
Children, Hos. 13. 13.

Seventhly, Thy Fears that Christ will not Receive thee, may arise from those
Decays that thou find in thy Soul, even while thou art coming to him: Some,
even as they are coming to Jesus Christ, do find themselves grow worse and
worse; And this is, indeed, a fore Trial to the poor Coming-Sinner.

To explain my self: There is such an one a coming to Jesus Christ; who, when
at first, he began to look out after him, was Sensible, Affectionate, and
broken in Spirit: but now is grown Dark, Senseless, Hard-hearted, and inclining
to neglect Spiritual Duties, etc. Besides, he now finds in himself,
Inclinations to Unbelief, Atheism, Blasphemy, and the like: Now he finds, he
cannot Tremble at God's Word, his Judgments, nor at the Apprehensions of
Hellfire: Neither can he, as he thinks, be sorry for these Things. Now, this
is a sad Dispensation: The Man under the Sixth Head, complained for want of
Temptations; but thou have enough of them: Art thou glad of them, Tempted,
Coming-Sinner? They that never were Exercised with them, may think it a fine
thing to be within the Range; but he that is there, is ready to sweat Blood for
Sorrow of Heart, and to howl for Vexation of Spirit.

This man is in the Wilderness, among the wild Beasts: here he sees a Bear,
there a Lion, Yonder a Leopard, a Wolf, a Dragon: Devils of all sorts, doubts
of all sorts: Fears of all sorts Haunt and Molest his Soul. Here he sees smoke,
yea, feels fire and brimstone, scattered upon his secret places; he hears the
sound of an Horrible Tempest.

O! My friends, even the Lord Jesus that knew all things, even He, saw no
pleasure in Temptations, nor did He desire to be in them: Wherefore one, Text
says, he was led; and an other, he was driven of the Spirit into the
wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. Mat. 4. 1. Mar. 1. 12.

But to return, Thus it happens sometimes to them that are coming to Jesus
Christ. A sad hap indeed; one would think, that he that is flying from Wrath to
come, has little need of such Clogges as these; And yet so it is, and woeful
experience proves it: The Church of old Complained, that her enemies over-took
her, between the straights. Just between hope and fear, Heaven and Hell, Lam. 1.

This man feels the infirmity of his flesh; he finds a proneness in himself
to be desperate: now he chides with God, Flings and Tumbles like a Wild Bull in
a net, and still the guilt of all returns upon himself, to the Crushing of him
to pieces; Yet he feels his heart so hard, that he can find, as he thinks, no
kind falling under any of his Miscarriages. Now he is a lump of confusion in
his own eyes, whose Spirit, and Actions are without order.

Temptations serve the Christian, as the Shepherds dogs serves the silly
sheep, that is coming behind the flock; he runs upon it, pulls it down, worry
it, wound it, and grievously bedabbleth it with dirt and wet in the lowest
places of the Furrows of the field: And not leaving it, until it is half dead;
nor then neither, except God rebuke.

Here is now room for fears of being cast away. Now I see I am lost, says the
sinner; This is not coming to Jesus Christ, says the sinner; such a desperate
hard, and wretched heart as mine is, cannot be a gracious one, says the
sinner: And bid such an one be Better; he says, I cannot, no I cannot.

Quest. But what will you say to a Soul in this condition?

Answ. I will say, that Temptations have attended the best of Gods people; I
will say, that Temptations come to do us good; and I will say also, that there
is a difference betwixt growing worse and worse, and thy seeing more clearly
how bad thou art.

There is a man of an ill-favored countenance, who has too high a conceit of
his beauty; and wanting the benefit of a glass, he still stands in his own
conceit; at last a Limner is sent unto him, who draws his ill-favored face
to the life: now looking thereon, he begins to be convinced that he is not half
so handsome, as he thought he was. Coming sinner, thy Temptations are these
painters, they have drawn out thy ill-favored heart to the life, and have set
it before thine eyes, and now thou see how ill favored thou art.

Hezekiah was a good man, yet when he lay sick (for ought I know) he had some
what too good an opinion of his heart; and for ought I know also, the Lord
might, upon his recovery, leave him to a Temptation, that he might better know
All that was in his heart. Compare, Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. with 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.

Alas! we are sinful out of measure, but see it not to the full, until an
hour of Temptation comes: But when it comes, it does as the Painter does, it
draws out our heart to the life: Yet the sight of what we are, should not
keep us from coming to Jesus Christ.

There are two ways, by which God lets a man into a sight of the Naughtyness of
his heart: One is, by the light of the Word, and spirit of God; and the other
is, by the Temptations of the Devil. But by the first, we see our naughtiness
one way, and by the second, another. By the Light of the Word, and Spirit of
God, thou have a sight of thy naughtyness, as by the light of the Sun, thou
have a sight of the spots, and defilements that are in thy house or raiment.
Which light gives thee to see a necessity of cleansing, but makes not the
blemishes to spread more abominably. But when Satan comes, when he tempts, he
puts life and rage into our sins, and turns them, as it were, into so many
devils within us. Now like prisoners they attempt to brake through the prison
of our body; they will attempt to get out at our eyes, mouths, ears, any ways;
To the Scandal of the Gospel, and Reproach of Religion, to the darkning of our
evidences, and damning of our souls.

But I shall say, as I said before, this has often times been the Lot of Gods
people. And, No Temptation has over-taken thee, but such as is common to man;
and God is faithful, who will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou
art able, 1 Cor. 10. 13. See the Book of Job, the Book of Psalms, and that of
the Lamentations. And remember further, that Christ himself was tempted to
blaspheme, to worship the devil, and to Murder himself. ( Mat 4. Luke 4.)
Temptations, worse then which, thou can hardly be over-taken with. But he was
sinless. That is true. And he is thy Savior, and that is as true: Yea, it is
as true also, that by his being tempted, he became the Conqueror of the
tempter, and a succourer of those that are tempted, Col. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 17.
chap. 4. 15, 16.

Quest. But what should be the reason, that some that are coming to Christ,
should be so Lamentably cast down, and buffetted with Temptations?

Answ. It may be for several causes.

First, Some that are coming to Christ, cannot be persuaded, until the
Temptation comes, that they are so vile as the Scripture says they are: True,
they see so much of their wretchedness, as to drive them to Christ; but there
is an over, and above, of wickedness, which they see not. Peter little thought
that he had had Cursing, and Swearing, and Lying, and an inclination in his
heart to deny his Master, before the Temptation came: But when that indeed,
came upon him, then he found it there to his sorrow. Joh. 13. 36, 37, 38. Mark.
14. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72.

Secondly, Some that are coming to Jesus Christ, are too much affected with
their own graces, and too little taken with Christ's person; wherefore God, to
take them off from doteing upon their own Jewels, and that they might look more
to the person; undertaking, and merits of his Son, plunges them into the ditch
by Temptations. And this I take to be the meaning of Job. If I wash me, said
he, with snow-water, and make my self never so clean, yet will thou plung me in
the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me, Job 9. 30, 31. Job had been
before a little too much Tampering with his own graces, and setting his
excellencies a little too high (as these Texts make manifest, Job 33. 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. chap. 34. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. chap. 35. 2, 3. chap. 38. 1, 2. chap. 40. 1,
2, 3, 4. chap. 42. 3, 4, 5, 6.) But by that the Temptation was ended, you find
him better taught.

Yea, God does oft-times, even for this thing as it were, take our graces from
us, and so leave us almost quite to our selves, and to the tempter, that we may
learn not to love the Picture, more than the person of his Son. See how he
dealt with them in the Sixteenth of Ezekiel, and the Second of Hosea.

Thirdly, Perhaps thou have been given too much, to Judge thy brother, to
condemn thy brother, because a poor tempted man: And God, to bring down the
pride of thy heart, lets the tempter loose upon thee, that thou also may
feel thy self weak. For pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit
before a fall. Pro. 16. 18.

Fourthly, It may be thou have dealt a little too roughly with those that God
has this way wounded; not considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: and
therefore God has suffered it to come unto thee, Gal. 6. 1.

Fifthly, It may be thou wast given to slumber, and sleep, and therefore these
Temptations were sent to awaken thee. You know that Peter's Temptation came upon
him, after his sleeping; then, instead of watching and praying; then he denied,
and denied, and denied his Master, Mat. 26.

Sixthly, It may be thou have presumed too far, and stood too much in thine own
strength, and therefore is a time of Temptation come upon thee. This was also
one cause, why it came upon Peter. Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I.
Ah! that is the way to be tempted indeed, Joh. 13. 36, 37, 38.

Seventhly, It may be, God intends to make thee wise, to speak a word in
season, to others that are afflicted; and therefore he suffers thee to be
Tempted. Christ was tempted, that he might be able to succor them that are
tempted. Heb. 2. 18.

Eighthly, It may be Satan has dared God, to suffer him to tempt thee;
promising, that if he will but let him do it, thou will curse him to his face.
Thus he obtained leave against Job; wherefore take heed, tempted soul, lest
thou provest the devils sayings true. Job 1. chap. 2.

Ninethly, It may be thy graces must be tried in the fire, that that rust that
cleaves to them, may be taken away, and themselves proved, both before Angels
and Devils, far better than of Gold that perishes; it may be also, that thy
graces are to receive special Praises and Honor, and Glory, at the coming of
the Lord Jesus (to Judgment) for all the exploits that thou have Acted by them
against Hell, and its infernal crew, in the day of thy Temptation, 1 Pet. 1. 6,
7.

Tenthly, It may be, God would have others learn by thy sighs, groans and
complaints under Temptation, to beware of those sins; for the sake of which,
thou art at present delivered to the Tormentors.

But to conclude this, put the worst to the worst, (and then things will be bad
enough) suppose that thou art to this day without the grace of God, yet thou
art but a miserable Creature, a sinner, that has need of a blessed Savior; and
the Text presents thee with one as good, and kind, as heart can wish: who also
for thy encouragement says, And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out.

To come therefore to a word of Application.
IS it so? That they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times heartily
afraid, that Jesus Christ will not receive them. Then this teaches us these
things:

First, That faith, and doubting, may at the same time have their residence in
the same soul. O Thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Mat. 14. 31.
He says not, O! Thou of No faith; but O! Thou of Little faith. Because he had
a little faith in the midest of his many doubts. The same is true, even of many
that are coming to Jesus Christ: They come, and fear they come, and doubt. When
they look upon the promise, or, a word of encouragement by faith, then they
come; but when they look upon themselves, or the difficulties that lie before
them, then they doubt. Bid me Come, said Peter: Come, said Christ. So he went
down out of the Ship to go to Jesus, but his hap was to go to him upon the
water; There was the Trial. So it is with the poor desiring Soul. Bid me Come,
says the sinner: Come, says Christ, and I will in no wise cast thee out. So
he Comes, but his hap is to come upon the water, upon drowning difficulties; if
therefore the wind of Temptations blow, the waves of doubts and fears will
presently arise, and this coming sinner will begin to sink, if he has but
little faith.

But you shall find here, in Peter's little faith, a two fold act; to wit,
Coming, and Crying; Little faith cannot come all the way without crying: So
long as its holy boldness lasts, so long it can come with peace; but when it,
So, can come no farther, It will go the rest of the way with crying. Peter went
as far as his little faith would carry him: he also cried as loud as his little
faith would help, Lord save me, I perish: And so with coming and crying, he was
kept from sinking, though he had but a little faith. Jesus stretched forth his
hand, and caught him, and said unto him: O! Thou of little faith, wherefore
did thou doubt?

Secondly, Is it so? That they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times
heartily afraid, that Jesus Christ will not receive them: Then this shows us a
reason of that Dejection, and those castings down, that very often we perceive
to be in them, that are coming to Jesus Christ: Why, it is because they are
afraid that Jesus Christ will not receive them. The poor World, they Mock us,
because, we are a dejected people; I mean, because we are sometimes so: But
they do not know the cause of our Dejections. Could we be persuaded, even then,
when we are Dejected, that Jesus Christ, would indeed receive us: It would put
more gladness into our hearts, than in the time in which their Corn, and Wine,
and Oil increases, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. But,

Thirdly, Is it so? That they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times
heartily afraid that he will not receive them. Then this shows, that they that
are coming to Jesus Christ, are an awakned, sensible, considering people. For,
fear comes from sense, and consideration of things. They are sensible of sin,
sensible of the Curse due thereto; They are also sensible of the Glorious
Majesty of God, and of what a blessed, blessed thing it is, to be received of
Jesus Christ: The glory of Heaven, and evil of sin, these things they consider,
and are sensible of. When I remember, I am afraid; when I consider, I am
afraid, Job 21. 6. chap. 36. 15.

These things dash their spirits, being awake, and sensible; Were they dead
like other men, they would not be afflicted with fear, as they are; For dead
men, Fear not, Feel not, Care not; but the living, and sensible man, he it is,
that is often times heartily afraid, that Jesus Christ will not receive him. I
say, the dead, and senseless, are not distressed. They presume, they are
groundlesly confident. Who so bold as blind Bayard. These indeed should fear,
and be afraid, because they are not coming to Jesus Christ. O! The Hell, the
Fire, the Pit, the Wrath of God, and Torments of Hell, that are prepared for
poor neglecting sinners: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation!
(Heb. 2. 3.) But they want sense of things, and so cannot fear.

Fourthly, Is it so? That they that are coming to Jesus Christ, are oft-times
heartily afraid, that he will not Receive them; Then this should teach Old
Christians to pity and pray for Young Comers: You know the Heart of a Stranger,
for you your selves were Strangers in the Land of Egypt. You know the Fears,
and Doubts, and Terrors, that take hold of them; for that they sometimes took
hold of you. Wherefore, pity them, pray for them, encourage them; they need all
this: Guilt has overtaken them, Fears of the Wrath of God has over-taken
them: Perhaps, they are within the Sight of Hellfire; and the Fear of going
thither, is burning-hot within their Hearts. You may know, how strangely Satan
is suggesting his Devilish Doubts unto them, if possible, he may sinck, and
drowned them with the Multitude, and weight of them. Old Christians, mend up
the Paths for them, take the Stumblingblocks out of the way; lest that which is
Feeble and Weak be turned aside, but let it rather be Healed, Heb. 12.

I come now to the next Observation, and shall speak a little to that; to wit,
THat Jesus Christ would Not have them, that in truth are coming to him, Once
think, That he will cast them out.

The Text is full for this: For, he says; And him that comes to me, I will in
no wise cast out. Now, if he says, I will not, he would not have us think, He
will.

This is yet further manifest by these Considerations:

First, Christ Jesus did forbid even them, that as yet, were not coming to him,
Once to think him such an one: Do not think (said he) that I will accuse you to
the Father, Joh. 5. 45.

These (as I said) were such, that as yet, were not coming to him: For he says
of them a little before; And ye will not come to me: For the Respect they had
to the Honor of Men, kept them back. Yet, I say, Jesus Christ gives them to
understand, that though he might Justly reject them, yet he would not; but bids
them not Once to think, that he would accuse them to the Father. Now, not to
Accuse (with Christ), is to Plead for: For Christ in these things, stands not
Neuter between the Father and Sinners. So then, If Jesus Christ would not have
them think, that Yet will not come to him, that he will Accuse them; then he
would not that they should think so, that in truth are coming to him. And him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Secondly, When the Woman taken in Adultery, (even in the very Act) was brought
before Jesus Christ: So he carried it, both by Words and Actions, that he
evidently enough made it manifest, that Condemning, and Casting-out, were such
Things; for the Doing of which, he came not into the World.

Wherefore, when they had set her before him, and had laid to her charge her
Heinous Fact, he stooped down, and with his Finger wrote upon the Ground, as
though he heard them not. Now, What did he do by this his Carriage, but testify
plainly, That he was not for Receiving Accusations against poor Sinners,
who-ever accused by? And observe; Though they continued asking, thinking at
last to force him to Condemn her; yet then he so answered, as that he drove all
Condemning Persons from her. And then he adds, for her Encouragement to come to
him; Neither do I Condemn thee; go, and Sin no more, Joh. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Not but that he indeed abhorred the Fact; but he would not Condemn the Woman
for the Sin, because that was not his Office: He was not sent into the World,
to condemn the World, but that the World through Him might be saved, Joh. 3.
17. Now, if Christ, though urged to it, would not Condemn the Guilty Woman,
though she was far at present from coming to him; he would not that they should
Once think, that he will cast them out, that in truth are coming to him: And
him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Thirdly, Christ plainly bids the Turning Sinner, Come; and forbids him to
Entertain any such Thought, as that He will cast him out. Let the Wicked
forsake his Ways, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts; and let him Turn unto
the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly Pardon, Isa. 55. 7.

The Lord, by bidding the Unrighteous forsake his Thoughts; does in special
forbid, as I have said, (to wit) those Thoughts, that hinder the Coming-Man in
his Progress to Jesus Christ; His Unbelieving Thoughts.

Therefore, he bids him, not only forsake his Ways, but his Thoughts: Let the
Wicked forsake his Ways, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts. It Is not enough
to forsake one, if thou will come to Jesus Christ; because the other will keep
thee from him. Suppose a Man forsakes his wicked Ways, his debauched and
filthy Life; yet if these Thoughts, That Jesus Christ will not Receive him, be
entertained and nourished in his heart; them Thoughts will keep him from coming
to Jesus Christ.

Sinner, Coming-Sinner; Art thou for coming to Jesus Christ? Yes, says the
Sinner. Forsake thy wicked Ways then. So I do, says the Sinner. Why come
thou then so slowly? Because I am hindered. What hinders? Has God forbidden
thee? No. Art thou not willing to come faster? Yes: Yet I cannot. Well, prithee
be plain with me, and tell me the Reason and Ground of thy Discouragement: Why?
(says the Sinner) though God forbids me not, and though I am willing to come
faster; yet there naturally arises this, and that, and the other Thought in my
Heart, that hinders my Speed to Jesus Christ. Sometimes, I think, I am not
Chosen; sometimes, I think, I am not Called; sometimes, I think, I come too
late; and sometimes, I think, I know not what it is to Come. Also, One while I
think, I have no Grace; and then again, that I cannot Pray; and then again, I
think, that I am a very Hypocrite: And these Things keep me from coming to
Jesus Christ.

Look ye now! Did not I tell you so? There are Thoughts yet remaining in the
Heart, even of those that have forsaken their wicked Ways; and with those
Thoughts they are more plagued, than with any thing else; because they hinder
their Coming to Jesus Christ: For the Sin of Unbelief, (which is the Original
of all these Thoughts) is that which besets a Coming-Sinner more easily, than
does his Ways; Heb. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.

But now, since Jesus Christ commands thee to forsake these Thoughts; forsake
them, Coming-sinner: And if thou forsake them not, thou Trangressest the
Commands of Christ, and abidest thine own Tormentor, and keep thy self from
Establishment in Grace: If ye will not Believe, ye shall not be Established,
Isa. 7. 9.

Thus you see, how Jesus Christ sets himself against such Thoughts, that any
way discourage the Coming-Sinner; and thereby, truly vindicates the Doctrine we
have in hand; To wit, That Jesus Christ would not have them, that in truth are
coming to him, Once think, that he will cast them out. And him that comes to
me, I will in No wise cast out.

I come now to the Reasons of the Observation.
1. IF Jesus Christ should allow thee Once to think, that he will Cast thee
out; he must allow thee to think, that he will falsify his Word: For he has
said, I will in no wise cast out. But Christ would not that thou should count
him as One, that will falsify his Word: For he says of himself, I am the
Truth; Therefore, he would not, that any that in Truth are coming to him,
should Once think, that he will cast them out.

Secondly, If Jesus Christ should allow the Sinner, that in Truth is coming to
him, Once to think, that he will cast him out: Then he must allow, and so
countenance the first Appearance of Unbelief; the which, he counts his
greatest Enemy; and against which, he has bent even his Holy Gospel. Therefore,
Jesus Christ would not, that they that in Truth are coming to him, should Once
think, that he will cast them out: See Mat. 14. 31. chap 21. 21. Mark 11. 23.
Luke 24. 25.

Thirdly, If Jesus Christ should allow the Coming-Sinner, Once to think, that
he will cast him out; then he must allow him to make a Question, Whether he is
willing to Receive his Father's Gift? For the Coming-Sinner is his Father's
Gift; as also says the Text: But he testifeth, All that the Father gives him,
shall come to him; and him that comes, he will in no wise cast out. Therefore,
Jesus Christ would not have him, that in Truth is coming to him, Once to think,
that he will cast him out.

Fourthly, If Jesus Christ should allow them Once to think (that indeed are
coming to him) that he will cast him out; he must allow them to think, that he
will despise and reject the Drawing of his Father: For No Man can come to him,
but whom the Father draws: But it would be high Blasphemy, and damnable
Wickedness, Once to imagine thus. Therefore, Jesus Christ would not have him
that comes, Once think, that he will cast him out.

Fifthly, If Jesus Christ should allow those, that indeed are coming to him,
Once to think, that he will cast them out; He must allow them to think, that he
will be Unfaithful to the Trust, and Charge, that his Father has committed to
him; which is to Save, and not to Lose, any thing of that which he has given
him to Save; Joh. 6. 36. But the Father has given him a Charge, to save the
Coming-Sinner: Therefore, it cannot be, that he should allow, that such an one
should Once think, that he will cast him out.

Sixthly, If Jesus Christ should allow, that they should Once think, that are
coming to him, that he will cast them out: Then he must allow them to think,
that he will be unfaithful to his Office of Priesthood: For, as by the first
part of it, he paid Price for, and Ransomed Souls; so by the Second Part
thereof, he continually makes Intercession to God for them that come, Heb. 7.
25. But he cannot allow us to question his Faithful Execution of his
Priesthood: Therefore, he cannot allow us Once to think, that the
Coming-Sinner shall be cast out.

Seventhly, If Jesus Christ should allow us Once to think, that the
Coming-Sinner shall be cast out: Then he must allow us to question, his Will,
or Power, or Merit to Save. But he cannot allow us Once to question any of
these: Therefore, not Once to think, that the Coming-Sinner shall be cast out.

1. He cannot allow them to question his Will: For he says in the Text, I will
in no wise cast out.

2. He cannot allow us to question his Power: For the Holy Ghost says, He is
Able to save to the uttermost, them that come.

3. He cannot allow them to question the Efficacy of his Merit: For the Blood
of Christ cleanses the Commer from all Sin; 1 John 1. Therefore, he cannot
allow, that he that is coming to him, should Once think, that he will cast him
out.

Eighthly, If Jesus Christ should allow the coming sinner, Once to think, that
he will cast him out; he must allow him to give the lie, to the manifest
testimony of the Father, Son, and Spirit: yea to the whole Gospel contained in
Moses, the Prophets, the book of Psalms, and that commonly called the
New Testament: But he cannot allow of this, therefore, not that the coming
sinner should Once think that he will cast him out.

Ninethly, Lastly. If Jesus Christ should allow him that is coming to him, Once
to think that he will cast him out: He must allow him to question his Fathers
Oath; Which he in truth, and Righteousness, has taken; that they might have a
strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to Jesus Christ: But he cannot
allow this, therefore he cannot allow that the coming sinner should once think
that he will cast him out, Heb. 6.

I come now to make some General Use and Application of the whole, and so to
draw toward a Conclusion.
THe First Use, a Use of Information. And it Informs us, That Men by Nature
are far off from Christ.

Let me a little improve this Use, by speaking to these Three Questions.

1. Where is he, that is not coming to Jesus Christ? 2. What is he, that is not
coming to Jesus Christ? 3. Whether is he to go, that comes not to Jesus
Christ?
First, Where is he?

1. Answ. He is far from God, he is without him; even alienate from him, both
in his Understanding, Will, Affections, Judgment, and Conscience; Ephesians. 2. 12.
chap. 4. 18.

2. He is far from Jesus Christ, who is the only Deliverer of Men from
Hellfire; Psalm. 73. 27.

3. He is far from the Work of the Holy Ghost, the Work of Regeneration, and a
Second Creation; without which, no Man shall see the Kingdom of Heaven; Joh. 3.
3.

4. He is far from Righteousness, from that Righteousness that should make him
Acceptable in God's Sight; Isa. 46. 14.

5. He is under the Power and Dominion of Sin; Sin reigns in and over him; it
dwells in every Faculty of his Soul, and Member of his Body: So that, from
Head to Foot, there is no place clean; Isa. 1. 6. Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

6. He is in the Pesthouse, with Uzziah; and excluded the Camp of Israel, with
the Leapers; 2 Chronicles. 26. 21. Numb. 5. 2.

7. His Life is among the Unclean; He is in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity, Job 36. 14. Act. 8. 23.

8. He is in Sin, in the Flesh, in Death, in the Snare of the Devil, and is
taken Captive by him at his Will; 1 Cor. 15. 17. Romans 8. 8. 1 John 3. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 26.

9. He is under the Curse of the Law; and the Devil dwells in him, and has the
Mastery of him; Gal. 3. 13. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Acts 36. 18

10. He is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, and knows not whither he goes;
for Darkness has blinded his Eyes.

11. He is in the Broad-way, that leads to Destruction; and holding on, he
will assuredly go in at the Broad-gate, and so down the Stairs to Hell.

Secondly, What is he, that comes not to Jesus Christ?

1. He is counted one of God's Enemies; Luke 19 14.. Romans 8. 7.

2. He is a Child of the Devil, and of Hell; for the Devil begat him, as to his
sinful Nature; and Hell must swallow him at last, because he comes not to
Jesus Christ; Joh. 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8. Mat. 23. 15. Psalm. 9. 17.

3. He is a Child of Wrath, an Heir of it; it is his Portion, and God will repay
it him to his Face; Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. Job 21. 29, 30, 31.

4. He is a Self-Murder; he wrongeth his own Soul, and is one that loves
Death; Prove. 1. 18. Chap. 8. 35, 36.

5. He is a Companion for Devils, and Damned Men; Prove. 21. 16. Mat. 25. 41.

Thirdly, Whither is he like to go, that comes not to Jesus Christ?

1. He that comes not To him, is like to go Further from him; for every Sin,
is a Step further from Jesus Christ; Hos. 11.

2. As he is in Darkness, so he is like to go on in it: For Christ is the Light
of the World; and he that comes not to him, walks in Darkness, Joh. 8. 12.

3. He is like to be removed at last, as far from God, and Christ, and Heaven,
and all Felicity, as an Infinity God can remove him; Mat. 12. 41.

But, Secondly, This Doctrine of coming to Christ, informs us, Where poor
destitute Sinners may find Life for their Souls; and that is in Christ: This
Life is in his Son; he that has the Son, has Life: And again; Whosoever finds
me, finds Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord, Prove. 8.

Now, for further Enlargement, I will also here propound three more Questions:

1. What Life is in Christ? 2. Who may have it? 3. Upon what Terms?
First, What Life is in Jesus Christ?

1. There is Justifying Life in Christ. Man, by Sin, is Dead in Law; and Christ
only can deliver him by his Righteousness, and Blood, from this Death, into a
State of Life: For God sent his Son into the World, That we might Live through
him, 1 John 4. 9. That is, through the Righteousness which* he should
accomplish, and the Death that he should dye.

2. There is Eternal Life in Christ: Life that is endless; Life for ever, and
ever. He has given us Eternal Life; and this Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.

Now, Justification, and Eternal Salvation, being both in Christ, and no where
else to be had for Men, Who would not come to Jesus Christ?

Secondly, Who may have this Life?

I answer; Poor, Helpless, miserable Sinners: Particularly,

1. Such as are willing to have it; Whosoever will, Let him take the Water of
Life, Revel. 22. 17.

2. He that Thirsts for it: I will give to him that is a Thirst, of the
Fountain of the Water of Life, Revel. 21. 6.

3. He that is weary of his Sins. This is the Rest, whereby ye may cause the
Weary to rest; and this is the Refreshing, Isa. 28. 12.

4. He that is Poor and Needy. He shall spare the Poor and Needy, and shall
save the Souls of the Needy.

5. He that follows after him, crying for Life. He that follows me, shall not
walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, Joh. 8. 12.

Thirdly, Upon what Terms may he have this Life?

Answ. Freely: Sinner, Do thou hear? Thou may have it Freely. Let him take
the Water of Life Freely: I will give him of the Fountain of the Water of Life
Freely. And when they had nothing to pay, he Frankly forgave them both, Luke 7.

Freely, without Money, or without Price. Ho! Every one that Thirsts, come ye
to the Waters; and he that has no Money, Come ye, Buy and Eat: Yea, come, buy
Wine and Milk, without Money, and without Price, Isa. 55. 1.

Sinner, Art thou Thirsty? art thou Weary? art thou Willing? Come then, and
regard not your Stuff; for all the Good that is in Christ, is offered to the
Coming-Sinner, without Money, and without Price. He has Life to give away, to
such as want it, and that have not a Penny to purchase it; and he will give it
Freely: Oh, What a blessed Condition is the Coming-Sinner in!

But, Thirdly, This Doctrine of Coming to Jesus Christ for Life; Informs us,
That It is to be had no where else: Might it be had Any where else, the Text,
and Him that spoke it, would be but little set-by: For, What great Matter is
there in, I will in no wise cast out, if another stood by that could Received
them? But here appears the Glory of Christ, that none but He can Save! And,
here appears his Love, that though none can Save but He, yet he is not Coy in
Saving! But him that comes to me (says he) I will in no wise cast out.

That none can Save but Jesus Christ, is evident from Acts 4. 12. Neither is
there Salvation in any other; and he has given us Eternal Life, and this Life
is in his Son. If Life could have been had any where else, it should have been
in the Law; but it is not in the Law: For, by the Deeds of the Law, no Man
living shall be Justified; and if not Justified, then no Life. Therefore, Life
is no where to be had, but in Jesus Christ; Gal. 3.

Quest. But why would God so order it, that Life should be had no where else,
but in Jesus Christ?

Answ. There is Reason for it; and that both with Respect to God, and to Us.

First, With Respect to God.

First, That it might be in a way of Justice, as well as Mercy: And in away of
Justice it could not have been, if it had not been by Christ; because He, and
He only, was able to answer the Demand of the Law; and give for Sin, what the
Justice thereof required. All Angels had been Crushed down to Hell for ever,
had that Curse been laid upon them for our Sins, which was laid upon Jesus
Christ: But 'twas laid upon Him, and He bare it; and answered the Penalty, and
Redeemed his People from under it, with that Satisfaction to Divine Justice,
that God himself does now proclaim; That he is Faithful and Just to forgive us,
if by Faith we shall venture on Jesus, and trust to what he has done for Life;
Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. 1 John 1. 9.

Secondly, Life must be by Jesus Christ, that God might be Adored, and
Magnifyed, for finding out this Way. This is the Lord's Doings, that in all
Things he might be Glorified, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thirdly, It must be by Jesus Christ, that Life might be at God's dispose; who
has great Pity for the Poor, the Lowly, the Meek, the Broken in heart; and for
them that others care not for, Psalm. 34. 6. Psalm. 138. 6. Psalm. 25. Psalm. 51.
17. Psalm. 147. 3.

Fourthly, Life must be in Christ, to cut off boasting from the lips of men.
This also is the Apostles reason, in Romans 3. 26, 27. And Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, Life must be in Jesus Christ, with respect to us.

First, That we might have it upon the easiest Terms, to wit, Freely, as a
gift, not as wages; was it in Moses hand, we should come hardly at it. Was it
in the Popes hand, we should pay soundly for it: but thanks be to God, it is in
Christ, laid up in him, and by him, to be communicated to sinners upon easy
Terms, even for receiving, accepting and imbraceing with Thanksgiving. As the
Scriptures plainly declare, Joh. 1. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 11. 4. Heb. 11. 13. Col. 3.
13, 14, 15.

Secondly, Life is in Christ for us, that it might not be upon so brittle a
foundation, as indeed it would, had it been any where else. The Law it self is
weak because of us, as to this: But Christ is a tried stone, a sure foundation,
one that will not fail to bear thy burden, and to receive thy Soul; coming
sinner.

Thirdly, Life is in Christ, that it might be sure to all the seed. Alas! the
best of us, was life left in our hands, to be sure, we should forfeit it, over,
and over, and over: or was it in any other hand, we should by our often
backslidings, so offend him, that at last he would shut up his bowels in
everlasting displeasure against us. But now it is in Christ, it is with one
that can pity, pray for, pardon, yea multiply pardons: It is with one that can
have Compassion upon us, when we are out of the way; with one that has an
heart to fetch us again, when we are gone astray; with one that can pardon
without upbraiding. Blessed be God, that life is in Christ! For Now it is sure,
to all the seed.

But Fourthly. This Doctrine of coming to Jesus Christ for life, informs us of
the evil of Unbelief; that wicked thing, that is the only, or chief hindrance
to the coming sinner. Does the Text say, (...)? Does it say, And him that
comes, I will in no wise cast out? Then what an evil is that, that keeps
sinners from coming to Jesus Christ? And that evil is unbelief. For by faith we
come, by Unbelief we keep away. Therefore It is said to be that, by which a
Soul is said to depart from God; because it was that, which at first caused the
world to go off from him; and that also that keeps them from him to this day.
And it does it the more easily, because it does it with a wile. This sin may be
called, The White Devil; for it oftentimes in its Mischievous doings in the
Soul, shows as if it was an Angel of Light. Yea, it Acts like a Counselor of
Heaven: Therefore a little to discourse of this evil disease.

First, It is that sin, above all others, that has some show of reason in its
attempts. For it keeps the Soul from Christ, by pretending its present
unfitness, and unpreparedness; as want of more sense of sin, want of more
repentance, want of more humility, want of a more broken heart.

Secondly, It is the sin, that most Suiteth with the Conscience: the Conscience
of the coming sinner, tells him that he has nothing good, that he stands
inditable for Ten Thousand Tallents; that he is a very ignorant, blind, and
hardhearted sinner, unworthy to be once taken notice of by Jesus Christ: And
will you (says Unbelief) in such a case as you now are, presume to come to
Jesus Christ?

Thirdly, It is the sin that most Suiteth with our Sense of feeling. The coming
sinner, feels the workings of sin, of all manner of sin, and wretchedness, in
his flesh: He also feels the Wrath, and Judgment of God due to sin, and
oft-times staggers under it: Now, says unbelief, you may see you have no
grace, for that which works in you, is corruption; You may also perceive, that
God does not love you, because the Sense of his Wrath abides upon you:
Therefore how can you bear the face to come to Jesus Christ?

Fourthly, It is the sin, above all others, that most Suiteth with the Wisdom
of our flesh: the Wisdom of our flesh, thinks it prudence to question a while,
to stand back a while, to hearken to both sides a while, and not to be rash,
sudden or unadvised, in too bold a presuming upon Jesus Christ: And this Wisdom
Unbelief falls in with.

Fifthly, It is that sin above all other, that continually is whispering the
Soul in the ear, with mistrusts of the faithfulness of God, in keeping promise
to them that come to Jesus Christ for life. It also suggesteth mistrust* about
Christ's willingness to receive it, and save it. And no sin can do this so
Artificiently as Unbelief.

Sixthly, It is also that sin, which is always at hand, to enter an Objection
against this or that Promise, that by the Spirit of God is brought to our
heart, to comfort us; and if the poor coming sinner, is not aware of it, it
will by some evasion, slite, trick or cavil, quickly wrest from him the Promise
again, and he shall have but little benefit of it.

Seventhly, It is that above all other sins, that weakens our Prayers, our
faith, our love, our diligence, our hope and expectations: It even takes the
heart away from God in duty.

Eighthly, Lastly. This sin, as I have said even now, it appears in the Soul
with so many sweet pretenses to safety, and security; that it is, as if it
were, Counsel sent from Heaven. Biding the Soul be wise, wary, considerate,
well advised, and to take heed of too rash a venture upon Believing. Besure
first, that God loves you; take hold of no promise until you are forced by God
unto it; neither be you sure of your Salvation, doubt it still, though the
testimony of the Lord has been often confirmed in you: live not by faith, but
by sense: and when you can neither see nor feel, then fear and mistrust, then
doubt, and question all. This is the Devilish counsel of Unbelief, which is so
covered over with specious pretenses, that the wisest Christian can hardly
shake off these reasonings.

But to be brief: Let me here give thee, Christian Reader, a more particular
description of the qualities of Unbelief, by opposing Faith unto it, in these
Twenty five particulars.

First. Faith, believes the word of God, but Unbelief questioneth the
certainly of the same, Psalm. 106. 24.

Secondly. Faith, believes the word, because it is true; but Unbelief doubts
thereof, because it is true, 1 Timothy 4. 3. Joh. 8. 45.

Thirdly. Faith, sees more in a promise of God to help, than in all other
things to hinder: But Unbelief, notwithstanding Gods promise, says, How can
these things be? Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. 2 King. 7. 2. Joh. 3. 4, 12. Fourthly,

Fourthly, Faith will make thee see love in the heart of Christ, when with his
mouth he gives reproofs: But Unbelief will imagine wrath in his heart, when
with his mouth, and word, he says he loves us, Mat. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28. Numb. 13. 2. chap. 14. 3.

Fifthly, Faith will help the Soul to wait, though God deferres to give: but
Unbelief will take snuff, and throw up all, if God make any tarrying, Psalm. 25.
5. Isa. 8. 17. 2 King. 6. 33. Psalm. 106. 13, 14.

Sixthly, Faith will give comfort in the midst of fears; but Unbelief causes
fears in the midst of comfort, 2 Chro. 20. 20, 21. Mat. 8. 26. Luke 24. 36, 37.

Seventhly, Faith will suck sweetness out of Gods rod; but Unbelief can find no
comfort in his greatest mercies, Psalm. 23. 4. Numb. 21. 5.

Eighthly, Faith makes great burdens light; but Unbelief makes light ones
intollerably heavy, 2 Cor. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Mal. 1. 2, 13.

Ninethly, Faith helps us up when we are down; but Unbelief throws us down,
when we are up, Mich. 7. 8, 9, 10. Heb. 4. 11.

Tenthly, Faith brings us near to God, when we are far from him; but Unbelief
puts us far from God, when we are near to him: Heb. 10 22. Chap. 3. 12, 13.

Eleventhly, Where Faith reigns, it declares Men to be the Friends of God; but
where Unbelief reigns, it declares them to be his Enemies: Jam. 5. 23. Heb. 3.
18. Rev. 21. 8.

Twelfthly, Faith puts a Man under Grace; but Unbelief holds him under
Wrath: Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Chap. 4 16. Ephesians. 2. 8. Joh. 3. 36. 1 John 5. 10.
Heb. 3. 17. Mark 16. 16.

Thirteenthly, Faith purifieth the Heart; but Unbelief keeps it polluted and
impure: Acts 15. 9. Tit. 1. 15, 16.

Fourteenthly, By Faith, the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us; but by
Unbelief, we are shut up under the Law to Perish: Romans 4. 23, 24. Chap. 11. 32.
Gal. 3. 23.

Fifteenthly, Faith makes our Work acceptable to God through Christ; but
whatsoever is of Unbelief, is Sin: For without Faith, it is impossible to
please him; Heb. 11. 4. Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6.

Sixteenthly, Faith gives us Peace and Comfort in our Souls; but Unbelief
works Trouble and Tossings, like the restless Waves of the Sea: Romans 5. 1.
Jam. 1. 6.

Seventeenthly, Faith makes us see Preciousness in Christ; but Unbelief sees no
Form, Beauty, or Comlyness in him: 1 Pet. 2. 7. Isa. 53. 1, 2, 3.

Eighteenthly, By Faith we have our Life in Christ's Fullness; but by Unbelief,
we starve and pine away: Gal. 2. 20.

Nineteenthly, Faith gives us the Victory over the Law, Sin, Death, the Devil,
and all Evils; but Unbelief lays us Obnoxious to them all: 1 John 5. 4, 5.
Luke 12. 46.

Twentyeth, Faith will show us more Excellency in Things not seen, than in them
that are; but Unbelief sees more in Things that are here, than in Things that
will be here-after: 2 Cor. 4. 18. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 15. 32.

Twenty-First, Faith makes the Ways of God pleasant, and amiable; but Unbelief
makes them heavy, and hard: Gal. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 10, 11. Joh. 6. 60. Psalm. 2.
3.

Twenty-Second, By Faith, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, possessed the Land of
Promise; But because of Unbelief, neither Aaron, nor Moses, nor Mirian, could
get thither: Heb. 11. 9. Heb. 3. 19.

Twenty-Third, By Faith, the Children of Israel passed through the Red Sea; but
by Unbelief, the Generality of them perished in the Wilderness: Heb. 11. 29.
Jude 5.

Twenty-Fourth, By Faith, Gidion did more with Three-hundred men, and a few
empty Pitchers, than all the Twelve Tribes could do; because they believed not
God: Judge. 7. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Numb. 14. 11, 44.

Twenty-Fifth, By Faith, Peter walked on the Water; but by Unbelief, he began
to sink: Mat. 14. 21, 22, 23, 24

Thus might many more be added, which, for brevity sake, I omit: Beseeching
every one, that thinks he has a Soul to Save, or be Damned, to take heed of
Unbelief. Lest, seeing there is a Promise left us of Entering into his Rest,
any of us, by Unbelief, should indeed come short of it.

The Second Use; a Use of Examination.
WE come now to a Use of Examination. Sinner, Thou have heard of the Necessity
of Coming to Christ; also, Of the Willingness of Christ, to Receive the
Coming-Soul: Together, with the Benefit, that They by him shall have, that
indeed come to Him. Put thy self now upon this Serious Enquiry; Am I, indeed,
come to Jesus Christ?

Motives, plenty, I might here urge, to prevail with thee to a Conscientious
Performance of this Duty: As,

1. Thou art in Sin, in the Flesh, in Death, in the Snare of the Devil, and
under the Curse of the Law; if thou art not coming to Jesus Christ.

2. There is no way to be delivered from these, but by coming to Jesus Christ.

3. If thou come, Jesus Christ will Receive thee, and will in no wise cast
thee out.

4. Thou will not Repent it in the Day of Judgment, if now thou come to
Jesus Christ.

5. But thou will surely Mourn at last, if now thou shall refuse to come: And,

6. Lastly, Now thou have been invited to come; now will thy Judgment be
greater, and thy Damnation more fearful, if thou shall yet Refuse, than if thou
had never heard of Coming to Christ.

Object. But we hope, we are come to Jesus Christ?

Answ. It Is well, if it proves so. But lest thou should speak without Ground,
and so fall unawares into Hell Fire; Let us Examine a little.

First, Art thou, indeed, come to Jesus Christ? What have thou left behind
thee? What did thou come away from, in thy Coming to Jesus Christ?

When Lot came out of Sodom, he left the Sodomites behind him; Genesis 19.

When Abraham came out of Chaldea, he left his Country and Kindred behind him;
Genesis 12. Acts 7.

When Ruth came to put her Trust under the Wings of the Lord God of Israel; she
left her Father, and Mother; her Gods, and the Land of her Nativity behind her;
Ruth 1. 15, 16, 17. Chap. 2. 11, 12.

When Peter came to Christ, he left his Nets behind him; Mat. 4. 18.

When Zacheus came to Christ, he left the Receipt of Custom behind him; Luke 19.

When Paul came to Christ, he left his own Righteousness behind him; Philip. 3.
7, 8.

When those that used Curious Arts came to Jesus Christ, they took their
Curious Books, and burned them; though in another Man's Eye, they were counted
worth Fifty-Thousand Pieces of Silver: Acts 19. 18, 19, 20.

What say thou, Man? Have thou left thy Darling Sins, thy Sodomitish
Pleasures, thy Acquaintance, and vain Companions; thy unlawful Gain, thy Idol
Gods, and Righteousness, and thy unlawful Curious Arts, behind thee? If any of
these be with thee, and thou with them, in thy Heart and Life, thou art not yet
come to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Art thou come to Jesus Christ? Prithee tell me, What moved he come
to Jesus Christ? Men do not usually come, or go, to this or that Place, before
they have a Moving Cause; or rather, a Cause moving them thereto: No more do
they come to Jesus Christ, (I do not say) before they have a Cause; but before
that Cause moves them to come: What say thou? Have thou a Cause moving thee
to come? To be at present, in a State of Condemnation, is Cause sufficient for
Men to come to Jesus Christ for Life: But that will not do, except that Cause
move them; the which, it will never do, until their Eyes be opened, to see
themselves in that Condition. For it is not a Man's being under Wrath, but his
seeing it, that moves him to come to Jesus Christ. Alas! All Men by Sin. are
under Wrath; yet but few of that All, came to Jesus Christ: And the Reason is,
because they do not see their Condition. Who has warned you, to flee from the
Wrath to come, Mat. 3. 7. Until Men are warned, and also, receive the Warning,
they will not come to Jesus Christ.

Take three or four Instances for this:

1. Adam and Eve came not to Jesus Christ, until they Received the Alarm; the
Conviction of their Undone State by Sin: Genesis 3.

2. The Children of Israel cried not out for a Mediator, before they saw
themselves in danger of Death by the Law; Exodus 20. 18, 19.

3. Before the Publican came, he saw himself lost and undone; Luk 18. 13.

4. The Prodigal came not, until he saw Death at the Door, ready to devour him:
Luke 15. 17, 18.

5. The Three-Thousand came not, until they knew not what to do, to be Saved;
Acts 2. 37, 38, 39.

6. Paul came not, until he saw himself lost and undone; Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8. 11.

7. Lastly, Before the Jayler came, he saw himself undone; Acts 16. 29, 30, 31.
And I tell thee, It is an easier thing to persuade a Well-Man to go to the
Physician for Cure, or a Man without Hurt, to seek out for a Plaster to Cure
him; than it is to persuade a Man, that sees not his Soul-Disease, to come to
Jesus Christ. The Whole have No need of the Physician: Then, Why should they go
to him? The full Pitcher can hold no more; then, Why should it go to the
Fountain? And, if thou come full, thou come not aright; and be sure, Christ
will send thee Empty away: But he heals the Broken in Heart, and binds up
their Wounds, Mar. 2. 17. Psalm. 147. 3. Luke 1. 53.

Thirdly, Art thou Coming to Jesus Christ? Prithee tell me, What see thou in
him, to allure thee to forsake all the World, to come to him? I say, What
have thou seen in him? Men must see something in Jesus Christ, else, they will
not come to him.

1. What Comlyness have thou seen in his Person? Thou come not, if thou
see no Form, nor Comlyness in him; Isa. 53. 1, 2, 3.

2. Until those mentioned in the Song, were convinced, that there was more
Beauty, Comlyness, and Desirableness in Christ, than in Ten-Thousand; they did
not so much as ask, Where he was, nor incline to turn aside after him; Song 5.
Chap. 6.

There be many Things on this side Heaven, that Can and Do, carry away the
Heart; and so will do, so long as thou Live, if thou shall be kept blind, and
not be admitted to see the beauty of the Lord Jesus.

Fourthly, Art thou come to the Lord Jesus; what have thou found in him, since
thou came to him?

Peter found with him the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68.

They that Peter makes mention of, found him a Living stone, even such a living
stone as Communicated life to them, 1 Pet. 2.

He says himself, they that come to him, etc. Shall find rest unto their
Souls; have thou found rest in him, for thy Soul? Mat. 11.

Let us go back to the times of the Old Testament.

First, Abraham found that in him, that made him Leave his Country for him,
and become for his sake a Pilgrim, and stranger in the earth, Genesis 12. Heb. 11.

Secondly, Moses found that in him, that made him forsake a Crown, and a
Kingdom for him too.

Thirdly, David found so much in him, that he counted, to be in his house one
day, was better than a Thousand; yea, to be a door keeper there-in, was better,
in his esteem, than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84. 10.

Fourthly, What did Daniel, and the three Children find in him, to make them
run the hazard of the Fiery Furnance, and the Den of Lions, for his sake, Dan.
3. chap. 6.

Let Us come down to Martyrs.

First, Stephen found that in him, that made him Joyfully and quietly, yield up
his life for his name, Acts 7.

Secondly, Ignatius found that in him, that made him, Choose to go through the
Torments of the Devil, and Hell it self; rather than not to have him, Acts and
Mon. vol. 1. page 25.

Thirdly, What saw Romanus in Christ, when he said to the rageing Emperor, who
threatened him with fearful Torments; Thy Sentence O Emperor, I Joyfully
embrace, and refuse not to be Sacrificed -- by as Cruel Torments as thou can
invent, page 116.

Fourthly, What saw Menas the Egyptian in Christ, when he said under most Cruel
Torments; There eis nothing in my mind, that can be compared to the Kingdom of
Heaven; neither is all the World, if it was weighed in the balance, to be
conferred with the price of one Soul; who is able to separate us from the Love
of Jesus Christ our Lord; and I have Learned of my Lord, and King not to fear
them, that kill the body, etc. page 117.

Fifthly, What did Eulalia see in Christ, when she said, as they was pulling
her one Joint from another; Behold O Lord, I will not forget thee: what a
pleasure is it for them O Christ! that remember thy Tryumphant Victories, page
121.

Sixthly, What, think you, did Agnes see in Christ, when rejoyceingly she went
to meet the Soldier, that was appointed to be her Executioner: I will
willingly (said she) receive into my Paps, the length of his Sword, and into my
Breasts will draw the force thereof even to the hilts; that thus I, being
married to Christ my Spouse, may surmount and escape all the darkness of this
World, page 122.

Seventhly, What do you think did Julitta, see in Christ, when, at the Emperors
telling of her; that, except she would worship the Gods, she should neither
have Protection, Laws, Judgments, nor life: She replied, Farewell life,
Welcome Death: Farewell Riches, Wel-come poverty. All that I have, if it were
a Thousand times more, would I rather lose, than to speak one wicked and
blasphemous word against my Creator, page 123.

Eighthly, What did Marcus Arethusius, see in Christ, when after his enemies had
cut his flesh, anointed it with honey, and hanged him up in a basket, for flies
and bees to feed on, he would not (give to up-hold Idolatry) one half penny to
save his life, page 129.

Ninethly, What did Constantine, see in Christ, when he used to kiss the wounds
of them that suffered for him. page 135.

Tenthly, But what need I give, thus, particular instances of words, and
smaller actions, when by their lives their blood, their enduring hunger, sword,
fire, pulling a sunder, and all Torments that the Devil, and Hell could devise,
for the love they bare to Christ, after they were come to him.

What have thou found in him sinner?

What! come to Christ, and find nothing in him (when all things that are worth
looking after, are in him; or if any thing, yet not enough to wean thee from
thy sinful delights, and fleshly lusts: Away, away: thou art not come to Jesus
Christ.

He that is come to Jesus Christ, has found in him, that, as I said, that is
not to be found any where else. As,

First, He that is come to Christ, has found God in him reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them: And so God is not to be
found in Heaven and earth besides, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.

Secondly, He that is come to Jesus Christ, has found in him a fountain of
grace, sufficient, not only to pardon sin, but to Sanctify the Soul, and to
preserve it from falling in this evil World.

Thirdly, He that is come to Jesus Christ, has found virtue in him: That
virtue, that if he does but touch thee with his Word; or thou, him by Faith:
Life is forthwith conveyed into thy Soul: It makes thee wake as one that is
waked out of his sleep: it awakes all the powers of thy Soul. Psalm. 30. 11, 12.
Song. 6. 12.

Fourthly, Art thou come to Jesus Christ? thou have found glory in him, glory
that Surmounts, and goes beyond: Thou art more glorious than the mountains of
pray, Psalm. 76. 4.

Fifthly, What shall I say? thou have found Righteousness in him; Thou have
found rest, peace, delight, Heaven, glory and eternal life. Sinner, be advised,
Ask thy heart again, saying; Am I come to Jesus Christ? For, upon this one
question, Am I Come, or, am I Not, Hangs Heaven and Hell, as to thee. If thou
can say, I am come; and God shall approve that saying; Happy, Happy, Happy
man art thou! but if thou art not come, what can make thee happy: Yea what can
make that man Happy, that for his not coming to Jesus Christ for life, must be
damned in Hell?

The Third Use; a Use of Encouragement.
COming Sinner, I have now a word for thee; be of good comfort, He will in no
wise cast out. Of all men, thou art the blessed of the Lord; the the Father
has prepared his Son to be a Sacrifice for thee; and Jesus Christ thy Lord is
gone to prepare a place for thee, Joh. 1. 29. Heb. 10. Joh. 14.

What shall I say to thee? thou come to a full Christ, thou can not want
any thing, for Soul or body, for this World, or that to come, but it is to be
had, in, or by Jesus Christ,

As it is said of the Land, that the Dannits went to possess, So, and with much
more truth, it may be said of Christ: He is such an one, with whom there is no
want of any good thing that is in Heaven or earth.

A Full Christ, is thy Christ.

First, He is full of Grace. Grace is sometimes taken for love, and take it so
here. He is full of love; never any loved like Jesus Christ. Jonathans love
went beyond the love of Women; but the love of Christ passes knowledge. It is
beyond the love of all the Earth, of all Creatures, even of Men and Angels. His
love prevailed with him to lay aside his Glory, to leave the Heavenly place, to
cloth himself with flesh, to be born in a Stable, to be laid in a Manger, to
live a poor life in the World, to take upon him our sicknesses, infirmities,
sins, curse, Death, and the Wrath that was due to man. And all this he did, for
a base, undeserving, unthankful people: yea, for a people that was at Enmity
with him. For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for
the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure
for a good man, some would even dare to die. But God commended his love toward
us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. Much more then being
now justified, we shall be saved by his life. For if when we were Enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son: much more, being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, He is full of Truth. Full of grace, and truth. Truth, that is,
faithfulness in keeping promise, even this of the Text, (with all other) I will
in no wise cast out. Hence it is said, that his words be true, and that he is
the faithful God that keeps covenant. And hence it is also that his promise
is called Truth, Thou will fulfill thy truth unto Jacob, and thy mercy to
Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our Fathers, from the days of old.
Therefore it is said again, that both himself, and words are Truth. I am the
Truth, the Scriptures of Truth, thy Word is Truth, thy Law is the Truth, and my
mouth, aith he, shall speak truth, Joh. 14. 6. Dan. 10. 21. Joh. 17. 17. 2 Samuel
7. 28. Pro. 8. 7. Psalm. 119. 142. Eccles. 12. 10. Isa. 25. 1. Mal. 2. 6. Acts
26. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 12, 13.

Now I say, his word is truth, and he is full of truth, to fulfill his truth
even to a Thousand Generations. Coming sinner, he will not deceive thee, come
boldly to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, He is full of Wisdom, He is made unto us of God Wisdom, Wisdom to
manage the affairs of his Church in general, and the affairs of every coming
sinner, in particular. And upon this account he is said to be head over all
things, 1 Cor. 1. Ephesians. 1. Because he manages all things that are in the world
by his Wisdom, for the good of his Church; all men's Actions, all Satan's
Temptations, all Gods Providence, all Crosses, Disappointments; all things
what ever, are under the hand of Christ (Who is the Wisdom of God,) and he
orders them all for good to his Church; And can Christ help it, (and be sure
he can) nothing shall happen, or fall out in the world, but it shall, in
despite of all opposition, have a good tendency to his Church and people.

Fourthly, He is full of the Spirit, to communicate it to the coming Sinner; he
has therefore received it without measure, that he may communicate it to every
member of his body, according as every man's measure thereof is allotted him by
the Father. Wherefore he says, that he that comes to him, Out of his belly
shall flow rivers of Living water, Joh. 3. 34. Tit. 3. 5, 6. Acts 1. Joh. 7.
31, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.

Fifthly, He is indeed a storehouse, full of all the graces of the Spirit. Of
his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Here is more Faith, more
Love, more Sincerity, more Humility, more of every Grace; and of this, even
more of this he gives to every Lowly, Humble, Penitent coming Sinner:
wherefore coming Soul, thou come not to a barren wilderness, when thou come
to Jesus Christ, John 1. 16.

Sixthly, He is full of Bowels and Compassion; And they shall feel, and find it
so, that come to him for Life. He can bear with thy Weaknesses, he can pity thy
Ignorance, he can be touched with the Feeling of thine Infirmities, he can
affectionately forgive thy Transgressions, he can heal thy Back slidings, and
Love thee Freely. His Compassions fail not: And he will not break a bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: He can pity them, that no Eye pities, and
be afflicted in all thy Afflictions; Mat. 26. 41. Heb. 5 2. Chap. 2. 18, 19.
Mat 9. 2. Hos. 14. 4. Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6. Isa. 63. 9. Psalm. 78. 38. Psalm. 86. 15.
Psalm. 111. 4. Psalm. 112. 4. Lam. 3. 22. Isa. 42. 3.

Seventhly, Coming Soul, the Jesus that thou art coming to, is full of Might,
and Terribleness, for thy Advantage; He can suppress all thine Enemies: He is
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; He can bow all Men's Designs for thy
Help: He can break all Snares laid for thee in the Way: He can lift thee out of
all Difficulties, wherewith thou may be surrounded. He is Wise in Heart,
and Mighty in Power. Every Life under Heaven is in his Hand; yea, the Fallen
Angels tremble before him: And he will save thy Life, Coming-Sinner; 1 Cor. 1.
24. Romans 8. 28. Mat. 28. 18. Rev. 15. Psalm. 19. 3. Psalm. 27. 4, 5, 6. Job 9. 4.
Joh. 17. 2. Mat. 8. 29. Luk 8. 28. Jam. 2. 19.

Eighthly, Coming-Sinner, The Jesus to whom thou art coming, is Lowly in Heart;
He despises not any: It Is not thy outward Meanness, nor thy inward Weakness;
it is not because thou art Poor, or Base, or Deformed, or a Fool, that he will
despise thee. He has chosen the Foolish, the Base, and despised Things of this
World, to confound the Wise, and Mighty. He will bow his Ear to thy Stammering
Prayers; he will pick out the Meaning of thy inexpressible Groans; he will
respect thy weakest Offering, if there be in it but thy Heart: Mat. 11. 29.
Luke 14. 21. Prove. 9. 4, 5, 6. Isa. 38. 14, 15. Song 5. 16. Joh. 4. 27. Mark 12
33, 34. Jam. 5. 11.

Now, Is not this a Blessed Christ, Coming-Sinner? Art thou not like to fair
well, when thou have Embraced him, Coming-Sinner! But,

Secondly Thou have yet another Advantage by Jesus Christ, that art coming to
him: For he is not only Full, but Free. He is not sparing of what he has; he is
open hearted, and openhanded. Let me in a few Particulars show thee this:

First, This is evident, because he calls thee; He calls upon thee, to come
unto him; the which he would not do, was he not Free to give: Yea, he bids
thee, when come; Ask, Seek, Knock: And for thy Encouragement, adds to every
Command, a Promise; Seek, and ye shall find; Ask, and ye shall have; Knock, and
it shall be opened unto you* If the Rich Man should say thus to the Poor, would
not he be reckoned a Free-hearted Man? I say, Should he say to the Poor, Come
to my Door, Ask at my Door, Knock at my Door, and you shall Find and Have;
Would he not be counted Liberal? Why? thus does Jesus Christ: Mind it,
Coming-Sinner; Isa. 55. 3. Psalm. 50. 15. Mat. 7. 7, 8, 9.

Secondly, He does not only bid thee Come, but tells thee, He will heartily do
thee Good; Yea, he will do it with Rejoicing: I will rejoice over them to do
them Good, with my whole Heart, and with my whole Soul, Jer. 32. 41.

Thirdly, It appears that he is Free, because he gives without Twitting: He
gives to all men Liberally, and upbraideth not; Jam. 1. 5. There are some, that
will not deny to do the Poor a Pleasure, but they will mix their Mercies with
so many Twitts, that the Persons on whom they bestow their Charity, shall find
but little Sweetness in it. But Christ does not do so, Coming-Sinner; He
casts all thine Iniquities behind his Back; Thy Sins and Iniquities he will
remember no more: Isa. 38. 17. Heb 8. 12.

Fourthly, That Christ is Free, is manifest by the Complaints that he makes
against them, that will not come to him for Mercy: I say, he complains, saying;
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! How often would I have gathered thy Children together,
as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Matthew. 23.
37. I say, he speaks it by way of Complaint. He says also in another place;
But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou have been weary of me, O
Israel; Isa. 43. 22. Coming-Sinner, See here the Willingness of Christ to Save;
See here, how Free he is to communicate Life, and all good Things, to such as
thou art? He complains, if thou comes not; he is displeased, if thou call
not upon him.

Hark, Coming-Sinner, once again; When Jerusalem would not come to him for
Safeguard, He behold the City, and wept over it, saying; If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the Things that belong to thy Peace; but
now they are hid from thine Eyes, Luke 19. 41.

Fifthly, Lastly, He is open and Free Hearted to do thee Good, as is seen by
the Joy and Rejoicing, that he manifests at the coming home of poor
Prodigals: He receives the lost Sheep with Rejoicing; the lost Groat with
Rejoicing: Yea, when the Prodigal came home, what Joy and Mirth, what Music
and Dancing, was in his Father's House? Luke 15.

Thirdly, Coming-Sinner, I will add another Encouragement for thy Help.

First, God has prepared a Mercy-Seat, a Throne of Grace to Sit on; that thou
may come thither to him, and that he may from thence Hear thee, and Receive
thee: I will Commune with thee (says he) from above the Mercy-Seat, Exodus 25.
22.

As who should say; Sinner, When thou come to me, thou shall find me upon the
Mercy Seat; where also I am always found of the Undone, Coming, Sinner:
Thither I bring my Pardons; there I Hear, and Receive their Petitions, and
Accept them to my Favor.

Secondly, God has also prepared a Golden Altar for thee, to offer thy
Prayers, and Tears upon: A Golden Altar! It is called a Golden Altar, to show
what Worth it is of in God's Account: For this Golden Altar, is Jesus Christ;
This Altar sanctifies thy Gift, and makes thy Sacrifices acceptable. This
Altar, then, makes thy Groans, Golden Groans; thy Tears, Golden Tears; and thy
Prayers, Golden Prayers, in the Eye of that God thou come to, Coming Sinner:
Rev. 8. Mat. 23. 19. Heb. 10. 10, 15. 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Thirdly, God has Strowed all the way (from the Gate of Hell, where thou wast,
to the Gate of Heaven, whither thou art going,) with Flowers out of his own
Garden: Behold! How the Promises, Invitations, Calls, and Encouragements, like
Lillies, lie round about thee; (Take heed, that thou do not tread them under
foot, Sinner!) With Promises, did I say? Yea, he has mixed all those with his
Own Name, his Sons Name; also, with the Name of Mercy, Goodness, Compassion,
Love, Pity, Grace, Forgiveness, Pardon, and what not, that may encourage the
coming Sinner.

Fourthly, He has also, for thy En-couragement, laid up the Names, and set
forth the Sins, of those that have been Saved: In his Book they are fairly
written, that thou through Patience, and Comfort of the Scriptures, might
have Hope.

1. In this book is Recorded Noah's Name, and Sin; and how God had Mercy upon
him.

2. In this Record is fairly written the Name of Lot, and the Nature of his
Sin; and how the Lord had Mercy upon him.

3. In this Record, thou have also fairly written, the Names of Moses, Aaron,
Gidion, Sampson, David, Solomon, Peter, Paul; with the Nature of their Sins,
and how God had Mercy upon them: And all to Encourage thee, Coming-Sinner.

Fourthly, I will add yet another Encouragement, for the Man that is coming to
Jesus Christ. Art thou coming? Art thou coming, indeed? Why?

1. Then this thy Coming, Is by Virtue of God's Call. Thou art Called; Calling
goes before Coming: Coming is not of Works, but of him that Calls. He went up
into a Mountain, and called to him whom he would, and They came to him, Mark 3.
13.

Secondly, Art thou coming? This is also by Virtue of Illumination. God has
made thee see; and therefore, thou art coming. So long as thou wast Darkness,
thou lovedst Darkness; and could not abide to come, because thy Deeds were
Evil: But, being now Illuminated, and made to see, what, and where thou art;
and also, what, and where thy Savior is: Now thou art coming to Jesus Christ.
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona! for Flesh and Blood has at Revealed it unto
thee (said Christ) but my Father which is in Heaven; Matthew. 16. 15, 16.

Thirdly, Art thou coming, this is because God has Inclined thine heart to
come; God has called thee, illuminated thee, and inclined thy heart to come,
and therefore thou come to Jesus Christ. It is God that works in thee to
Will, and to come to Jesus Christ. Coming sinner, bless God, for that he has
given thee a Will, to come to Jesus Christ. It is a Sign that thou belongest to
Jesus Christ, because God has made thee willing to come to him, ( Psalm. 110.
3.) Bless God for slaying the enmity of thy mind; had he not done it, thou
would, as yet, have hated thine own Salvation.

Fourthly, Art thou coming to Jesus Christ, it is God that gives thee Power;
power to pursue thy Will in the matters of thy Salvation, is the gift of God.
It Is God that works in you both to Will and to Do, Phil. 2. 13. not that God
works Will to come, where he gives no power; but thou should take notice,
that power is an aditional Mercy. The Church saw that will and power were two
things, when She cried, Draw me, we will run after thee, (Song. 1. 4.): and so
did David too, when he said, I will run the ways of thy Commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my Heart. Will to come, and power to pursue thy will, is a double
Mercy, coming Sinner.

Fifthly, All thy strange, passionate, sudden rushings forward after Jesus
Christ, (coming Sinners know what I mean) they also are thy helps from God.
Perhaps thou feel at sometimes, more than at others, strong stirrings up of
heart, to fly to Jesus Christ; now thou have at this time a sweet, and stiff
gale of the Spirit of God filling thy sails with the fresh gales of his good
Spirit; and thou ridest at those times, as upon the wings of the wind, being
carried out beyond thy self, beyond the most of thy prayers, and also above all
thy fears and temptations.

Sixthly, coming Sinner, have thou not, now and then, a kiss of the sweet lips
of Jesus Christ? I mean, some blessed word droping like an Honeycomb upon thy
Soul to revive thee, when thou art in the midst of thy dumps.

Seventhly, Does not Jesus Christ sometimes give thee a glimps of himself,
though perhaps, thou see him not so long a time as while one may tell twenty?

Eighthly, Have thou not sometimes as it were the very warmth of his wings
over-shadowing the face of thy Soul, that gives thee as it were a gload upon
thy Spirit, as the bright beams of the Sun do upon thy body, when it suddenly
breaks out in the midst of a cloud, though presently all is gone again?

Well, all these things are the good hand of thy God upon thee, and they are
upon thee to constrain to provoke and to make thee willing, and able to come
(coming Sinner) that thou might in the end be Saved.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. Line 30. for given Read giver. p 19. l. 6. f. his r. this. p. 20. l
8. f. my r. may. p. 22. l. 22. f. those r. these. p. 23. l. 27. f. Satan r.
some. p. 24. l. 25. f. me r. one. p. 27. l. 5. f. changing r. cleansing. p 32.
l 12. f. his r. this. p 33. l. 1. after is add to. p. 33 l. 15. after meddle r.
with these. p. 43. l. 8. f. pre r. present. p. 78. l 2. after force r. to come.
p. 116. l. 7. before give r. to. p. 138. l. 13. f. above r. alone. p. 183. l.
14. after not r. to. p. 184. l. 19. f. between r. be. p. 187. l. 22. after
Judge r. no.


