A new Discovery OF THE FRENCH DISEASE AND RUNNING of the REINS; THEIR Causes,
Signs, with plain and easy Direction of perfect curing the same.

By R. BUNWORTH,

The second Edition corrected with large Additionals.

LONDON, ^^inted for Henry Marsh at the Princes-Arms in Chancery Lane, 1662.

The Bookseller to the Author.
SIR, when you see we have not Engraved your face;
But put this Mountebanke into your Place,
It Is from design to make noe shows of you
As such as promise more then they can do:
Your whole faced cures Refuse you should be shown
By shaddows or by halves: your art alone
That can Preserve entire and save the frame
Of others, shall be praised in the same.
There Is Beauty in those Scars that you have cured
And double Pleasure while they have endured
Further this kindesse is diffusive too
Like the Disease you courteously do:
You cure the Pox as it did first begin
By Prostitution of your Medicin.
Others their Patients belief betray,
Your Publication is the Secret'st way.
H. MARSH

The PREFACE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving had continual and daily experience for some years together in the cure
of the French disease with as good success, as my own heart could desire; I
thought it necessary to publish all those several ways which I have made use of
in the cure of this disease, in several constitutions, that other people might
receive the benefit also of our labors and studies that I might show my self a
profitable member of the Commonwealth wherein I lived, and in that City
wherein was my present abode: but now having found that that which we then did
only for a trial, has bin so well received into the world, we thought it our
duty to make it public again with additions, being assured that only the
benefit which it brought along with it, gave it so free a welcome and
entertainment in the world. And certainly for the time of publishing it, it
never could have bin more seasonable, in regard that besides the multitude of
those that are infected with venereal distempers, such is the dark ignorance of
most in this City, who publicly profess to cure the same, by sticking their
bills upon posts, to catch ignorant Country people, that scarce one in twenty
can give cure of that disease which they profess to cure.

The patient tells them, and then they tell the patient again that he has got
a clap; which signifies just as much as if they had said nothing at all.

And then out of ignorance or deceit they engage the patient into a long and
tedious Course of Physic until the time of the year shall have cured the
disease for the present, which they wholly ascribe to the Physic he took, but
the next Spring the patient finds by woeful experience the contrary; for as the
year getts up, so does the disease daily increase which these Empyricks pretend
to have cured.

Then he goes to another such like Mountebank which deals no better with him
then did the former.

And thus is he miserably deluded for two or three years together, until at
length he concludes that the disease is incurable, and so he is enforced to
make much of his disease, until it brings him into some other distemper which
kills him.

It Is a vain thing, and I am sorry that poor people should be so far deluded to
think their disease incurable because these Quacksalvers tell them so. For I
here publicly profess by Gods blessing to cure this disease within the space
of forty days in any that have had it above a dozen years, by such means as are
here set down in this small treatise, which we have once more, by reason of the
public recommendations that have bin given it, published for the comfort of
all those that are distressed, and for the benefit of the young Practitioner,
of whom now I am speaking. I shall take leave to give him these few
exhortations, first to avoid the common fault of all practitioners which is
covetousness; and not to exact upon the necessities of others that are in
distress: in the next place let him not be too inquisitive of any patient who
he is, or where he dwells, especially if he have a mind to conceal himself, thy
business being only to cure him which ease, speed, and safety. Thirdly if thou
know the patient, judge not rashly of him; for as an Artist you must know
that the French disease may be got by lying in a hot bed with another, or by
drinking with him, or by setting on the Close stool after him, and so the
Running of the reins may be got by riding lifting or any manner of streining,
as using too frequent copulation with a man's own wife. Fourthly so to contrive
the business that not any one of thy patients may know that the other is thy
patient, that each patient may be with all possible privacy. Fifthly neither
flatter nor dally with any patient whatsoever. Tell him not that the cure will
not be troublesome, when thou in thy conscience know that it will, and on the
contrary do not affright him, when thou know that he is in no danger. The
observation of those instructions will give a repute to the practice of
whosoever shall have a care not to deviate from them; which I wish to all
honest and painful practitioners, and that the abuses of Mountebanks may be
discovered and avoided, which as it will be profitable to the judicious
practitioner so it will not be a little advantageous to the patient.

Farewell.

R. B.

CHAP. I. Of the name, causes, and original of the French Disease.
THE French pox is certainly a new disease, and not known in Europe till within
this hundred years: For when Charles the eight king of France beseig'd Naples,
which was in the year 1494. it first began to spread it self, not only through
his army, but through all Italy, being brought by the Spaniards from the
American Islands into these parts of the world. It has been variously named,
some calling it the Spanish, some the Italian, some the French disease. Others
not willing to injure any nation, have styled it the Venereal plague.

Now what it is, whence it deduceth it is original, and to what kind of disease
it ought to be referred, it is a great difficulty to determine. Some will have
it to be the effect of divine justice. Others say it proceeds from a manifest
distemper of the air, that is, when it is very moist. But this stands not with
reason, when we find that this disease is contracted as well in times of drowth
as well as moisture. Nor can the air be the cause of it, seeing that never any
man was yet infected with the breath of the most distempered person. Some blame
the copulation of a leprous soldier with a noble courtesan in Spain to have
been the original thereof; for when other young men came and made the same use
of her, the Foulness of the former mixture dispersed this contagion to their
bodies, and they to others.

The Cause of this disease as the Galenists affirm, is a certain venom which
preys upon the blood, is hurtful to the liver, and works by second qualities,
heat and drowth. The Chemists not much differing from them, define it to be a
venomous ferment, that like a stink seizes upon the solid and liquid parts of
the body. But most commonly it associates it self with the excrements, which
are the matter of diseases, that have not the power to resist its virulences.

This contagious disease is contracted many ways, as by touch in coition, by
reason that the active force of the poison communicates its venom by means of
that corrupt matter, or those stinking vapors that proceed from the infected
person. Now because that cannot happen but by touch, it follows that the signs
of the disease must first appear in those parts which first are liable by that
contaction to receive the infection. And therefore we always find the first
symptoms in the privy parts. Sometime it is contracted by lying together in
the same bed, by reason that the sweat and impure vapors that exhale from a
defiled body corrode and penetrate the skin of him that is sound. In the same
manner the chaps are infected by drinking together, the nostrills by receiving
the evil sents of his body. As to the parties receiving, some whose skins are
soft and tender, their vessels larger, their spirits more subtle, and more
inflamed, their blood more thin and hot, have a less force to resist, and are
consequently more apt to receive this poison. So we see the tenderest parts of
the same body soonest infected, as the privities, which are very tender, and
still heated and rarefy'd by copulation. The mouth also and jaws are in the
same danger, by reason of the softness and thinness of the subject. Young men
also are sooner infected, then aged, and the weaker young men sooner then those
who are of stronger constitutions. But women are less subject to infection then
men, by reason of the coldness of their temper, as also because those parts are
washed by their natural evacuations.

CHAP. II. Of the signs and symptoms of this disease.
THE signs and symptoms how you shall know those that are infected with this
grief, appear by the following effects. Now because the signs do proceed and
are taken either from the nature of the effects or from the causes of the
sickness and also from some symptoms or causes thereof, and also because this
disease begins in the liver, which cannot be looked into, let us not look
for any signs which may be common to other diseases, but let us seek for such
signs as can give certain testimony and show thereof, as being contained under
the effects, and consequently proceeding immediately from the disease. Of these
signs there be two sorts, some are symptoms, as falling off of the hair, aches
in the head and members and small infection of the skin. But those which I call
diseases proceeding from the disease, are those sore and vehement ulcers,
tumors of the shins and other parts of the body with pustules. Of these
symptoms some happen at the beginning, some when the disease is grown more
prevalent and vigorous. Those of the first sort are these that follow. When a
man is first infected, He feels a certain weariness come upon all his members,
without any outward occasions, such as walking or violent exercise. There will
be also a lumpish heaviness over the whole body, a dullness, faintness and
slowness to move in all the members. The occasion of this is the infection of
the natural spirits, which are the immediate instrument that give livelyness to
the whole body, which being infected it must of necessity follow, that the
whole body should be more weary and heavy then it was before. There is moreover
a certain pain or ache, which wandreth throughout all the body and the several
parts thereof. First the head aketh, then it leaves the head and goes into
the shoulders, by and by it leaves one shoulder and goes into another, out of
the shoulders it flies to the legs, sometimes in one leg and sometimes in
another. The cause of this is a certain vapor which takes it is course from the
liver. It Is true that the evil humor is not yet quite begotten, but by reason
of the fervent heat of the liver, which is caused by the infection, there is a
certain small vapor engendered, which is the cause of these pains that wander
up and down the body. Now after that the disease has a little prevailed, the
color of the face is quite altered; Those that before were of most lively and
clear complexions, are in very short while all discolored. The lively spirit
of the eyes, and the comely colors of the mouth and cheeks will be altogether
of another Hew; and besides this there will be under the eyes of a wan colored
or bluish circle, such as appears in women that have Their stomachs will be
much taken off from their meat, they will have pains in the night coming upon
them much about the time they go to sleep, will many times wake them out of
their sleep. They are colder then ordinary and more over they have an itching
pain in their shin-bones, which abates no longer then while you are gently
rubbing of the part. Besides all this, they will be troubled with drowsiness or
a disposition to sleep, which shall be often interrupted. There is wont also to
be a notable heat in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, though it be
in the winter time. Neither is sadness of the mind to be left out, for though
the party infected should be of a pleasant and merry nature, yet will this
disease cause him to be sad even to such a height as to groan therewith. The
infection now increasing burns the blood which causes a fever, by reason of
the heat which is about the distempered parts. By this appears the putrified
matter which is a sign to discover the malady; for when you see this putrified
matter yet in small quantity about the yard, knowing no occasion thereof to
have gone before, you may safely pronounce it to be the French disease. For
this matter cannot proceed but from two causes; either because of the
corruption of the woman's Matrix, which may have eaten and gnawn the fine skin
of the yard; or else by reason that the contagion being imparted unto the Liver
by the natural spirits, the liver therefore expells those infected spirits and
sanious matter down again upon the privy parts. Besides these common signs
there are others, of another nature, as bubo's, which are small tumors in the
armholes or groyn and privy parts, afterward a general itching over the whole
body, and sometimes sore and angry pustules or breakings out in the head, face
and other parts.

CHAP. III. Of the cause of the coming forth of those pustules and other
tumors.
THE chief cause why these pustules break forth, are first, because the
infected matter is sent thither by the liver; Secondly because the parts
infected do not digest and expel the excrements by way of transpiration, and
therefore it remains there and grows into crusts. But there are besides these
pustules other signs of the disease, as the hanging down of the Uvula in the
further part of the mouth, which causes much moisture to come into the mouth,
by reason wereof happens a very great hoarsness. Wherefore if you hear your
patient speak hoarsely, open his mouth and you shall perceive the Uvula full of
moisture, which if the patient have no Catarrhe, is a confirmed sign of the
disease. The cause of the moistness of the Uvula is the change and infection of
the natural spirits, which being carried with the blood throughout every vein
of the whole body, by reason of their infection lose their strength, so that
their function grows weak and feeble in the stomach, which causes and engenders
phlegm, and unnatural humors in the brains; which abundance of humors falling
down upon the Uvula, are the cause of it is being pressed down: if the blood be
sharper, it consumes the roots of the hair which causes them to fall off; it
exulcerates the mouth, the palate, and the nose. Now the cause of hoarsness of
the voice is humidity and excrements which stop and let the ways of the voice.
There be other tumors denoting this disease as, such are the tumors of the
glandules in the further part of the mouth, which when ere you see be out of
doubt that the infection of this disease is confirmed. For the infection being
now sent to the head, is expelled by his emunctory places which are the
glandules. There are in the last place certain other tumors called gummata or
bumbata, by reason that the matter contained in them resembles the gum of
trees, which happens either because the party is not well nourished, but
heaps up abundance of undigested excrements, or else because the liver
continually feeds them with the infected matter of the disease. Note here that
if an asthma happen upon this disease, it declares the party to be past cure
and therefore let never any man seek to put such a one to pain by medecines or
other means, for they shall never heal such a one. These signs confirming the
certainty of the infection, care must be had that you know the time of the
infection, for, if it be new and lately contracted, it requires a shorter and
easier cure; if it be of a long standing, it requires a longer and more
artificial cure.

CHAP. IV. General observations concerning the cure of the French disease.
THis small Treatise which we are now about to write does contain all both the
known and secret ways of curing the French disease which are at this day
practiced, either in London, Paris, Venice, Rome or any other part of the
world; yet all these would be in vain without some general of what is to be
done before the cure, in the cure, and after the cure, Before you proceed to
the particular cure of this disease, let the body be sufficiently cleansed,
otherwise that which you give to cure the disease, will work upon some other
superfluous humor of the body, and leave the disease but half cured; for
though the symptoms will for the present abate, and the disease seem to be
wholly cured, yet the next spring after, the patient shall be sure to know by
woeful experience that his Doctor was but an Emperick.

CAP. V. Of the preparation of the humors.
THE humors predominant in the constitution of every person, are Phlegm,
Blood, Choler, or Melancholy; and according to the particular abundancy of
either of these humors, people are said to be phlegmatic, sanguine,
choleric, or melancholic.

If the patient be Phlegmatic, first prepare his body, and then purge him, let
him be prepared with this following Apozeme.

Take roots of Parsley, Fennel, Grass butchers brom, and Asparagus an ounce.
Maidenhaire one handful, Penyroyal half a handful, Cinnamon and Liquorice an
ounce; cut, slice or bruise them according to Art; then boil them all together
in white wine and spring water, of each a pound and half, until half be wasted,
strein away the ingredients, and sweeten the Liquor with six ounces of Oxymel
Julianizan; drink of this four ounces fasting in the morning, and as much to
bedward so long as it shall last.

The next day after he has taken his Apozeme in the morning fasting give him
this following Purging potion, and if need require two days after purge him
again.

Take Senna three drams, Agarick two Scruples, Caraway-seeds half a dram,
Cinnamon and Squinanth one scruple; infuse them all night in four ounces of
white wine, strein it, then added Manna and Syrrup of Roses solute half an
ounce, Tartarum vitriolatum ten grains. The next day after proceed to the
particular cure.

If the patient be of a sanguine constitution take from his right arm ten
ounces of blood, more or less according to his age strength and time of the
year. The next day after bleeding proceed to the particular cure.

If the patient be choleric, purge him with this following potion.

Take Senna two drams, Rhubarb and Tamarinds an'. a dram, Coriander seeds
prepared half a dram, cream of Tartar a scruple; infuse them in three ounces
and a half of sorrel water for the space of twelve hours, strain it and put to
the strained liquor one ounce and a half of syrup of Roses, and one drop of
oil of Cinnamon. If you perceive by his excrements that his body be very foul,
purge him again after two days intermission, and the next day after begin with
his particular cure.

If the patient be melancholy, take from his left arm nine ounces of blood,
more or less according to his strength age and the time of the year. The next
day after bleeding let him take of this following preparative Apozeme.

Take Borage Bugloss, Maidenhair, Ceterach, and Fumitory, of each a small
handful; the roots of grass Asparagus and liquorice an one ounce Cream of
Tartar half an ounce, boil them altogether in two quarts of spring water
until half be wasted, strein it and sweeten the strained liquor with six
ounces of syrrup of Apples; Give him four ounces of it in the morning fasting,
and as much at night toward bed time as long as it shall last. The next day
after he has taken all his Apozeme let him purge with this following potion.

Take Senna three drams, black Hellebore one dram, Agarick half a dram,
Galingale and Squinanth an one scruple, Spikenard ten grains. Infuse them all
night in four ounces and a half of Borage water, in the morning put to the
streyned Liquor one ounce and a half of syrup of Roses, and five drops of oil
of vitriol.

Two days after he has taken this potion, if need require, purge him again
with two scruples of extractum Rudii made up into five pills. The next day
after he has taken his pills take more blood from him as you shall see
occasion, and then proceed to the particular cure.

Those which are of mixed temperaments must be dealt with all according to the
prudence of the Physician, which is greatly to be required as well in the Cure
of this Disease as of any other.

Yet this give us leave to set down, that where you find mixed humors there you
must apply your self to the giving of such things as are prepared for the
cleansing away of mixed humors.

As for example: Pilulae Mastichinae, containing Agarick, do forcibly purge
away gross choler and phlegm, which are made this. Take Mastick half an ounce,
Aloes one ounce, Agarick Trochiscate and powder of Hiera simplex ana three
drammes and a half, incorporate them with Malmsey; take three pills at a time
going to bed eating no supper. The Pills sine quibus esse nolo do draw choler,
phlegm and melancholy out of all parts of the body. They are to be taken in a
morning fasting, keeping your self warm by reason of the scammony which is in
them. Thus with such Receipts as these are, of which there are many more, when
you find the mixed humors sufficienly prepared, proceed to the particular cure
of the disease.

CHAP. VI. Of the diet used in the cure of this disease.
THE diet of your patient must be always drying as to the quality, and very
slender as to the quantity. The use of biscuit is no way to be discommended, for
it suffers the meat taken after it to moisten so much as otherwise it would.
His meat must be roasted, and of the very best, as Mutton, Chickens, Partriches,
Rabbetts etc. only when he purges you may permit him to have his meat boiled,
and when his strength begins to come you may permit him to eat some bread and
raisins; His drink must be very small, and indeed if he could keep himself to
the decoctions which belong to the cure of the distemper, it would do much
better.

CHAP. VII. The first way of curing the French disease.
TAke of this following decoction of the Wood Guaiacum half a pound, the bark
of Guaiacum four ounces, Sassaphras an ounce; boil them over night in three
Gallons of water in an Iron pot close covered, and let them infuse all night.
In the morning boil them again with raisins stoned half a pound, China
Sarsaperill and Liquorice of each two ounces; Let them continue boiling over a
gentle fire, until the liquor be half wasted, then take it off from the fire,
and when it is cold strain away the liquor from the ingredients, and put it up
in stone bottles and keep it in a cellar or cool place for your use.

Take of this decoction a quarter of a pint in a morning fasting, at four in
the afternoon and at night to bed ward, for the space of forty days together,
and every time let him sweat moderately after it. Then let him use this
following decoction at meals in stead of beer.

Put a gallon and a half of water to the ingredients that were left of the
first decoction, and boil them a little, then take it from the fire and keep
the liquor together with the ingredients in an Earthen vessel two or three
days, in the mean time drinking of it as aforesaid, then put away the
ingredients from the liquor, and keep it by it self.

This first way of curing the French disease is very safe for any whatsoever,
but it agrees best with ancient people and such as are Rheumatick and of a
Phlegmatic constitution. It is moreover an apt cure for the Dropsy, the Gout,
the Scurvy, Quartain Agues, Convulsions, the Epilepsie, all manner of pains in
the head the Kings evil, and the Palsy.

CHAP. VIII. Of choosing your Guaicum and China.
HAving so often made mention of Guaiacum, and China, and finding them so
necessary ingredients in the cure, of this disease and that their goodness or
badness does much conduce either to retard or hasten the cure we have thought
fit to set down some few signs whereby to know which is good and which is
naught.

In choosing this wood you are to consider the time of the year, for in a cold
season as in the winter you are to use the hotter, sharper and bitterer sort,
which is easily judged by the sense, in the summer that which is least sharp or
bitter either of an old or young tree. Now the marks whereby you shall discern
the best from the other are these. First the old wood is very big and has a
gross and thick rind, which so cleaves to the wood that you can hardly separate
it with a knife, for as often as you see the bark come easily from the wood it
shows that it has bin moystened with salt water and it is of the worst sort;
in the second place, if you rasp a little of this wood, and find no smell to
come from it, you may conclude that it is either very old or else corrupt. The
third sign to choose this wood by, is, that if in rasping it appears very
oily, so that you perceive the dust thereof to glister. Fourthly, taste of that
dust, and if it bite your tongue immediately, and afterward yeildeth a
bitterness, it is very good. Fifthly, if there appear in the substance manifest
pores and holes, and that the place where it is rasped appear not very smooth
and equal, it is not good. Sixthly, you must choose it very ponderous and heavy.
The last proof thereof, is to boil the raspings, and if the decoction be
thick, very bitter and sharp, it is very good. The signs of the goodness of
the rind are these. If it be taken from a tree which is old or of a middle age;
for that which comes from small boughs is naught; now that which comes from an
old tree or a tree of a middle age, has great pieces and large cavities.
Secondly, let the rind be very thick and hard. Thirdly, let the rind be
somewhat black, sprinkled with an ash color, for this is the color of the
most excellent bark.

The best China, is that which is rough in color, not ponderous, nor
worm-eaten nor corrupted, though of the two, they which be worm-eaten are the
better of the two. For the spongious roots soon putrify, and give little
strength to the decoction.

CHAP. IX. Of the Second way of curing the French disease.
THis is by salivation or fluxing. To which purpose let the patient anoint the
palms of his hands and the soles of his feet with this following unguent until
he begin to spit.

Take of Quicksilver one ounce, and put it into a little mortar with four or
five spoon-fulls of vinegar, and stir them together in the mortar with a
pestle, until the quicksilver be divided into small particles, less then pins
heads, then pour away the vinegar, and put into the mortar to the Quicksilver,
Venice Turpentine and Hoggs seam of each an ounce, stir them together with the
pestle until the quicksilver be incorporated into them; then mix with it
Unguentum Neruinum two ounces, and keep it in a cool place for your use.

Let it be very well chafed in, otherwise it will not let him spit at all; when
he begins to spit let him leave off to anoint himself, and keep very warm. Let
him continue spitting, till his spittle leave off its brackish taste and become
either insipid, or else of a sweetish taste, which is commonly in fourten or
fiteen days during the whole time of his spitting. During the whole time of his
spitting let him drink a draught of warm posset drink for three or four times a
day. When you would abate the spitting which must be, upon some very
extraordinary occasion, as if he spit blood, so that you perceive any of the
vitals to be offended, then give him every afternoon at four of the clock this
following clyster.

Take new milk a pint, brown sugar two ounces, two yolks of eggs, and three
dramms of common salt; mix them together according to art and give them
Clysterwise blood warm: Give him also at night when he goes to bed this
following Bolus:

Take of Diascordium two scruples, Gascoynes powder twenty grains, oil of
Vitriol two drops, with a little syrrup of white Poppy, mix them into a Bolus.

If while he spits, his teeth are very loose, let him keep a piece of gold in
his mouth.

Some people are so ignorant as to procure salivation by anointing all the
joints; but this Remedy is worse than the Disease: for there be many that have
been so anointed which have had feeble joints all the year after.

Salivation may be also procured by the mouth, as well as by unction, as thus.

Take of Turbith minerals ten grains, and make it into a ball or pill with
conserve of Roses, and give it the patient; the next day but one give him
eleven grains so made up as before, and the next day but one to that give him
thirteen grains of the said Turbith.

When he takes his doses he must receive it early in the morning and sleep
after it an hour, and then rise and keep himself very warm for an hour, nor
must he drink any thing but posset drink warm while the flux continues, which
will be for twenty days, he shall eat no meat but broth of mutton or hens:
after he has done fluxing let him take this drink.

Take of Sarsaperil two ounces; Guaiacum four ounces; Hermodactyles two ounces;
Senna two ounces; Annis-seed and Cominseed two ounces; Liquorice sliced Twenty
two ounces; boil all these together in ten quarts of liquour half beer half
water, and let them boil twelve hours on a soft fire till three quarts be
consumed, and then drink thereof half a pint in a morning and half a quart
about four in the evening till you have drunk it up. You may when you take this
drink eat boiled mutton or veal or hens roasted.

The Cure of the French disease by salivation or spitting surpasses any other
cure, provided it be used to those bodies unto which it is most convenient;
otherwise it is most uncertain and dangerous. For it proves destructive to
those that have a moist brain, and are subject to pain in the head, and are
inclined to cold diseases. But to those that are of extreme hot constitutions,
and are not at all obnoxious to the headache, it is the only remedy under
heaven for the disease.

CHAP. X. The third way of curing the French disease.
TAke of Conserve of Wood Sorrel and conserve of Barbery's of each three
ounces, red Coral prepared two drams, Crabbs eggs, salt of steel and Tartarum
vitriolatum of each a dram and a half, Succinum two scruples, with as much
syrrup of coral as is sufficient, mix them together in an electuary.

Give the patient the quantity of a nutmeg of this electuary every morning
fasting, and as much at four in the afternoon, so long as it shall last and let
him exercise after it; and in the mean time every fifth day let him purge with
this following potion, and once a week let him sweat in a hot-house or in his
bed with bottles or bricks.

Take white wind three ounces; syrrup of roses solutive an ounce and a half,
Lac sulphuris two scruples, mix them together according to art.

Let him not take the Electuary when he purges and sweates.

This is a good way for those that live sedentary lives and have obstructions
in their inward parts, as the liver, the spleen, the Mesentery, etc.

CHAP. XI. The fourth way of curing the French disease.
KEep the patient in his bed four or five days or a week together, and sweat
him continually. In the mean time let him drink now and then a draught of hot
posset drink, but let him by no means take any thing else whatsoever. This way
is used much in the Low Countries. It is the only way for those that have sharp
and eating humors, insomuch that they are fearful of losing the palate of
their mouth, or the bridge of their nose, and have holes in their head or any
other part.

CHAP. XII. The fifth way of curing the French disease.
TAke of Sarsaperil one ounce and an half, split it and cut it into half an
ounce of the best spirit of wine in a glass close stopped with a cork and
bladder; Let the infusion continue so long till the spirit of wine continue of
a perfect golden color. Then strein it, and put to the streined liquor gum of
Guaiacum powdered an ounce; natural balsam a dram, stop them very close, and
shake up the glass, once or twice every day until the gum be perfectly
dissolved.

Let the patient take half a spoonful of this Artificial balsam in every
draught of beer he drinks three weeks or a month together. In the mean time let
him be purged every fifth day with two scruples of extractum Rudii, and ten
grains of Mercurius dulcis mixed together according to art and made up into five
pills.

This is an excellent way for all effeminate persons and such as are of weak
constitutions.

CHAP. XIII. The sixth way of curing the French disease.
TAke white wine three ounces, Venice Treacle two scruples, Balsam of Sulphur
seven grains, mix them together into a potion.

Let the patient drink this potion every morning for the space of twenty days
together, and let him not eat or drink any thing for three hours after. This is
accouned a great secret among the French and Italian Doctors. It cures the
disease. He may go about his occasions every day notwithstanding the potion
which he takes in the morning. It is safe for all sorts of people, but it
agrees best with cold constitutions and such as are inclined to shortness of
breath and a defluxion of Rheum upon their lungs. Many of the French Doctors
do use balsam of Sulphur alone with good success. But this way is not to be
used when the disease is over far gone.

CHAP. XIV. The seventh way of curing the French disease.
TAke gum Guaiacum two drams, Antimonium Diaphoreticum, flower of Brimstone,
Diagrydium, man's bones calcind, Mercurius dulcis, of each a dram. Opium half a
dram, Saffron a scruple, Juice of Camomil as much as suffices; make them into a
mass according to art.

Of this following mass make a pill consisting of ten grains, and let the
patient take one every night when he goes to bed for forty nights together; let
him be composed to a good moderate sweat by laying on good store of clothes
upon him: in the mean time let him drink nothing but spring water, both at
meals and at other times.

This is most agreeable to them that have extreme nocturnal pains, and have
scarce any other symptoms as swellings, pustules, etc.

CHAP. XV. The eight way of curing the French disease.
MAke the Patient an Issue in his right arm, and another in his lest leg, then
give him five spoonfulls of this following Apozeme, every morning fasting, and
as much at four in the afternoon, so long as it shall last.

The Apozeme.
Take of the Shavings of Tin two ounces, of the juice of Rue six ounces, of the
juice of Garleek four ounces, Venice-Treacle an ounce and a half, Muskadel six
pintes; boil them altogether in an earthen-vessel close covered (over a gentle
fire) until half be wasted.

This way is most suitable for those that are much extenuated and weakened by
reason of the long continuance of the disease.

CHAP. XVI. The ninth way of curing the French disease.
TO these eight ways before rehearsed we shall add a ninth, which is called
the Chimical way of curing the French disease.

Take powder of Mastick one scruple, Mercurius dulcis three grains, make
thereof little tablets with Honey, which the Patient is to chew in his mouth
for eight hours: when the flux is raised you must omit purgations, and take
care against the excoriation of the tongue, mouth and gums, which is easily
avoided by a gargarism made only of salt and water, with which being luke warm
the mouth is often to be washed; all this while the patient must eat nothing
but thin though nourishing broths.

The salivation perfected Take of the red spirit of Mercury, as Hartman easily
prepares it, and put two drops thereof in a small draught of persicaria water
of peaches; This causes moderate sweats and thereby cleanses the body from any
infection which the Mercury could leave behind it, and wholly extirpates the
disease. So that in three or four times taking you shall see the pustles shall
of themselves, the tumors assuage; and if there be any faetid ulcers, they
presently dry up and heal.

There is no pox (says Hartman) so obstinate, but it yields to this
medicament, so that the patient have strength to endure the sweatings, which he
is to undergo.

CHAP. XVII. The second Chymicall way of curing the French disease.
FIrst purge with confectio Hamech or Diacarthamum, after purgation if the
party be plethorick let blood, otherwise not. This done make this following
ointment.

Tage of Hogs seam one pound without any salt in it, and very new. Mercurii
vivi killed in juice of Limons or Turpentine water which is better, with this
ointment anoint the knees and legs of the patient before and if the disease be
vehement, the spine of the back also; after that let him sweat gently in his
bed with hot bottles, if he sweat not easily after the three first days,
whereas before you anointed him only in the morning, anoint him twice a day,
viz. in the morning and three hours after dinner, when the flux is raised cease
oynting and let him be kept in a warm bed while the flux lasts, but if it
continue above eight or nine days, use then astringent gargarismes made of
Pilosella Myrtles, Centinody, orange flowers, and mel rosarum; use the said
gargarisme also when the flux ceases to cleanse the teeth and gums, or mingle
salt water with the decoction of Guiacum and wash the mouth therewith.

While the flux lasts, let him use only for his drink the second decoction of
Guaiacum, as shall be set down.

When the flux has ceased let him eat roast meats altogether, and let him
twice a day take this following decoction.

Take of the shavings of Lignum Sanctum one pound, of the bark of the same four
ounces, infuse them in twelve pints of water for the space of twenty four hours
then boil it to the consumption of the eight part, strain it and let him take
four ounces at a time. Then take the residue and put to it other twelve pints
of water and let it boil gently, to this you may add a little Cinnamon,
liquorice and raisins of the sun and this is that which as we said before he
must use instead of drink.

Every sixth day purge him with confection Hamech or Diacarthamum, or confectio
de Citro, and be sure that all the time of the cure he abstain from salt, and
salt meats.

CHAP. XVIII. Of curing the pustles coming of the French disease.
TAke Sage, Rue, nightshade and red rose leaves of each a handful, Guaiacum two
ounces, Orpiment half an ounce Quicksilver two dramms boil them all together
in two quarts of spring water in an earthen vessel close covered, over a gentle
fire until half be wasted. Streine away the ingredients and put the liquor into
a stone bottle, and put to it two drams of Chalcantum Romanum dawb the pustule
with this liquor with a linen cloth twice a day.

Another way to cure the said pustules.
Take Quicksilver four ounces, silver two ounces dissolve them apart in aqua
fortis, then being dissolved mix them together, and by a retort in the sand
distill a water out of them; That Liquor distill again in Balneo till you can
perceive no more to come from the still this water keep for your use, dip a
small feather therein and with it wipe over the pustules one by one every day
once, and they will presently look black and dye, if they fall not off in four
days cease to use the water, and anoint them with a little Fresh butter which
will cause them to fall off. When they are fallen off, Take a little Saccharum
Saturni and dissolve it in rose water, and wet the place whence the scabbs or
pustules fell off, and it will take both the scar and the redness: or,

Take of the rust of brass one part Salt peter two parts mingle them together
and put them in a dish, and with a piece of paper lighted set them on fire,
when it has don flaming, take that which remains and put it into the bladder
of a hog, then tie it up close and put the bladder into cold water, and that
within will presently dissolve, then strein it through a piece of silk, and
keep it for the same purpose to be used as before.

CHAP. XIX. To cure a Bubo.
TAke a Diaculum plaster and moisten it with vinegar and lay it on the
swelling, and as the swelling rises lay on another every day twice a day, to
soften the tumor, when it is full ripe open it with a pen knif, and press out
the matter. Then apply to it this following plaster, which will never suffer
it to close up till it be perfectly healed.

Take Galbanum, Opoponax ana two ounces Ammoniac, Bdellium ana one ounce: Steep
them in vinegar eight or fourteen days, the longer the better, then strein
them, and inspissate them to the thickness of honey.

Then take Litharge pulverised one pound, let it boil gently over a small fire
in two pints of olive oil, moving it all the while with a little stick till it
come to be of a bay color. Then remove it from the fire, and by and by add of
wax one pound stir it till it melt, then put in the foresaid gumms and mix them
well, when they are all mixed, add oil of Laurel three ounces and then mix it
well together Then taking it quite from the fire add these following pouders.

Take of Crocus Martis, munrie of the magnet, majisterie of red and white coral
ana half an ounce, Lapis calaminaris, red myrrh, male Frankincence, mastick and
round Aristolochia ana two ounces; powder all these into a most subtle powder,
and mix them by little and little. This being diligently done add of oil of
Amber which comes forth last in the distillation, and is called balsome of
Amber one dram: then put it on again and stir it very well over a gentle fire,
then when it is a little cool make it up into rolls for your use.

CHAP. XX. Instructions to put in practice the several ways of curing the
French disease before rehearsed.
ACcording to each particular aforesaid of curing the French disease there are
diverse daily cured. Yet would we not advise any to undertake the cure of this
disease by any of these ways indifferently without respect had to the patients
constitution, age, course of life, and all other circumstances whatsoever.
After he has observed the several ways of curing this disease which I have
here set down, let him satisfy himself inwardly upon what account each
particular way is most suitable to such a particular constitution. As for
example for effeminate persons and those which are of a more delicate temper
there is a balsome prescribed in the twelveth Chapter. Now why should these be
cured by this way rather then by any other. The reason is because there is
something or other in all the other ways of curing this disease which might
prove destructive to a tender habit of body. The decoction mentioned in the
first Chapter would dry them too much and be apt to breed a schyrrhus in some
of the inward parts, as the liver, the spleen, the pancreas; salivation which
is another way of curing would presently consume them. Wherefore if this safe
and easy way will perform the cure, why should we put the patient to the
trouble and inconvenience of any other, as fluxing sweating or the like. To
which I answer, that although this way does cure it in those that are of a
tender habit, yet it will not be effectual to those of a stonger constitution.
Thus a prune or an apple will move some persons, when as others shall not be
moved with an ounce of Manna or two ounces of syrrup of Roses: so great is the
diversity of constitutions.

When the practitioner is fully satisfied in reason why each particular way of
cure is most conducible to such a particular temperament, let him observe
whether there be not a complication or mixture of symptoms in the patient, that
is whereas I have set down after each particular cure, that such a way is
proper for effeminate persons, and another way proper for those that have
extreme pains, whether the person be not only an effeminate person and
troubled also with nocturnal pains, with some other symptoms set down severally
in other chapters, and if there be, let him so compound these particular ways
of cure that they may be most agreeable to the complication of the patients
symptoms; as for example, suppose I had a patient of a strong constitution
having nocturnal pains, both in his head and other parts, and pustles in his
face and outward parts, I would use the decoction in the seventh chapter, but
yet I would borrow the pill mentioned in the fourtenth chapter, which I would
give him instead of that draught of the decoction which he should take every
night when he goes to bed and besides that I would use unto him first the water
for his pustles set down in the eight chapter. If I had a patient of an
indifferent hot temper, who had extreme pains sometimes in his head, but not
very often, as perhaps once in fortnight or three weeks I would first flux him
according to the method set down in the ninth Chapter and after his fluxing I
would give him the decoctions mentioned in the seventh chapter, for the space
of ten days. By which instances it is plain how little difficulty there is in
contriving a fit remedy for this disease in each particular constitution.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Cure of the Gonorrhea called the Running of the Reins.
THE simple Gonorrhea though the symptoms thereof be nothing near so dangerous
as are those of the pox, yet if the patient either through negligence or
bashfulness do neglect the timely cure, it will certainly in a short time turn
to the pox, and therefore the remedy thereof is suddenly to be sought. We need
not set down the symptom of this disease, for it easily betrays it self, and
therefore we shall proceed to the cure. The method of the first way of curing
this disease is as follows.

Take guaiacum four ounces, Senna two ounces anniseeds and liquorice ana one
ounce, lignum neptneticum half an ounce, boil them over night in three quarts
of water, until half be wasted, then put into it three dramms of Agarick, Let
the ingredients continue in the liquor all night, in the morning strein away
the ingredients and mix with the streined liquor four ounces of syrrup of Roses
solutive keep it in a cool place for your use.

Let the patient drink of this Apozeme every morning five ounces fasting so
long as it lasts. The third day after he has taken all his Apozeme give him
this following potion.

Take plantain water four ounces. Venice Turpentine washed in red rose water
half an ounce, and the yolk of an egg. First incorporate the yolk of the egg
with the turpentine in a little mortar then mix the plantain water by little
and a little by degrees.

The third day after he has taken this Potion take these following pills.

Take of Aloes Rosat. half an ounce, Agarick trochiscated two dramms Coloptony
two scruples, Mastick half a dram, saffron twenty grains syrrup of damask roses
as much as suffices make them into a mass according to art.

Let him take two scruples of this mass made into five pills every third
morning for three weeks together This is most convenient for those which are of
a cold constitution.

CHAP. XX. The second way of curing the running of the reins.
TAke China and Sarsaperilla ana an ounce and a half Red sage a small handful,
Senna an ounce, Coriander seeds prepared three drams boil them over night in
white wine, and spring water, of each three pints until half be wasted; Then
while it is hot put into the decoction two drams of Rhubarb sliced and let it
infuse in the liquor all night with the rest of the ingredients, in the morning
strein away the ingredients, and put to the liquor four ounces of syrrup of
Cichory with Rhabarb.

Let the patient drink twelve spoonfulls of this Apozeme fasting so long as it
shall last. The next day after he has taken all his Apozeme let him begin to
take of this following electuary.

Take of Lenitive Electuary three ounces; Cassia lately extracted in red rose
water, and Venice turpentine washed in plantain water, ana an ounce and a half.
The powder of Senna and Anniseeds of each a dram and a half, Rhubarb finely
powdered a dram mix them according to art into an electuary.

Of this Electuary let him take the quantity of a wall nut fasting, and as much
at four of the clock in the afternoon so long as it shall last. When he begins
to take of this electuary, let him take this following plaster and lay it
athwart his back letting it continue on as long as will stick.

Take of Venice Turpentine an ounce, Virgins wax half an ounce, melt them
together in a brass ladle or small earthen pot over a gentle fire, and when it
is almost cold, stir into it three dramms of white sealed Earth, finely
powdered, and spread it upon Allome leather, to be applied as aforesaid.

This way of cure best agrees with those that are of a hot constitution.

CHAP. XXIII. The third way of curing the Running of the reins.
FIrst give the patient this following vomit:

Take of the infusion of Crocus metallorum an ounce Oxymell simplex two ounces,
oil of Cinnamon a drop, mix them together give it him in a morning fasting with
due observation according to the custom of vomiting.

After he has taken this vomit, two days after, give half a dram of extractum
rudii, and twelve grains of mercurius dulcis mixed together, made into four
pills. Two days after he has taken the pills sweat him with this following
sweating potion.

Take treacle water, two ounces, Antimonium diaphoreticum ten grains syrrup of
wood sorrel an ounce and a half, mix them together.

The next day after he has sweat let him begin to take this following Apozeme.

Take China, Sarsaperil, Senna, roots of water Lillies of each an ounce,
Raisins stoned, four ounces, black hellebore, half an ounce Caraway seeds and
Cinnamon of each three dramms; boil them altogether in three quarts of water
over a gentle fire in an Earthen vessel close covered until half be wasted
strain away the ingredients and sweeten the liquor with six ounces of common
Treacle.

Give him four ounces of this Apozeme at a time every morning fasting for the
space of twenty days in the mean time let him swallow every night when he goes
to bed five pills as big as large peace of Cyprus Turpentine.

This cure is most proper for those that have a violent Gonorrhea or running of
the reins which may have some tincture or smatch of the French disease.

CHAP. XXIV. The fourth way of curing the Gonorrhea.
TAke of Rhabarb Crema Tartar of each four ounces Cassia newly extracted and
Venice Turpentine as much as will thicken it into the form of an electuary.

Let the patient take of this electuary in the morning fasting as much as will
amount to the quantity of a wall nut, and at night also when he goes to bed
the same quantity drinking after it a glass of whay or if he find any sharpness
in his urine a glass of milk and water. Let him do this for a fortnight or
three weeks together. He may go about his business without any disturbance,
only keeping a temperate diet and abstaining from much drinking and taking
tobacco.

If the person be of a sanguine complexion, he may let blood before he begins
to take his Electuary.

Let this cure be used only when the disease is taken in time before the venom
of the disease has proceeded two far.

CHAP. XXV. The fifth way of curing the Gonorrhea.
FIrst purge the patient with a bolus of Cassia newly extracted, causing him to
drink after it a little broth without any salt in it. After this let him take
half a dram of Chrystallum minerale in six ounces of whey two howrs before
meals morning and evening, and at meals let him use this following diet drink.

Take of barley, grass, topps of Mallows, plantain leaves, agrimony,
maidenhaire, ana a good handful, liquorice as much as will suffice; boil it
high and make thereof a Ptisan, and to every four pints of this Ptisan, add
half an ounce of Chrystallum minerale; use this for fifteen or sixteen days or
three weeks.

This with great ease stopps the gonorrhea of it self, But if it be an old
running, after you have made use of the former prescription, the due time set
down, take of this following mass of pills.

Take of Salt of Coral rectifyed twice or thrice with spirit of Guaiacum one
ounce, extract of Amber, one ounce. Terra sigillata three drams, Crocus Martis
astringent reverberated half an ounce. Extract of tormentill, Pilosell, golden
rod, great Sanicle of each two ounces Venice Turpentine evaporated with a soft
heat, till the consumption of the third part.

Mix with the hot Turpentine first the extract of amber, then the salt of
coral, and the terra sigillata mingled with the other extracts, then the Crocus
Martis; stirring with a spatula till they be all exactly mixed. Make a mass
thereof and let the patient take thereof two scruples made into pills morning
and evening till he find himself well.

You may also use injections into the yard made of the decoction of Tormentil,
golden rod, pilosell and great Sanicle dissolving a dram of Saccharum Saturni,
in one dram of the said Liquor.

CHAP. XXVI. The chemical way of curing a virulent Gonorrhea.
IN the curing of the Gonorrhea chymically, green precipitate is thus made.

Take of mercury three ounces, and dissolve it in two ounces of aqua fortis,
of Venus one ounce and dissolve it in two ounces of Aqua fortis, mix the two
solutions together and distill them out of the sand through a retort, toward the
end of the distillation urging the fire more Vehemently, whereby the greatest
parts of the corrosive spirits may be taken away, pound that which remains
behind in a mortar, and with vinegar digest it six days in the ashes, then boil
it that the greatest part of the mercury may be dissolved in the vinegar, when
it it impregnated with the vinegar take it and distill it with a soft fire till
it be come very dry, and there will remain in the bottom a green precipitate,
of this give four five six or seven grains according to the strength of the
patient, in conserve of roses.

CHAP. XXVII. General observations concerning the Cure of the Gonorrhea.
THere is a much prudence and discretion required in the Physician or Surgeon
in the cure of the Gonorrhea, as in the cure of the French disease, in regard
of the great danger there is in stopping of the Gonorrhea suddenly in some
bodies, and the safety of curing it with all speed in others; in those bodies
that are extreme foul, upon a Gonorrhea, nature takes her opportunity to purge
the whole body by the seminary vessel.

Now when this passage is suddenly stopped except there be some other way to
carry away the matter, which does continually flow to these parts, experience
teaches us that there do dangerous symptoms arise from thence as intolerable
pain in the back, sickness in the stomach, vomiting or a desire to vomit,
inflammation swelling and extreme pain in the stones, fevers, and fainting
fitts, and sometimes death it self.

In some such body's as those are, whether you would cure them after the first
or second way set down in the twenty first and twenty second Chapters, perhaps
besides what is mentioned in the aforesaid Chapters there will be occasion to
use the sweating potion, mentioned in the twenty third Chapter: and on the
contrary there are some bodies that do not require so much circumstance of
medicine as is mentioned in the foresaid Chapter, but may perhaps be cured
only by the potion in the twenty first Chapter, or the plaster and electuary
in the twenty second Chapter or else by the pills in the twenty third.

This depends wholly upon the prudence honesty and knowledge of the Surgeon.

The like prudence and knowledge is necessary to distinguish a simple
Gonorrhea, from a virulent Gonorrhea, as also in prescribing a fit diet
according to the several Circumstances of the patient, as whether he be young,
or in years, whither he have a full or a spare body, and lastly whither he be
of a hot, cold or indifferent temper.

CHAP. XXVIII. For a Bubo.
When the swelling rises, avoid no debaush or violent exercise to bring it
forth: If it rise not fast enough, use cupping glasses. When it is come to a head
lance it, or apply a Caustic to it; the filth being out, tent it to its full
depth, covering the tent with Basilicon Doron, or some such medicament that
draws without enflaming, keep it open a month or five weeks with moderate
exercise and diet, drinking the purging decoction mentioned in the second
Chapter. Take as much rest as you can, and when the orifice inclines to heal,
purge as you see occasion.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS of all the Chapters contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. OF the name, causes, and original of the French Disease. page 1 CHAP.
II. Of the signs and symptoms of this disease. page 6 CHAP. III. Of the cause
of the coming forth of those pustules and other tumors. page 12 CHAP. IV.
General observations concerning the cure of the French disease. page 16 CHAP.
V. Of the preparation of the humors. page 17 CHAP. VI. Of the diet used in the
cure of this disease. page 24 CHAP. VII. The first way of curing the French
disease. page 25 CHAP. VIII. Of choosing your Guaiacum and China. page 27 CHAP.
IX. Of the Second way of curing the French disease. page 31 CHAP. X. The third
way of curing the French disease. page 36 CHAP. XI. The fourth way of curing
the French disease. page 38 CHAP. XII. The fifth way of curing the French
disease. page 42 CHAP. XIII. The sixth way of curing the French disease. page 41
CHAP. XIV. The seventh way of curing the French disease. page 42 CHAP. XV. The
eight way of curing the French disease. page 44 CHAP. XVI. The ninth way of
curing the French disease. page 45 CHAP. XVII. The second Chemical way of
curing the French disease. page 47 CHAP. XVIII. Of the curing the pustles
coming of the French disease. page 50 CHAP. XIX. To cure a Bubo. page 53 CHAP.
XX. Instructions to put in practice the several ways of curing the French
disease before rehearsed. page 55 CHAP. XXI. Of the cure of the Gonorrhea
called the Running of the Reins. page 60 CHAP. XXII. The second way of curing
the running of the reins. page 63 CHAP. XXIII. The third way of curing the
Running of the reins. page 65 CHAP. XXIV. The fourth way of curing the
Gonorrhea. page 68 CHAP. XXV. The fifth way of curing the Gonorrhea. page 69
CHAP. XXVI. The chemical way of curing a virulent Gonorrhea. page 72 CHAP.
XXVII. General observations concerning the Cure of the Gonorrhea. page 74 CHAP.
XXVIII. For a Bubo. page 77
The end of the Table.

