LETTERS Write to a Friend, By the Learned and Judicious Sir Andrew Balfour, M.
D CONTAINING Excellent Directions and Advices For Traveling through FRANCE and
ITALY With many Curious and Judicious Remarks and Observations made by Himself,
in His Voyages through these Countries.

Published from the Author's Original M. S.

EDINBURGH, Printed in the Year, M.DCC.

To the Most Illustrious, Most Potent, and Noble EARL, ALEXANDER Earl of
Murray, Lord Down and Abernethy, etc.
Sometime Lord High COMMISSIONER, And Principal SECRETARY of State For the
Kingdom of Scotland.
My Noble Lord!
IN all Ages, discerning and serious Men, who knew best to allow and
distinguish things and Persons, have made it their great Complaint, That the
present Generation did degenerat from the former; And that the Generality of
Men were too apt and ready to pursue bad Courses: And some thinking Persons
now, are easily induced to believe, that, the Days we live in, the World is not
much mended. This notwithstanding, no Time has been known (how dissolut
soever) wherein some worthy and virtuous Men have not appeared, who have
studied to improve Natural and Moral Enduements, and to pursue Virtue,
preferring that way to base Interest, and selfish Ends. And it is well known,
that even at this Time, when many and great Duties are easily superceded, there
are here and there some Persons who worthily act upon the Principles of Honor,
Conscience, and Virtue, maugre all Discouragements. Among whom Your Lordship
(even in your Solitude) moves and acts in a very high and conspicuous Sphere,
to that Measure of lovely Virtue and Splendour, that Your Friends and
Wellwishers admire, and your Enemies (if You have any) can find no matter of
Censure. If there were many such in the Nation, it would be no hard matter to
retrieve and bring in Vogue again, these adequat Qualities and Virtues, which
often have rendered many of our Countrymen (endued therewith) famous and
illustrious both at Home and Abroad. In the mean Time it is to be wished that
each man would labor to reform Himself and his own Ways, conforming them to
these excellent Rules. And that certainly at length would make and advance a
laudable Reformation indeed. But it is to be feared, that this would rather
prove an abortive Wish, than that it shall have its wished for Effect: albeit
(to have it so with the World) it should be a part of our daily Prayers, and
come in continually to Our Letany.

My Lord!

Whilst You are Enjoying Your self, and are solaced with the Comfort of a good
Conscience, in Your Retirement, making your self an Example of Virtue, and a
Pattern of Honor and Goodness to those who observe you and your Actions. I
humbly address Your Lordship, not desiring to interrupt Your Repose, but to
afford You a little divertisement for some of your vacant and Recreating Minutes:
By Offering to Your Lordships Perusal these following Sheets, and Begging Your
Patronage thereto: And I judge I have little Reason to despair of your Favor
and Acceptance, since Your Lordship was Pleased to show a more than Ordinary
Affection and Kindness to the Author my Father. And therefore I hope this
little Tract will give Your Lordship some Content; and for others I am bold to
say, I hope well: for many Persons of great Honor and Judgment, have (since
my Father the Author's Death) been sollicitous to get written Copies from the
Original, which was indeed perfected by My Father in his Own Time, without any
Design to make it public. But my Father's M. S. with all his Books being
committed to a certain Person he, without my Privity, gave out Copies to
Knowing and Inquisitive Persons, as of late I came to understand, and now these
Copies abounding abroad, and most (if not all) being defective or incorrect,
(to Prevent my Father's being abused) I now send a True Copy abroad unto the
World, and let it See the Light: And go it must under your Lordships Patronage,
for I am confident the Design will succeed the better, and the Book will be the
more acceptable to these who Love and Desire the Knowledge of such curious
Matters: Nor shall I diffide its Fate, being first welcome to Your Lordship, to
whom I hereby address the same, most humbly and heartily, and not in course,
ingyring upon a Patron, as the custom sometimes is.

Thus, begging Your Lordships Pardon for my Presumption, I do entreat from your
Lordship the Honor to be accounted,

My Noble LORD, Your Lordships most humble, Most Faithful, most Devoted, And
Obedient Servant, M. BALFOVRE.

TO THE READER
IT is needless to show the many advantages may be had from Traveling, since
all are convinced of it; and the VVisest of Men in all Ages have thought this
the best way to improve themselves: thus, as Homer, the Greek Master, shows
us, Ulysses followed this Method.

Qui Domitor Trojae multorum providus Vrbes,
Et Mores hominum inspexit; latumque per aeqour
Dum sibi dumsocijs reditum parat, aspera multa
Pertulit.
And such a one Homer drew his Son Telemachus, whose adventures have of late
been Painted by an excellent Pen, with all the advantages, requisite for the
education of a good Man and Excellent Prince. Indeed, the World is a Theater,
in which we may see not only the different productions of Nature, but also all
the Arts and Mysteries of Government; and all the ways of improving Nature by
Art; and every Climate affords new Scenes for improving Geography, Natural and
Civil History, Medicine, Commerce, and all the Mechanic Arts.

Medicine certainly is much improved this way, for thus Galen writes, he sailed
to Lemnos, Cyprus and Palestina of Syria, on purpose to see foreign Plants, and
rare Ores and Mineralls.

The following Letters give you some account, to this purpose, of these
Countries in Europe viz. England, France and Italy, which for, Politeness and
Civility, for Grandeur and Magnificence, and for Arts and Inventions, and the
Public encouragements of them, far excels all the rest. The Author of
them, Sir Andrew Balfour, Doctor of Medicine, spent some fifteen Years in his
Travels, and Residence in these Countries; He was a Man of an Excellent Wit,
and of a Ripe Judgment, and of a most taking behavior; He had improven
himself to the best advantage, with all the learning taught in the most famous
Universities of these Countries, had acquired their Languages, and Conversed
with the most famous Man then alive. The particular Curiosity He had to learn
every thing that might enrich his mind with knowledge, was in his youngest
Years favored with the Example and Instruction of his eldest Brother, 30 Years
elder than himself, the Famous Sir James Balfour, Lion King at Arms, who had a
Curious Bibliotheck, had Collected in his Cabinet many Curious Products of
Nature and pieces of Art, and took delight to cherish this early Curiosity of
his youngest Brother: With this Disposition and proficiencie in the Learning
then taught in his Native Country, He begun his Travels, which, in so long a
Tract of time he employed that way, came to Qualify him exceedingly for
performing all that is recorded of him. In the Memoria BALFOUR^A^A.


When He wrote these Letters He had settled his abode at Edinburgh, where He
Practiced Physic with great Success, and deservedly gained the Reputation of
the best Qualified Physician in the place, and accordingly was employed by
these of the best Rank. About a Year or two after his settlement here He took
the Resolution of erecting a public Garden for Plants, and a Cabinet of
Curiosities: He had begun the last in his own Lodging* and was projecting how
He might establish the other, when He became acquainted with that worthy
Gentleman Patrick Murray, Baron of Livingstone, to whom these Letters (now
published) were addressed. This Gentleman designed so much for the good and
Honor of his Country, that I cannot but in this place do that Justice to his
Memory to give the World some Character of him, having been well acquainted
with him, and having had the happiness to make the Acquaintance, and beginn the
Friendship contracted betwixt him, and Sir Andrew Balfour, which produced these
Letters.

This Gentleman had a particular Genie inclining him to study Natural History,
and all the ways and means, how to improve the Arts, most useful to his
Country; He had studied the Mathemathicks, and delighted much in the practical
part of them, and employed much of the Revenue of that plentiful Estate He had
from his Ancestors, in purchasing Instruments, and Curious Books, which treated
on these Subjects, He having Traveled over a great part of this Country, in
searching after the Plants that grew wild up and down in it, and withal having
read several writers on the Plants, he every Year sent for new Seeds of
foreign Plants: He enclosed a considerable Parcel of Ground, in which He
trained them up with great Skill; and before He (...) to his Travells, He had
of domestic and foreign Plants, growing in his Garden at Livingstone, above a
Thousand: He was above thirty six Years of Age before He began his Travells,
and had fitted himself by reading of Voyages, and such Books as might best
inform him of what He was to inquire for, in foreign Countries, ye^ He was so
sensible of the great Advanta^^^ (...) that Learning Sir Andrew Balfour (...)
^^^ster of, that He not only inform^d (...) him of the best Books, fitted (...)
and the design He had to Learn all that might be for the improving of
knowledge, and of the Arts useful to this Country, but likewise He obtained
his promise to intertain a Correspondence with him whilst He was in foreign
Countries, by Letters, upon all Occasions. These three make a Part of what Sir
Andrew wrote. He had whilst He was abroad, bought up most of the writers extant
upon Plants and other parts of natural History, and many relating to the
culture of Plants; He had ^exactly learned all the Plants then keept in the
Kings Garden at Paris (the most complete that is in the World, either for the
number or the Quality of the Plants) or in private Gardens there; and had
traveled thorough a great part of France, when He was surprised with a Fever,
that he contracted at Avignion, of which he dyed.

He begun his Voyage the 2d. of September 1668, and dyed in August or September
1671. In these places of England and France He Traveled thorough, He gives a
very particular Account, even of the Dimension of the Public Buildings, the
Remarks, the distances of the places; He gives an Account of the Government of
France, of the Peers there, and the Orders of Knighthood; He gives an account
of the Remarkable Manufactories in France, and particularizes some of the Mines
and Quarries of Marble, and has an Account of the Canale for the Communication
betwixt the Mediterranean and the Ocean; He shows the Quality of the Weather,
the Habits of the People in the Souths parts of France; He des^^ibes the
Monuments of Eminent Men, and (...) some of their Sepulchral inscriptions, and
takes notice of the best Gardens and of the C^^iners of the Curious where He
Traveled* describing many particulars not to be ^et ^ith in the printed
Voyages, and upon this Account his Voyage deserves very well to be made Public.

As to these Letters of Sir Andrew Balfour now published, I shall leave the
Judgment of them to the Learned, who may peruse them; yet this I must say,
There are many particularities in them relating to Natural History, and the way
of Safe and connient Traveling, not to be met with in the printed Accounts of
these Countries, and I am persuaded they are of Excelleut use for these who
study Natural History, and Physic, where they may be informed where Plants,
and other Subjects of them, are to be found in their Native Places, and where
they may see the Cabinets of the Curious.

Others will be hereby instructed in the Manners, Orders, and Customs, of
these People; They will find likeways many Curious Reflections, which are
Pleasant to read, and may give rise to higher Considerations. They will see
what Varieties foreign Countries of a different Soil and Temperature of Air, do
afford; several of which may be brought here, and may be made useful to this
Country.

What Sir Andrew delivers here, is what he observed, experienced, and handled
himself, and none need question the Relations in any Circumstance; He was known
to be a most candid and Ingenious Gentleman, He gives his apprehension and
Judgment of the Reasons and causes: which was allways much valued by all which
kneDw him; being a Gentleman of Excellent Wit, and Judgment: He did not expect
that they should be printed, and in his lifetime he would never hear of it; and
such was his Modesty, he never showed them to any but his most intimate
Friends, and could not be persuaded to give a Copy of them, but since his
Death copies of them have past from hand to hand, and all who have seen them
are very well pleased; whereupon at the earnest entreaty of his Friends, his
Son has published them in the Style he found them written; his design was to
render all easy and intelligible to his Friend he wrote them to; if the Phrase
and Language seem in some places less ornate, and not so congruous as may be
expected now, it is to be remembered, they were written thirty Years ago, when he
had been Fifteen Years absent from his own Country, and had accustomed himself
to speak foreign more Language, than to Study the Elegancie of his own Native
Tongue; and this I think should excuse him at the hands of the Critics, He
Studied more things than words, and yet, as all know, He expressed himself most
handsomely upon all Occasions.

It was fit this should be Represented: The rest is left to the impartial
Reader, who will meet with so many Remarkable and useful things in the
Letters, that there is no doubt of his kind Acceptance of them. If these meet
with the encouragement hoped for, it is like, the Baron of Lovingstone his
observations in his Travels, in our Language too, and a Voyage of another
Countryman of ours, through France and Italy, written in a pure Style of Latin,
may be published for the satisfaction of such as are Curious of Travells,

Farewell.
LETTER I.
CONTAINING An Account of what is remarkable in and about London, etc. And in
and about Paris, etc.
Sir,
I Cannot inform You of any thing considerable on this side London, except it
please you, when you are got the length of Huntington, to turn six or seven
miles out of the road to see Cambridge; which I do truly think worth the
while, in regard it is one of the two famous Universities of England, where if
it please you, You may take Notice of the number, structure, and order of the
Colleges, etc. but particularly of the Libraries and Gardens; as also of the
Booksellers Shops in the town-where possibly you may meet with something that
you shall not meet with any where else in order to this it would be convenient to
have some letter of recomendation or adress to some member of the University
whom you might be sure (upon this account) to find very ready to serve you; I
am sorry that I cannot help you in this particular, having never been in this
place my self; But I think if you address your self to Mr. Ray (who wrote and
published the Catalogue of plants growing about Cambridge) upon the score of
seeing that place, and himself as a Person so deserving especially in the
knowledge of plants, of which you are also a very great lover; I make no doubt
you shall find him as ready to oblidge you there, as you use to be to any
Virtuoso here.

At London I shall advise you to lodge in or about Convent-garden, as a place
most commodious for your business. I thought it necessar to accompany you only
with two leters of recommendation, the one to Dr. Morisone, whom I think the
best Botanist in the world, and a most honest and obliging friend; By his means
you will easily see all that is considerable of Plants about London, and
purchase what seeds that place affoords. The other is to Mr. Scott a
Bookseller, dwelling in Little-Britain by whose means you may be furnished
with any Book that may be be had in London; and I think as reasonably as
elsewhere: notwithstanding you will 'doe well to see other shops, as
particularly Mr. Bees and Mr. Pulleyns, both of them in Little-Britain.

As for the other beauties of the Court and City I need not say much, being you
will easily be informed of them upon the place: I shall only hint at some of
the most considerable,

And first, at Whythall be pleased to take Notice of the ^anquetting-house; you
will find it of a stately fabric, such as the late King designed to have all
the Palace of; it was built by King James, the history of whose diefication
you will find Painted on the roof within, by the noble artist Rubens, only you
will find the Figures too big, occasioned by the Painters misinformation
concerning the Hight of the Room, which he was made believe to be greater. The
King's privy Rooms are worth the seeing, because of their excellent Ornaments
of Hangings and Pictures.

2 The Palace of Westminster, in which I find the great Hall only considerable
for its great breadth and artificial roof.

3. Henry VII. Chapel and the tombs in and near it.

4. You will do well upon some Holyday (if any happen during your abode there)
to see the King at Divine service, in regard of the extraordinary state used on
such days, as also of the excellent Music; I would advise you likewise to see
the King dine on some such day.

5. The Tower, in which be curious to see the Mint Crown, Scepter, and
Treasury, the Magazine of ancient arms etc. and the new Arsenall built and
furnished by the present King, The wild Beasts.

6. Gresham-Colledge, where the Exchange is now kept; inquire there for Dr.
Pope that by his means you may see a very fine collection of natural rarities
kept in that College. He will likewise carry you to see the Royal society, if
you so desire.

7. The King and Dukes play houses.

8. The Innes of Court, especially the Temple, Lincolns Inn, and Gray's Inn.

9. The New Exchange, and not far from it, Sommerset-House.

10. St. James's-House and Park.

11. If you please to take a pair of Oars the length of Greenwich, you will
see the Kings new House that is a building there, and if you please to walk up
to the Hill above it, You will have a prospect up and down the river, which the
multitude of goodly ships, the pleasantness of of the Country about, and our
Countreyman John Barcly's curious Description and Commendation of it, render
most famous.

12. For the rest, I shall only put you in mind, that about London there are
such places, as Wimbletone belonging now to the Earl of Bri^^o^, but lately to
the Queen Mother and in the time of the Rebellion possessed by Lambert; who
imbellished the Garden thereof with great variety of plants. Hampton Court and
Park belonging to the Kings Majesty. I shall likewise put You in mind that
Oxfoord is but fifty miles from London, and that it is one of the most famous
Universities in the world, both for the number and structure of the Colleges
and Halls, and for the multitude of ^^udents, and competency of their
provision. The chief Colleges are Christ's Church, Magdalens, All Souls, St.
John's, etc. Baliol College was founded by a Scots King's father of that name,
The Schools is a stately Fabric where there is kept a most magnificent
Library for Number of Books beyond any that ever I saw: there is besides near
Magdalen-Colledge a Physical Garden; when You resolve to go thither Dr.
Moreson will recommend You to such persons as will be careful to show you every
thing.

From London to Paris the best way is to go by Dover and Calais, that you may
return by Die^ and Rye, except you make account to return by Flanders in
which case I advise you rather to go by Rye and Deip, because Rouen (which
otherwise will not fall to be in your way) is a more considerable place and
better worth the seeing, than any thing upon the way of Calais.

For your accommodation from London to Rye, you may either take post, or
enquire for the Rye Carrier at the Kings Head in Southwark, he will furnish You
sadle Horses for 12. sh. a man, and if You have any baggage he will carry it
at an easy rate; by this way You will arrive at Rye in two days, where You
may lodge at the Marmaid until You find an Opportunity of passage, for which
if there be Passingers enough You must pay 10. sh. but if there be few
passingers You will be obliged to pay more.

At Deip be pleased to lodge A la Bastile, the master of the House has a Son
that speaks English, and they are all very civil people. You may see in the
shops very many curiosities in that place, and particularly, Au Roy de la
Chine; The Town is famous for working in Ivory, Horn, and Tortois-shell, for
Combs, Boxes, Dialls, and a Thousand other conceats.

From thence you must Hire Horse to Rouen, the ordinary price is a Crown, if
you have no company you will do well to take a guide by the Landlords
Direction; you dine at a place called Tostes, the first House of the village
which you come at is the best.

At Rouen lodge Au Bon Pasteur, the master is a Protestant, and speaks English*
be pleased to take Notice in the Town, of

1. The Bridge on the River, which is of wood, supported by boats, and rises
and falls with the Tide.

2. The great Church; if you will be at the pains to go to the Top of the
Steeple you may ^^ave a very good prospect of the Town and Avenues, you may
also see the biggest bell in the World called the St. George of Amboise.

3. The Palace, where the Parliament Sits; the great Hall is commended for its
breadth, being it is without pillars, but in my opinion it comes far short of
Westminster Hall at London.

There is a little Village about half a League from the Town called Santeville,
famous for Cream, if you please your landlord will find you a guide to conduct
you thither. You may Herbarize by the way.

You may take the messenger to Paris, as being the easiest way, you pay 13. or
14. Franks a man, for which You are to be furnished with horse, lodging and
diet to Paris, as al^o to have Six pound weight of baggage allowed you, But if
You have any more, You must pay for it beside; The last Meal which you make by
the way is at Po^to^^, where it is usual after Dinner for every Gentlman in
the company to give to the conductor a piece of 13. Solds.

At Paris I shall advise you to lodge at Mr. Haes, They are very honest people,
at least you may stay there until you find the way of accommodating your self
better; he lodges A. Fauxbourg St. Germain rue de la bouchery; There are so
many worthy things to be seen in this place that I shall only name some of
them, for fear of troubling you too much, and leave the rest to your own
observation.

1. See Luxemburgh palace and gardens; Monsieur Merchant will be a fit Person,
because of his aquaintance there, to wait upon you.

2. The Kings garden, where be sure to make a strong friendship with the
Gardner; and You may command what You will of Plants or Seeds.

3. The Kings Library, and especialy there, the Books of Minature done by
Monsieur Robert, which I look upon as the best curiosity of that kind in the
World.

4. The Garden of Tuilliaries.

5. Monsieur Marchant's own Garden; He dwells, Rue du Roy de Sicile devant la
nostre Dame d' Argent, deriere le petit St. Antoin; his Gard^n is hard by his
house, and there You may see some curious Plants, not to be found elsewhere in
France.

6. The Jesuits College, where enquire for some Scots Father, and desire him
to procure you a sight of the Bibliotheck, and Mathematical House; there you
will see the 3. Systems of the World, according to the several Hypotheses of
Copernicus, Tycho Brache, and Ptolomeus, represented in Motion.

If You be desirous to learn Chymie, You may cause Monsieur Merchant address
You to Monsieur Barlet; He lives au College de Cambray, and uses to teach
Courses; It will cost you ten Crowns for the Course, and two Crowns for his
Book; He demonstrates from two a clock in the Afternoon till five, and
finisheth his course in three weeks. I think it might be worth your while, in
regard you will hardly find the like Occasion any other where.

I need not say any thing of the Booksellers, being they are obvious A la Rue
St. Jaques; for new Books at the Palace; for French Books, as Romances, etc. A
la Place de Sorbone; as also at the End of the new bridge about nostre Dame
church, also at the postern Gate of the Palace and upon the Mont St. Hiller,
for old Books of all Sorts.

Remember to cause Monsr. Merchant show You a maker of Mathematical Instruments
that lives dans l'Isle du Palais au Key qui est vis a vis la valle des Miseres,
and enquire for the designing Instrument; about the same place also you may be
provided of Microscops of al sorts; If You desire to have your own, or any
other Picture done: enquire for Monsr. Ferdinand, Paintre sur la Fosse an
Fauxbourgs St. German proche l' Academy de Monsr. du Plessis, but make your
bargain before Hand.

It will be worth your while to see some places about Paris, as particularly,

1 Maisone, a very delicat House, belonging to the President of Maisone, and
standing upon the River of Saine, some 4. Leagues from Paris; From hence you
must go two Leagues up the River, to

2 St. German, A House belonging to the King; from thence four Leagues
further a little off the River, to

3 Versaile, A House begun by the late King, but finished by the present; It is
a most delicate fine place, but (as I think) there will be a Necessity of
procureing an Order from the Superintendent of the House (who ordinarily resides
at court) to the Cons^erge of the House to show the same to you; From thence to

4 Rue^e, You have about two leagues: it is a pretty little House built by
Cardinal Richlieu; The G^rdens are exceedingly pretty, and the Waterworks the
best in France; From thence You may come to

5 St. Clou, A House belonging to the present Duke of Orleans; From thence on
your way to Paris (which is not above 3 Leagues) You pass through a wood called
Bois de Bologne; in which there stands a House called Madrid, built by Francis
I. after His Return from Spain where He had been Prisoner, to save his promise
of going back to Spain once a year. In my time there was a Manufactorie for
weaving of Silk Stockings kept there.

Having performed this Journey in one or at the most two days, you may with
your conveniencie visit

6 St. Denis, in the Abbey whereof there is a famous Treasury kept. Remember
to take Nottice of Charles the Great's Crown, in which there is a Rubie of the
Bigness of a Pigeons Egg; A large Cup of oriental Aggat, which they count much
of; One of the Nails that fixed our Savior's Body to the Cross, sent to
Charles the Great by Constantine V. Emperor of Constantinople; One of the
Potts, wherein our Savior changed the water into wine at the Marriage of Cana
in Galilee; The Pucel of Orleans Sword, wherewith she overcame the English; The
Lantern that was carried before Judas, when He betrayed our Savior; and a
thousand other things of great Value. See the Tombs likewise: You will do well
to go early in the Morning that you may have time to speak to the Religious
Men, and take their Hour of conveniencie for seeing of the Treasure; which being
done, you will have time enough to return to Paris.

7 I know nothing better worth your seeing about Paris, than the Aqueduct at
Arcqueul about 2 leagues from the town, it was built by Mary of Medices in the
time of her Regencie, for bringing the the water to her palace of Luxemborg.
Besides the Aqueduct, you will also see there a very fine Grotto with fine
walks and many pretty Jetts of water; one afternoon suffice for this Journey.

8. Fountainbleau, in which there are so many things considerable: not only in
the House, furniture, and painting; but also in the Gardens, Walks, Fish Ponds,
and waterworks, that it will be less trouble for you to observe them by seeing,
than by a long narration; I shall only tell you for the better improvement of
your Journey thither that you will do well first to go to

9. Esson a House seven leagues from Paris belonging to a private Gentleman,
where you will see very fine water works and many other pretty conceats; from
thence you have 3 leagues

10. To Durance, a private House likewise, but to which there belongs very noble
gardens and walks, with delicat Ponds and Jetts of water. It will not be a
miss to stay here all the night, being You will have 4 Leagues to Fontainbleau,
a great part of which is through the Forest, and therefore better to be gone
in the morning, when the day is before Your hand, than in the evening when
night may surprise You.

11. You may arrive so early in the morning at Fountainbleau that You may have
time to see all before dinner, and thereafter return to Veau, a most stately
house and gardens correspondent to it, built by Monsr. Fougues^, but since his
disgrace it is fallen to the King: From hence you may return a short League off
your way to lodge at Melun; The next morning You will have an easy Journey to
Paris, and time enough if you please to see Vinceu, within two short Leagues of
Paris. It is a House belonging to the King in the middle of a very pleasant
Park: after you have seen the House emember to see the Wild Beasts that are
kept not far from it. If You resolve upon making any greater toure into the
counrey, I shall advise You to provide a Book called le voyage de France, of
the latest edition, which will give you a hint of the most considerable things
that are to be seen in those Places you go to. I shall deferr any thing I would
say further, until I be happy to hear of Your safe arivall at Paris, and then
I would be content to trouble you with an other sheet: in the mean time I pray
for Your happy journey and safe return.

Sir,
I entreat You to signify to Mr. Hannay as also to Mr. Cranston that if they
have any thing to send to me, You will be pleased to take charge of it; I shall
beseech You likewise to do the same by Monsr. Merchant at Paris.



LETTER II.
Containing Advice for making the grand Toure of France, with an Account of
what is most observable relateing especially to the Natural History and
Antiquities of that Kingdom.
Sir,
IT seems You are not yet resolved whither to spend the Winter in Paris or in
the Country, my opinion is that out of Paris, there is little thing either to be
seen or learned in all France; But in regard it is pertinent for a Traveler to
see some thing of the country as well as the chief Town: I shall therefore
advise you to see those Places chiefly that I judge most suitable to your
inclinations, and particularie in order to Botany, that is Languedock and
Provence, for although there be many other places of France very worthy the
^eing, as particularly the River Loyre from Orleance downward to Nantes, which
for the fertility and beauty of the country, the frequencie of good Towns
and gentle disposition and Courtesy of the inhabitants, is called the Garden
of France: yet you will find that Climate produces but a few things different
from Normandy or the Isle of France: But if you should incline to see it, my
advice is that you should not spend much time in doing of it, and therefore if
you think fit you may make use of the following Advice at your Discretion.

I suppose You leave Paris about the beginning of June (for I would not have
you loose the Month of May in the Kings Garden, in regard most things will be
then, or a little before, in their Prime, which now that the Garden of Blois is
no more in Condition, is undoubtedly the best you are like to meet with) and
therefore, 1. you may go to Orleans by the Messenger: it is but two Days
Journie; Lodge Chez Monsr. Ogilbie, sur l'^^stape au Roy de la Grand Bretaigne;
A Day or two will serve you to see all that is considerable in the place; It
will be worth your while to see a place some two Leagues from the City, called
the Source, where in the midst of a fair green Meadow you will see a Spring of
Water so plentiful, that it is navigable from its Head, and powrs out a River
called Loirette. 2ly. From Orleans to Blois, they count 15. Leagues, yet it is
but a short Days Journie: besides if you please, you have the Commodity of the
River to go by Boat; Be pleased to take Notice of a place by the Way, some 4.
Leagues from Blois, called St. Die, where the best Claret in that Country
grows, and is ordinarily to be found. Blois of itself is no very considerable
Town, yet it is famous for making of Watches, for the Civilitie of the People,
for the Sweetness of the Air, and Purity of the French Language. You must stay
there some Days till you have seen the following Particulars; viz. in one day
you may get to Chambort, a house belonging to the King, some three leagues off,
on the south side of the River, and South-East from the Town; It is said to
have been built by King Francis I. and is a very stately House, though of a
far different Order of Architecture than what is now used. From thence you may
go to Herbeau, 3. Leagues to the southward of that, a private house belonging to
a Gentleman that bears the title thereof. It is a very pleasant seat having
very fine Gardens with an Orangery, Fish Ponds, Woods, Maille and Meadows
belonging to it; from thence you may go to Bean-Regard another private house,
where amongst other pretty things you will see a fine Gallerie well ornamented
with the pictures of such persons as have been illustrious for some age; from
thence you return to Blois at night, and as you go and come you will have
occasion to see that part of the forest of Blois that lies to the South of the
River and town; as also a little village called St. Gervais, famous over all
that country for excellent Cream; being returned to Blois, you may take notice
of the Castle, as also of the Garden which is now Seges ubi Troja; the keeper
of it is Dr. Brumer my very good acquantance, and sometimes one of the
Herbarists to the late Duke of Orleans, as were also Monsr. Morison and Monsr.
Marchand; upon any of whose accounts or yet upon mine, I am confident You will
be very welcome to him; I believe You may as yet see some Plants in the Garden,
from thence walk toward the Capucins or the mount, and you will have a delicat
prospect both up and down the river; from thence walk toward the Alleys which
you will possibly find to be the finest in length and breadth, and being well
planted on either side, that you have hitherto seen; You may choose whither You
will see Vendosme or not, it being a place not very considerable except for
the Holy Tea^e, which is preserved in the Cathedral Church with much
veneration, and which people go to see out of devotion; the town is famous for
making of Gloves which are accounted the best of that country; upon the
return from that place You may see the Fountain of Orchaise, of old Horrcum
Caesaris (for some where not far from thence the Roman legion was said to be
quartered) I take the fountain to be nothing else but a rivulet or little burn
falling over the Top of a soft Rock into which by process of time it has cut
in a considerable way through the whole deepth of it, and being grown together
upon the Top, it seems now to spring out of the Rock; over against that, cross
a meadow, you must take notice of a Cave or Hole dug in the side of a little
hill in which there is an Aromatic kind of Earth, not much inferior as is
believed to the Terra Sigillatae of Lemnos; the common people call the place La
cave de la terre Sigille.

And here I must put you in mind that in this same meadow I have very often
seen very large green Lizards, which because it is a beautiful creature and
not found with us, I must entreat you where ever you find of them to cause
preserve 1 or 2, to add to my Tradescants. I know not which will be the best
way of preserving them, whither by skinning them, or drying the flesh, but I
suppose the best way will be (especially if the skin be any thing strong) to
cause skin them, preserving the head feet and tail, and then stop the Skin
with Flax. There are likewise several other Birds in France which are not
common with us, which I must earnestly entreat you to do the same by, as for
example the Pie verte or Green Pyet, etc.

3ly. from Blois you go to Amboise in half a day by water; the boat will give
you liberty to see the Castle; in the Chapel whereof will be shown You
hanging a pair of Horns, they say, of a Heart, the largest and biggest (if they
be true) that ever was seen In the court of the Castle there is likewise to be
seen a Rib, and one of the Back-Bones of the same Animal, You are brought out
of the Castle by a Toure whose descent is so large and so easy, being without
Steps, that a Coach may drive from the Bottom to the Top thereof. From thence
You go Tours all Night, where

4ly. In my time the best Lodging was A la St. Marthe; the place is commended
for the Sweetness of it is Situation, the delicacie of it is Fields and Gardens,
and many other Particulars. It will be worth Your while to see the
Manufactories of Silk, especially the way of working Tissenes, and Brocarts,
which You will see of diverse Colors and some of Gold and Silver. The
invention and way of making Tabbies, which I forbear to descrive, because You
will abundantly discover it by sight. You must be at the pains to fetch a walk
out of town a little way to see the Maille, which in any time was the longest
and in the best order of any in France; and at the same time, you may go the
length of the Minims Convent because the first instituter of their Order St.
Francois de paul, lies Buried in the Church in a marble Coffine, as will be
shown You, which People visit with great Veneration: if you will be at the
pains to pass the River there is an ascent to the Capucins whence you may
discover the whole City, and a great part of the Country about, which for it is
Beauty and Fertility is called the Gardin of France. and certainly deserves
that Name better than any Place upon the whole River of Loir. There is
likewayes not far from Tours, a Place which they call la cave Gutiere, From the
Top of which there drops a Liquor which Congeals into a substance almost as
hard as a stone not much unlike that you sent me from Hamiltoun.

5ly. You may go from Tours to Saumure a town famous for it is Protestant
University, of which we have two very honest contrymen that are members,
Monsr. Doule and Monsr. Gray. You may take the pains to see Nostre damo d'
Ardeliers a Place of great devotion; if you please you may see the Treasury
which is Rich, and as you go and come, you may observe the great Trade of that
Suburbs, to be making of Beads or Chaplets; I beseech you forget not to bring
us some that are made of young Oranges: If you please you may see the Castle.
At Saumure you must hire Horses to make a little tour of three days, and first
you must go to Dove, where there is to be seen an ancient Amphitheatre cut out
of a Rock, as it is said, by the Romans. There are likewise very many great
quarries of free stone and the Workmen often find in cleaving of the stones,
some little pieces of a finer and harder substance by far than the rest, which
from the shape they have, They commonly call Langues de Serpents. The little
Boys for a small matter will sell you abundance of them which I pray forget not
to buy, If not for your own, at least for your friends curiosity. From thence
you must go to Thouars, a most delicate House belonging to the Duke of
Tremoville, it is situat upon a Rock, and the greatest part of the office
houses cut out of the Solid Rock. The next Morning you go to Waren, a very
pretty House but not much worth the pains of seeing were it not in Your way to
Richlieu, where you are to spend the rest of that day, That you may have the
more time to view the Town and House, which I think so well worthy your
seeing, That for it is sake a Journey from Paris that length were not ill
bestowed. I shall say no more of of it, that I may not deprive you of the Gusto
of being surprised with the Beauty of it. Amongst other things be pleased to
take notice of two Marble statues that stand over the Gate, at the upper end of
the inner Court, as also of a piece of painting in the Chapel, that was left
by way of Legacy to the Cardinal by Monsieur de Mont Morency, when he was
Beheaded at Thoulouse. There are two Books the one in 40. the other in 80.
containing the Figure of the House, and parts thereof; they are sold, as I take
it, by the Porter, of whom I entreat you to buy them for me.

The third day you may Dine at Loudun where in my time there was a Religious
Woman, that had been formerly Possessed. At the time of her cure which they say
was Miraculous there was found Written on her hand JESUS MARIA JOSEPH, which
still remained indelible. If she be yet alive you May see it. From thence you
return by Shinon, where they say the famous Francis Rablais had his first
breeding in an old convent, From thence you pass throw Most delicate Meadows
called the Valey of Shinon, and in your way to Saumure some three Leagues from
the Town you may see a Monastery of Religious Women whereof the Lady Abbas in
my time was the Queen-Mothers Sister of Great Britain.

6ly. You may hire horses to La Fleche, where the only thing considerable is
the Jesuits College. It is a most noble Structure, and by far the best they
have in France. Take Particular notice of their Church where the heart of Henry
the 4th who gave them that House is kept: The Bibliotheck: The Theatre-hall:
their Office houses, particularly the Kitchen; the Bake-house, where one Man
and a Dog makes bread for all the College every day: the Myln where the Water
that moves the Wheel does likewise move a Pump that furnishes water to the
whole College. The best lodging was Au quatre Vents. From hence you must again
take horse to Angiers.

7ly It is a Town famous for the Profession of Laws, and has likewise a
Faculty of Physic: See the great Church called St. Maurice, and therein one of
those pots in which our Savior converted the water into Wine at the Marriage
of Cana in Galile. See the Maill, and at the end of it next the town the Minims
Convent. You will find in their Garden several Kinds of Ilex; You will
likewise find in several places of the Country not far from the Town several
sorts of Pinastres, as also a kind of Fruit tree called Cormes, not mnch unlike
our Raun-tree, the Fruit whereof hangs in Clusters like our Roddens: but of an
other color, and bigness every one being as big as a Plumb. A League or two
from the town toward the East, are the Pierries or quarries, of blew Skleat
called Ardoise which serve the greatest part of France: See the Castle, and in
it that famous crib where Rene King of Sicilie and Duke of Anjou imprisoned his
Queen out of Jealousy all the days of her life. About half a League distant
from the town, down the River stands a Convent called Bamet, worthy of seeing;
there is likewise on the other side of the River an old Abbacie called Les Bons
Hommes, near to which there is a little lake, which I suppose to have been the
place where the blew Sklate was dug of old; you will find about the sides of
it, abundance of Tribulus aquaticus, the Fruit thereof is ripe in the Month
of August; they use to Boyll them and Sell them as they do Chasnuts, from which
they differ not much in Taste or Quality, but very much in Figure, and
therefore be pleased to provide a Quantity of them for your self and Friends.
You may likewise dry the Plant, if you think fit.

8ly You May go If you please from Angiers to Nantes either by Water or by
Land, in one day; It is a pretty town and stands upon the Loir and the Sea
flowing up above the town gives Commodity to Ships of a considerable Burden to
come up to the Town. It is here that the greatest part of the Wines that grow
upon this River or near to it, together with the Brandie made thereof, which
are carried out of France, are Embarked. You must return again to Angiers, and
from thence to Paris with the Messenger. It is a Journey of five days, and all
that I know considerable in it, is first, That when You come near to Man's
(which you will leave at a Leagues Distance, upon the Le^t Hand) You will find
in abundance a Kind of Cistus, not mentioned by any that I know of, except
Petrus Bellonius. Forget not to preserve a Branch or two, which You may Fold in
your Portefoile, which for such rancounters you will do well to be still Provided
of, and You may cause make them of what Bigness You please, and have them
furnished with Gray Paper within. I did allways use to Carry one of a 40 Form,
with good Tyers to it in a Carpet Bag (such as they use in France) tied to the
Tore of my Saddle, so that if it was My Fortune to Meet with any thing by the
Way worth the Gathering, I could easily take it and preserve it with out being
in Danger to Loss my Company. 2ly. The Town of Chartres; in the great Church
whereof (which is a most stately Fabric) K. Henry IV. was Sacred. It is a
Place of great Devotion, and there is kept in it amongst other Relicts, one of
our Ladys smocks. You will meet with several little shops near to the church,
where the chief Trade is Beads, and as they call them des Chemises de Chartres,
which Devout People Buy and append to their Chaplets, and then get them to
Touch the Relicts, according to the Custom.

You may furnish this Journey, and have Time enough at Paris to Prepare your
Self for the Journey to Provence and Languedock before the Dog Days be ended,
at which Time it will be fit to begin your Journey. And 1st. You may take the
Messenger to Lions; I think You must Pay about twenty Crowns; for the Journey
is of nine Days; There are not many things considerable to be seen by the way;
only take Notice 1st at Nevers of the Glass-Works, and Faiance, or white
Lame-works, of which the best in France are here. 2ly. At Mouline (where you
will fall to Dine) ^^quire for the monastery where the body of Monsr. de
Monmorancy is in^erred, You may see a very stately Monument of Marble. The Town
is famous for the Manufactorie of Knives and Scissers. You will not miss to be
troubled with a company of Women, who wait upon the arrival of Strangers, to
show them quantities of this kind o^ ware in hopes to Sell some. 3ly. Take
notice of the Well of Pouge, the water is Alummous and boills up in great
quantity, of a whiteish color, as if there were meal mixed with it. 4ly.
Roane; which is said to be the largest Bourg in France: they call that Bourg
which is not encompassed with wall or ditch. The Loir begins to be Portable
here and carry Boats, But it is source is many Leagues higher. 5ly. Mont tarare;
It is a very great Hill, and here You will find a change of the climate
together with the change of Plants, which I leave to Your observation, and
think it will be worth Your while at night to make a note of all those Plants
that You meet with. Being arrived at Lions You must stay some time to see the
place, which although in regard of its situation amongst Hills and Rivers, it be
somewhat unwholesome, the Air, being either too moist, or in Summer t^o hot; yet
I look upon it as one of the best and most important Towns in France, both for
the magnificknesse of the Buildings, the great tra^ique it has with almost all
Places of the World, to which the situation of it betwixt two Rivers, the Soane
and the Rhosne is no small advantage; for by the Soane it has Communion not
only with Burgundy, but also with the Ocean; for Chalon which stands upon the
Soane, is but a days Journey from Auxere, which stands upon the Saine, and that
River you know disimbogues it self in the Ocean at Haver^degrace. By the
Rhosne, it has communion with the Mediterranean Sea, and consequently, with
all the Levant. The Soane in Latin Araris is a Pleasant and very soft flowing
River; the Rhosne is Fluviorum Rapidissimus. The people are very ingenious and
dextrous in the matter of traffic and business, they are likeways courteous
and human, your most convenient Lodging, will be Auxtrois-Rois: It is a good
House and nea^ to the place where the Messenger of Paris arrives. As also to
the Post House. Remember to see the Maisone-de-Villo which without exception is
the most stately in France: Take particular notice of its Fabric, Statues,
Paintings, and ancient Inscriptions, of which some are extant upon Brass, its
Fountain's, courts, etc. 2. See the great Church of St. John, and in it a most
Stately and Curious Clock, upon the upper part of which, i^mediately before the
hour strike, the blessed Virgin appears with the Angel before her, as she uses
to be represented at the Annunciation, and within a little, a Cock upon the top
claps his Wings and Crows, and then the hour strikes. There is likeways
considerable in it, a Hand that points the minut of the hour upon the O^al, and
although the parts of an Oval line, be not equally distant from the center yet
the Hand which is fixed in the center, does always reach that line and never
exceed it, in the whole compase it makes. 3ly. There is an Old Monument about
the middle of that Fauxbourgh, by which the Messenger of Paris enters they call
it Tombeau-de-deux Amants. It seems to be of Roman antiquity. 4ly, See the
Bishops House and and Gardens, the great Place before it, the Bridge over the
Rhosne: And in short consider the Avenues and Compass of the Town.

5ly. Forget not to take with you your Catalogue of Books, for there are many
Booksellers in this Place, that have great Magazins of Books, and have great
traffic with all Germany, Swizerland and Italy, and it is very like, you may
come by Books here that you missed of at Paris; For so it happened to my self.

I must not omit in this place to tell you that it will be expedient, to draw
your Money from Paris, to Lions, either by Bill of Ex-change, or Letter of
credit, upon some honest, substantial Merchant, to whom yon must be sure to
yet good Recommendation: By his means you may return your Money, to any other
place as you shall have occasion, and likeways be furnished with new
recommendations as you desire; and this way you may make your Money march from
place to place, without fear or danger; and if you light upon honest Men the
Exchange will cost you nothimg, unless it be from Paris to Lions; because of
the disrance and that will not be above half a one per-Cent: Your Merchant at
Lions, will be a convenient Steple for receiving your Letters, or any thing
else, that you please to send from any other place, and to send it forward to
Paris, to be keept for you. By them you shall give advice to receive it from
the Carriers, or otherways to the Merchant, that returns your Money to Lions:
But of these things I have said enough, for I doubt not that you are
sufficiently informed of them already.

From Lions, you take Boat to Avignion, which is about fi^tie Leagues: if the
River be not very low, which seldom happens, you would go near to accomplish
it, in two days and a half, or three at most.

You have to take notice of, by the way 1st. Vienne, a little but ancient Town,
five Leagues from Lions. See the forges where they make Sword-blades, the
Haminers are moved by a Wheell which the Water turns, so that the Strokes are
both frequent and equal. The Town hangs upon the side of a Hill toward the
River. 2ly. some nine Leagues from Vienne, there is an old Castle called Le
Maisone de Pillate, the place is no otherways considerable than for having been
the retreat of Pontius Pilate, driven here, by, God knows, what accident. 3ly.
Valence, a Pretty Town only considerable for its University. 4ly. Le
Pont-Sanct-Esprite seventeen Leagues lower than Valence, the Town is not very
considerable, but only for the Bridge, from whence it takes its name, and which
at that place stands upon the Rhosne; that which renders the Bridge so
considerable, is the breadth of the River, and Impetuosity of the current; for
besides other small Rivers, both the Soane and the Isere, a little before You
come at Valence, and several others below that, loss themselves therein.

When you come at Avignion, You may lodge at Louxenbourg. The Town and Country
belongs to the Pope, whose Legate resides in Quality of Governor. It will be
fitting to stay here some Days, that You may the better take Notice of the
following Particulars. 1. The Churches and Religious Houses. 2ly. The Legat's
Palace. 3ly. The Situation, and Avenues of the Town, together with the Walls
thereof, which are high and stately, and it will be worth Your while to go
about them in regard of the Occasion You will have to Herbarize, for here you
will find many Plants that did not appear in any other part of your Journey.
4ly. The Jurie or Cantone of the Town where the Jews dwell, I advise You by
all means if You can stay of a Saturday to see their Synagogue and manner of
Worship, and if you be Curious and make Enquiry, You may possibly see a
Circumcision. 5ly. You may hire Horse^ to Orange, which is but half a days
Journie up the River. The Town and Principality belongs to the Prince of
Orange; It is an ancient, though little Town; It was considerable in My time for
the Castle, which was very Strong, both by Art, and by its natural Situation,
which was so high, that from thence one might have discovered seven or eight
Provinces about, at least some part o^ them: the Town has an ^niversity though
not very considerable; The inhabitants for the most part are Protestants. There
are yet extant some Monuments of antiquity, viz a Triumphal Arch a lttle
without the Town, and some ruins of a Theater within the Town, both of which
shows something of the Roman Greatness, in Respect of Modern Times; The Coun^ry
about is fertile, and there are whole ^^^lds of ^a^ron. I think it might be
well worth the while to enquire about the best way of P^anting, cultivating,
gathering and preparing o^ it. Having seen these thing and Dyned, You return to
Your Lodging at Avignion the same day. The next day you take Horses for Aix,
which is about two days Journey or two days and a half a most. If You depart
from Avignion early in the morning You will have time enough to see Vauclus,
which is three Leagues from Avignion and then to go Dine at Cavaillion. I look
upon Vaucluse as one of the most considrable things I have ever seen: it is a
fountain at the foot of a great Rock very Large and ^f immense deepness, which
poures out so much Water as to Move four or five Milnes about half a Mile
below. It is observed that the Water Diminishes and increases according to the
season of the Year. In rainy Weather it abounds most, and Yet when you consider
the position of it, how much it is elevated above the plain, and what vast
hills and Rocks are about it, It is not conceaveable with what other Water* it
should have any communion. The River that comes from it tumbles over so many
stones and Craigs; that it makes a noise like the Catarracks, and having near
three quarters of a Mile to fall, it becomes exceeding swift before it arrive
the Plain, and there divides it self in two, and incloses a little Meadow in
Form of an Isle, and then joins again. The Water is so Clear, finding nothing
among the Rocks to Defile it, that notwithstanding its Swiftness, yet it
hinders not the grass to grow in it is bed. The Fiver is likewise recomended for
excellent Trouts and Crawfish and it is agreeable to Reason they should be good
that live in so pure streams; When You come the length of the Mil^s you must
quite Your Horse, to walk up ^o the Sour^e, and and for that (...) must take a
guide, without which the way is not easy. As You go up you will observe upon
the other side, in two other places, the Ruins of two old Castles, the one
standing about a Musket shot higher than the other, in the uppermost whereof
did sometimes live that Noble Philosopher, and Poet Franciscus P^trarcha and in
the lower Donna Laura his Mistress, in the praise of whose beauty and virtue
he composed his most excelent Triumfe d' Amore; a Monument that has outlasted
her family, in which her Memory is like to live as long as Wit and Learning
continues in reputation. You may also in this place take notice of the
Paper-Milns and consider that so useful art of making Paper, and labor to
inform yourself well of all the particulars that when GOD shall be pleased to
return you, you may make it Practicable in your own Country. I am sure we want
not Linen rags in abundance which might be preserved for this use, and not
thrown into the Dunghill's, were people put once in the right way.

From hence you go to Dine at Cavaillion; in the rest of the Journey to Aix,
there is nothing considerable, only you have a River to pass by boat called
Durance. Aix, is one of the most delicate Towns in France, It Is the Capital
City of Provence and the seat of a Parliament. The streets are large, especialy
one great street, the Buildings fair and stately, The City well watered and the
Air very healthful and Sweet.

From hence you go to Marseilles in half a day, you may lodge at a l' Aigle or
al' test noire. You must resolve to stay two or three days at least, for the
more commodious seeing and observing the following things. 1st. the Harbory or
Port, which is very spicious and deep, and exceedingly well guarded, having
upon he entry thereof to the Sea ward, which is very narrow, not only a chain
drawn, but also a very strong Citidale, built within these seven or eight
years, upon the one side o^ it, and an other ^ort upon a little Island within
the Sea, at a leagues distance from the entry, all which renders it most
secure from the Algiers and T^n^ies Men of War and other Pirates. 2ly. the
Cathedral Church, which you may easily guess to be very ancient, from the
Model and Architectu^e thereof. It was first extructed in the honor of Digna
by the Greek Phocenses, who had a Colonie here. 3ly. Take notice in the (...)
before the Church upon the wall looking to the Sea, of nine or ten large Brass
Guns, which use upon the day of the Towns great Festivitie (which is sometime
in October) to be laden with Bull and discharged by so many of the best
gunners of the Town, after great Mass is ended, at a white mark placed on the
Side of the hill, on the other side of the Harbor. He that shoots nearest the
Mark is esteemed the best Gunner for that year. They begin to fire just as the
Archbishop comes out of the Church. Who having celebrated Mass in
Pontificalibu^, returns to his own House accompanied with the Consul and chief
Magistrates of the Place, and generally a^l the Gentlemen and citizens of the
best fashion, in their best apparel and a great consort of Music. 4ly. Nostre
dame de la guard, a Castle upon the Top of the Hill to the Southward of the
Town, in in the going thither, you will do well to bestow a whole day, and take
with you a couple of Soldiers, from the Citidale, or else a Couple of other
Soldiers armed at least with Swords, and let one of them carry a couple of
botles o^ Wine with bread and what else you think fit, as provision for that
day, the other may carry a Basket with you empty, being thus accourted, you may
Herbarize upon the way to the Castle, and put a little quantity of every Herb
you find into your empty basket, the better to judge of it at your return; as
also of what Seeds you find you may put up some for your own and friends use,
you may return by the way of the Sea, and so Herbarize all thereabouts. It is
a most excellent place for Variety of Plants, amongst the rest take particular
notice of the Tarto^rair Massiliensium, upon the Sea side you may likewise take
notice, what Stones or shells, Mosses or any other natural curiosities you can
observe, and if any be worth the preserving bring them along with you. 5ly I
would have you bestow half a day in a boat upon the Sea without the Harbor,
but so as it be very calm, for then you will easily se the botom of the Water,
especially where it is not very deep, because the Water has no Motion of
ebbing or flowing, and so you may possibly light upon curiosities worth the
gathering, for the taking up of which, you must provide Creepers, which the
Seamen know how to use. 6ly. Take notice of the situation Fabric, and Avenues
of the Town, especially some Shops upon the Shore, where you will find many
curiosities, especially from the Levant. I must recommend my self to you here,
but especially for a good handsome Tree of red Coral; as also one of those
that are black, but are not true Coral, and what else you think fit; I shall
hold you good account, for all expenses; you may send them with your own things
to Lions, with Order to your Friend there to send them to Paris, to be received
by your Factor and keept for you. 7ly. The Place is commended for perfumes,
sweet-Powders, Franchipane-Gloves, etc. But there is great cheating both in the
Prices and Quantities of the things; therefore take heed to your self, if you
buy any of them: I did formerly forget to tell you that Avignion is famous for
the same things, but especially for Gloves; whereof the Manufactorie is very
good; and Essences. But now I return to Marsails where 8ly. Take occasion
frequently to view the Fish-market, where you will not miss to see great
variety of strange Fishes well worth the observing, and for that end I wish you
to acquaint your self with the Icones Piscium, together with their description,
by Petrus Bellonius, it is in a Long 80. and not very thick, and therefore you
may take it along with you from Pari. If any of these Fishes which are not
common with us can be preserved or keept any way; as I doubt not but you will
find inventions to do it, you will exceedingly oblidge us to bring them along
with you, or send them as said is: Be pleased to enquire ches les Espiciers for
a kind of Seed which they call Grain d' Avignion, they sell it in great
quantity to Dyers who use it for Dying Yellow; it is the Lycium Gallicum
Dalechampij; It is a Shrub not common here, nor yet in the North of France, and
therefore worth the taking notice of; I would have you bring us some quantity
of the grain for a Show about an ounce or so: But because I suspect, that
which the Grossers sell is dried; therefore I think it will be more profitable
to search at Avignion, where it grows plentifully, for some that is better
conditioned for your own use. In your herborization at Marsaills especially
upon the Hill, amongst other rare Plants, you will find Mypum Montis Ceti, sive
herba terribilis Narb^n^nsium Lobelij.

9ly. Take a view of the Country about Marsaills from some eminent Place,
especially east from the Town, where the fertility is so great and the
Country-Houses, and Gardens, so thick, that they use to call it the Suburbs o^
Marsaills, and say merrily, that Marsaills and its suburbs is bigger than
Paris: The great conveniencie of these Houses is to acc^mmodat the Citizens
with a retireing Place, in time of Plague, as also to divert themselves in
Summer, and to provide necessars for House keeping.

At Marsaills you must hire Horses to Frayole, which is some three days
Journey east ward toward Neice; In this Journey, besides the things of Pleasure
you will see in this higher Provence, you will have the best herborization,
almost all the way, that you can possibly desire; you must part from Marsaills
early in the morning, that you may have the more time to herbarize by the way,
and that you may arrive in good time before it be Night at Saint Beaume, a
Place of much Devotion, and the greatest Solitude in the World. In the middle of
a vast and terrible Rock, there is a great cave where St. Maria Magdalen did
penance for many years before her Death: it is now upon that consideration
turned into a Chapel, with some few Rooms clacht up against the face of a
Rock, like a Bird cage upon the side of a Wall, where some Religious Men (as I
think Jacobins) keep the Place, and serve the cure in the Chapel every Day
receiving confessions, and giving the Sacraments to such as require them. There
is a little kind of a chainge-house close to it, that provides Meat for Men and
Horses, at their own expenses, but you mnst lie within the convent; in the
morning you must take a Guide to the Top of the Craig, where there is an other
Chapel of Devotion just in that Place where the Angels did use once a Day, to
carry the Saints, from the cave to administer consolation to her. As you go
and come you may herbarize, for the whole side of the Hill before you come at
the Rock, is a Wood: Upon your Arrival at the convent it is expedient to give
some little thing out of Charity, which I think is bestowed in maintaining the
place. You will ordinarily find without the Chapel Door, some few little
Merchants that sell Reads, and amongst other things, Silk-Cords of the just
length and greatness of the Saint, all which People use to buy and carry in to
the Chapel, there to touch the Statue of the Saint; which l^es just in that
Place, and in that Posture, that she used to do penance in; you will likeways
see within the Chapel a very Large Well of good Water, which they say did first
spring there by miracle, for use of the Saint. From hence you take Horses to
Saint Maximine, a little Town, in the great Church whereof, amongst other
relics, the Body of St. Maximine, Uncle to St. Mary Magdalen, and sometimes
Bishop of Marsaills, is preserved: If you please you may take this opportunity
of seeing it, and there dyne, for it is a little out of your way to Brignole,
where you must lie the second Night, and the Day following you Dine at a
Village called Luques, and then go to lie ae Frayote, or Freust, which you
please to call it. Its a Town of Roman antiquity, of which there are yet some
rests to be seen, as aqueducts, etc. The Town is not otherways considerable at
all; you will do well here, besides your own Guide that goes along with you to
take another Man from the Town, with an empty Basket, to wait upon you to the
Hill, called Astral, about a League from the Town, where you will have one of
the most pleasant Heborizations in the World: Amongst a great variety of
Shrubs, Plants, and Trees, you will find a great Number of Arbutus, laden with
Fruit, of a most Beautiful aspect; yet, somewhat insipid to the taste, It may
safely be eaten, but does not much allure the taste. Several kind of Spinous
Shrubs, amongst which Acaeia Secunda Dioscorides sive Aspalathus, when you come
upon the Top of the Hill, upon the way to Neice, there is an Inn, where you may
make a Shift for Dinner, and a little beyond it, upon the North-side of the
Hill, you will meet with abundance of Cork-Trees, Ilex, Abics, Picca, etc.

I must give you notice here, that in this place, you are not, above two or
three hours ryding, from Cane, a Village, upon the Seaside, some eight or nine
Leagues distant from Neice, where (were you to go to Italy,) you might
commodiously hire a Fel^oque of two Oars a side for Genova, and arrive there
in four or five days, Ter a Terre, that is Landing every Day to your Dinner,
and to your Lodging, in some convenient Town: But I shall say nothing of Italy,
until I understand from your self, that you have a design for it.

I shall therefore return to Astrate, where having satisfied your self, with
herbarizing you may return to Freiust; laden with Seeds, and Plants, and
there consider them at your ease: From thence you may return to Marseills in
two days and so to Avignion, by the way of Arles, Saint Eloy de Cro^ Tarascon.
At Arles, remember to see the entry into a great Passage all Vaulted, which
they say goes under the Rhosne to Nismes, and was made by the Romans. At
Tarascon, you will see on the other side of the River Bea^caire, most famous
for a very great Fair or Market, keept there once a Year, to which great
Numbers of Merchants from many Places of the Levant, do resort.

From Avignion, you go ^o Nismes, but you must part by times in the morning
that you may have the conveniencie to see Pont de Guard, which is one of the
finest Pieces of Antiquity extant in the World. It is a Part of that A
Aqueduct, which the Romans built for conveying a part of the water of the
Rhosne from the Pont St. Esprite to Nismes, and because at the Place where the
Bridge stands, the River Guard runs low betwixt two Hills, there was a necessity
of raising the Aqueduct so high as to level the Tops of these Hills, therefore
it has three Ranges of Arches, the lowermost are the biggest but fewest in
number; they are likeways the broadest, for besides that they support the
second row of Arches, they do likeways serve on the other side for a Passage
and Bridge for foot, Horse* and coaches to the highway: The second supports
the third, which are not so high, but many more in number, on the Top of all is
the Aqueduct five or six foot broad, and four or five foot deep, it is
compassed with great Flag Stones on all sides, exceedingly well cemented
together, insomuch that I believe it be yet very entire, except it be some few
of the covering Stones that are broak and fallen away.

Nismes is some three Leagues, but they are long ones, from the Pont de Guard;
And I must tell you, although the way you are to follow from Avignion to Nismes,
by the Pont de Guard, be for the most part very barren, yet you will find the
Weeds for the most part are, Cistum ledum Narbonense, thime, lavender,
Satureia, mirtles, timelaea, corranda, Smilax aspera, Lentiscus, Terebinthinus,
Staebe Salamantica, caliculis argenteis B. Ilex, Sabina baccifera, Iunip:
fructu majori, Cistus mas, Cistus faemina, thymum cephaloton

Clematis, vel flammula repens, aespalathus* phyllarelea Folio non serrata,
Jesiminum luteum bacciferum, Stellaria argente^ Ambrosia campestris, datura
simplici calice albo, aster attious foliolis ad florem rigidis, aster lunariae
folio, flore trifolij. Jacea cianoides flore albo folio multifido, trifolium
bituminosum, acarna lutea, Eringium luteum monspel: bicopsis flore carnec,
Carduus Spharocephalus ceruleus, amaranthus viridis, campanula flore plumeo,
attriplex non descript^ Semine singulari binis foliolis incluso, Linaria minor
lutea, paliurus and a great many more that I cannot remember of; but it will be
well worth the while to take a Note of the Plants you find in every Place.

At Nismes you must lodge Aux Arenes; you will see there a brave Amphitheatre
built by the Romans, in greater integrity yet than any that ever I saw in
Italy, the Stones of which it is built, as well as the Pont de Guard, are of
incredible Bigness, and although the things themselves be somewhat ruined; yet
they show greater Statelynesse and Magnificence than any modern Building. There
are some other remaine^ of antiquity about the Town which will be showen you.
From Nismes you take Horses for Mompellier, which is a Days Journey from it;
You dine at Lunel which is about midway, and because I have nothing to say of
this Place, I shall entreat you to bring me three or four ounces of the Seeds
of palliurus, for amongst other uses they serve for, they are the best Bullets
for Cauters that can be, but it is for an other use I would have them.

You will do well to stay some days at Montpellier: You may lodge at the white
Horse, or otherways as you find your accommodation. It is a delicat sweet Town,
the Streets well built, but narrow, because of the heats which are as great
here as in any place of France, nor is it strange it should be so, being it is
near upon the same latitude with Rome. You will do well to see the Physic
Schools, there is some Curiosities to be seen in them. 2ly. The Physick-Garden;
in which you will find many excellent Plants; by making a little acquaintance
with the Gardener, you may command what Seeds he has.

3ly. You will do well to make acquaintance with some of the Students or young
Doctors of Physic, by whose means and in whose company you may see all the
places about Monpelier that are fit for Herbarizing, as particularly Magelon, a
little Island of the Mediterranean Sea, lying within Sight of Monpellier. But
by all means of the World, you must be sure to make a Journey ten or twelve
Leagues from Mompellier, to a Place amongst the Hills, which for the great
varity of Plants, that is found in and about it, is called Hortus Dei.

You may likeways find some variety of Shells and productions of the Sea, to
Mompellier and the Shore, or Coast, which is near the Town.

I must not omit to tell you, that if you please to make a Collection of dry
Plants, this is a very fit Place for it, both because of the heat which helps
to dry them, both soon and well; and also because of the Garden and Fields,
that abound with Plants, that are not common, and likeways, because of the good
occasion you have to send them in a Box, close packt up, (as you have seen
mine) to Lions, etc.

In like manner, if you will make a Collection of Seeds, the best will be to
keep them in their Seed-Vessels, and write upon every parcel, that you may
dispose of them afterward according to your pleasure.

This I wish you to do in every Place, that afterward when it shall please God
to bring you safely to bring them home, Though you should not be able to raise
them in this climat, yet you might have enough to know them by. Do not forget
the Booksellers here, who may possibly have some of the Books you look for. I
must desire one Favor of you in this Place, that You would be pleased to
enquire after the Psilothrum or Depilatory Ointment, which they use in Rome in
the Baths, and which I was so Unluckie as not to mind when I was upon the
place. It you can find the Receipt, cause make some small quantity of it to try
if it be Right, which you will easily know by this, that being rubbed upon any
hairy place, within a little space, when you come to wipe it off, it takes the
hair without burning or scalding the Skin; but if it either burn or discolor
the Skin, it is not right. The place is afterward to be washed with a little
warm Water. I must likeways entreat you to be at ths pains to cause dry me a
Viper or two, it will be enough to dry their Skins with the heads at them,
stopped with Flax, or Cotton: but in no way must you meddle with them your self,
because there is Danger, but employ one of those fellows that brings them to
the Apothecaries, who for a small matter will do it. Some day or other, you may
be at the pains to see Frontiniague famous for that generous Moschat Wine,
called by the name of the place, you may Collation there, and Harbarize as you
go and come.

When you are satisfied here, it will be fit to set forward to Thoulouse. You
will see by the way, 1st. Pesenas a Pretty Town, where it may fall you to Dyne,
Au tapis vert, hard by the Town, there is a very fine House, with excellent
Gardens, belonging to the Prince of Condie, it is worthy of your seeing. 2ly.
Beziers; 3ly. Narbone, which is a very strong and well fortified Town, near
upon the borders of Catalonia. It has communion with the Sea, by means of a
little River, that runs through the Town. Be pleased to see the great Church,
and in it a Piece of excellent Painting, representing the History of our
Savior's raising Lazarus from the Dead. Take likeways notice of the Organes,
the great Pipes whereof ^stand by the Pillar sides, at a great distance from
the Organ room, and have the Wind conveyed to them by a secret conduct; which
though it be no difficult thing, yet it is not common.

From Narbonne, you have six or seven Leagues to Carcassone; They are two,
Ville and City; the City stands upon a hight about half a Leagues distance from
the Town: It is twice encompassed with Walls and Ditches, and is very strong,
as being upon the Frontiers o^ Catalonia. The Town stands below in the Plain,
and is much larger, better ^uilt, and better inhabited, and Walled about with a
more modern kind of Fortification. The Town is commended for Cloath-works, and
making of Combs: The Tradesmen use to bring them to the Innes as soon as they
understand any Stranger to be arrived; but your best will be to go to their
Houses, and see all, and try severals, for so you may best please your self,
and make the best bargain too. There is of all Prices, insomuch that I have
seen ten Pistoles refused for one single Comb, of Box-Wood. But indeed it was
of a vast bigness and most curiously carved. You may have very good ones for
three, four, or five Livres a piece, as also some for 30, 40, and 50 Solds. To
be short, there is of all kinds and prices, and I shall earnestly entreat you,
to bestow four or five Crowns, upon some of the middle sort, that is next to
the best, and some again of the next degree to them for me, (because of the
carving) to add to my Tradescants. They must be packt up in a little wooden
Box, which the Tradesmen know very well how to do.

From Carcassone to Thoulouse, you have twelve Leagues, viz. Four to
Vilpeinte, two to Castelna^* d' Arri, two to Vignonnet and four to Thoulouse.
The Second Town (in the opinion of some) in France, how justly, I leave to your
self, when you shall see it. The Town indeed is very big, and well built, all
of Brick; But not very populous, I think for the want of Trade, in regard it
lies far from the Sea. Amongst other things, take notice of the following
particulars 1st. The Town House, in the Court whereof they Show you the place
where the Scaffold was erected, that Monsr: de Momorancy was beheaded upon, and
some of his Blood yet Sticking upon the Wall. 2ly. The Parliament House, into
which (if it be sitting) you must neither carry Sword, nor Spurs, unless you
make account to pay a Forfaulter. 3ly. The Bridge over the River Garonne, which
is very stately, built of Brick, somewhat after the Model of the new Bridge of
Paris, having a Foot walk raised on every side, so that these that pass on
foot, are not troubled with Coaches, Cairts, etc. that pass in the middle. 4ly.
In the convent (as I take it) of the Cordeliers, there is a Piece of ground
under a Chapel, belonging to the Church, wherein all Dead Bodies, that lie
eight and forty hours, are so dried, but without the consumption of any
substantial part, that they become incorruptible for ever thereafter. They
will show you in a Vault, hard by the Chapel, some hundred of Bodies, standing
about the Walls entire and dried, as I have said, amongst the rest they show
one body of a Woman, called la Belle Paul, Mistrels as it is said to some
King, whose name I do not remember: But it is some hundreds of Years since she
died, and yet me thinks there is a beautiful Proportion observable in her
Face. The rest of the curiosities consist in Churches, religious-houses, etc.
which I leave to your self.

From Thoulouse to Montauban you about half a Days Journey, it is famous for
the Protestant University; It stands somewhat high and declines a little toward
the Bridge, that stands over the Tarne, which not far below the Town, casts it
self into the Garonne. It has many fine Fountains; but especially one, which
they call the Gri^one. It has good trafique, because of the situation betwixt
Thoulouse and Limoge and Paris, as also because of the Commodity of the River,
to Bourdeaux: the Town and Bridge are all built of Brick. It was formerly very
strong, but because of its Rebellion is now Dismantled of all Fortification.

From Moutauban to Bourdeaux, you may go by Water in a very short Time, because
the River is rapid; the Country about is very fertile and Pleasant. You will
see by the Way, Again, an ancient City, where Julius Scaliger was Born: within 4
or 5 Leagues of Bourdeaux stands Cadiliac, a most delicate Castle, belonging
some time to the Duke d' Espernon; You must not faill to see them.

At Bourdeaux, I did lodge au Chapeau rouge; but I have been told since, that
there are more commodious Inns in Town, which You may easily be addressed to.
You will meet with several of our Countrymen in this Place; But particularly,
Sir David Inglish, and Harie Iossy* are of my acquaintance. And therefore, I
must desire you to see them, and permit this, to present them my service. I
must likeways entreat you, to be at the pains, to enquire for a Doctor of
Physic, of the Religion that lives here, whose name I have forgotten; but you
will know him by this, that he has written in French Something against Doctor
Wills de Febribus: which I remember Sir David Inglish, did once send me to
Paris. And therefore, he may Probably know the Man: The Reason I desire You to
speak with him, is, That you may learn from himself, what he has Published,
upon this or any other Subject; and whatsoever they be, I must entreat You
earnestly, to buy them for me; for I have a very great Honor for the Man's
Parts, though I know not his Person; and I had the evil Luck to lend that Book,
which Sir David Inglish sent me, to a Doctor at Paris, that did never render it
me again. Remember to see in the Town, 1st. Piliers tutilarrs, which are the
Ruins of an Ancient Roman Temple. 2ly. The Ruins of an Amphitheatre, without
the Town, of Roman Antiquity likeways. 3ly. The Cheasteau Trompette, in which
there is a Garrison keept by the King. It was pulled down by the Citizens, in
the Time of their last Rebellion; but since rebuilt much better and stronger.
4ly. The Port, which if you happen to see in the Time of Vintage, will be well
furnished with Ships from all Places, and it may be from Scotland. 5ly. That
piece of Ground without the Town, which they call Grave; which brings forth the
best Wine about Bourdeaux, and which for the most part is sold within the Town,
at as great a Rate as ordinary French Wine gives with us: And therefore being
there is no great quantity of it, and that it would not turn the Merchants to
Account to send it here, you may easily guess how much Graves Wine We Drink in
Scotland, although Our People are pleased to Flatter themselves, that all their
Clarets are such; The rest I leave to others, to inform you of. I must only
tell you, You will meet with as good Fruits here as in any place of France, Des
Treffices in Latin Tuberae Terrae, they are found under the Ground by the
Hogs, who use to smell them before they come at them, and by the noise and
gests they make, give notice to their keeper, who presently puts them by, and
Digs the Trefice for himself: They are in great esteem, and being Boiled and
pared, use to be eaten by themselves with Pepper and Oil, or else cut down
with other things en Ragoust. There are likeways here a kind of small Birds but
exceeding fatt, which they call Ortolans, which are much prized for great
Delicacies.

From Bourdeaux you go to Rochelle. In the way you pass by these Places; first
Blay, Ville et City, The City stands on a Hight and Commands the River. It was
at this Place that of old the English Ships were Obliged to liver their Canon,
which were permitted the Scots (as a Privilege) to keep a Board; as they
passed to Bourdeaux. 2ly. Xaintes or Saints, the Capital Town of Xaintonge; It
stands upon the River Charante; here are some Rests of Roman antiquity, as of
an Amphitheatre, etc. But especially of an Arch, upon the Bridge over the
Charante, on which you will read this inscription. Caesari nep: D. Iulij
Pontifici A. There is also an inscription, on the reverse which I remember not.
You will see likeways here a Steeple, the Stairs whereof that lead to the Top
are on the outside. 3ly. Brouage; about half a Days Journey from Saints, a
little, but one of the most regularly fortified Towns in all France, in which
there is a continual Garrison keept, as a Guard for the Salt, of which vast
quantities is made here, by the heat of the Sun every Year in this manner. They
let in the Sea water by a (...), cut purposely in the ground into several
ponds, cut out likeways of purpose of a certain deepness: they fill them in the
Summer time, and then stop the entries that no more water come in; when the Sun
has co^^^cted it enough, they gather it together i^ ^eaps, and carry it to
places appointed for it. The Town stands upon a little River which i^
navigable, because the Sea flows a good way above it, the Salt marshes about
the Town, are little less than four Leagues about, and render the Town by so
much the more strong. You must be sure to arrive there at a good Hour in the
day, for at Sunsetting the Gates are shut, and none whatsoever can enter. You
must Salute the Governor, or in his absence, the Chief^Off^cer, and desire
Liberty of him to view the Town, which he will readily grant you, and appoint
a Soldier to wait upon you; from the Walls, you will discover the Marshes
about the Town, and then he will bring you to the Arsenal, and there you will
see their Magazine of Ai^s, and then having given something to the Soldier to
drink, you may thank the Governor and take leave of him. This is all that is
to be seen in this place except you make account to see the Isle of Ol^rone,
which lies without the mouth of the little River, about a League or two in the
Sea.

From Brouage you have seven Leagues to the Rochell, upon the Way to which you
will have occasion to see a great many Sea-Plants, such as Kali, Kali Spinosum,
Salicornia, Cakeile S^rapionis, Papaver corniculatum luteum, Eringium Marinum,
Crithmum; with many others.

The Rochel is much more famous for what it was, than for what it is, It was
the strongest hold, the Protestants had in France, but after the taking of the
Town by Jews the 13th. the Walls thereof were quite demolished, so that
scarcely the vestiges thereof remain: the Harbor is considerable, for it
enters within the middle of the Town. At ^resent it has a considerable trafique
(...) Salt, white Wines, etc.

You must be at the pains to see the Isle of Re, about a League from the Town,
but not above a quarter of a League from the Land. As you go from the Rochel,
to the place where you are to take Boat to cross over, they will show you the
Ruins of that Digue, which Cardinal Richlieu caused make by sinking of Barks,
laden with Stones, to hinder all relief for the Town by Sea, and it was
observeable, that the very day after the Town surrendered, the Digue was broke
down by Storm, which if it had done but three days sooner, it may be justly
questioned whether the Town had ever been taken, especially seeing the English
Fleet was ryding before the Isle of Re.

In the Isle of Re, there is a Citadale, near to which you will be put a Shore
upon the Island, but it is not usual to permit Strangers to enter into it. At
the east end of the Island, there is a little Town called St, Martines, in
which there are many Dutch Families, because of the great trafique the Dutch
has with this place, for Salt and white-Wines. The Island is generally of a
Sandy Soil, and only made fertile by the Sea- Ware which they throw upon it,
and which in my Opinion is the cause, that all the Wines both of the Island and
about the Rochel taste brackish, especially when they begin to be old. You will
find amongst other Plants upon the Island abundance of Pancratium, except you
come in the latter Season of the Year, when probably it may not be found. You
may return at Night to the Rochelle, from whence you have a Messenger to
Paris, upon the way to which there is nothing that I need to trouble you with,
except Poictiers, that I have not seen my self, and therefore can say nothing
of; From Poicteirs your way is to Amboise midway betwixt Tours and Blois of
which before.

I must advertise you here, that if you please you may make this Tour an other
way viz. To Nantes, as in the former advice concerning the Petit Tour, as far
as Nantes, from thence to the Rochell, Bourdeaux, Toulouse, Narbonne,
Montpellier, Avignion, and so all the rest throw Provence; and then back to
Avignion, from whence to Lions, and so to Paris with the messenger, or coach,
which you like best. For your better understanding in the Country, it will be
fit to carry a Map, or Carte of France along with you, to look upon the
situation of every place as you pass, for doing of which a little time will
suffice once a day. Let it be illuminat for the more easy discerning the
different counties and their bounding. You will do well likewise to carry a
Book with you in 80. called Le Voyage de France, which will inform you of many
particulars, that either were not at all seen and observed by me, or else have
escaped my Memory; and indeed it is no great wonder if they have, having been
so lazy as not to make any Memoire of them whilst they were yet recent in my
mind. And this is one Reason of the tumultuarinesse and disorder of this
Letter, but I am well pleased to think, that by the amendements you will make
both in seeing, observing, and writing down all things more particularly, we
shall have occasion afterward to put the Voyage in a better Dress; I must
likeways beg your Pardon for not having written to you sooner, having been
several times called out of Town since I began to write this Letter: If you
find it tedious in reading, blame your self for being the cause thereof, and be
the more patient, in regard I shall not have occasion to be any more so
tedious, unless you go for Italy, and give me a timeous advice of your
Intentions.

I shall conclude all with my best wishes for your health and happy Return, and
most earnestly entreat you not to grudge us with the effects of a Spare hour,
that seeing at this distance, we cannot be so happy, as to enjoy you
personally; we may at least by this next best way entertain a Correspondence,
which I assure you will be a great Kindness to your Friends here, but to none
so much as to my self who cannot be indifferent in any thing, that concerns
you, And therefore cannot but be sollicitous, to hear often from you, as the
only thing, that can supply the want of your person, So much desired and longed
for, by etc.

LETTER III.
CONTAINING Advice for Traveling into ITALY.
Written to a Friend
IT is much better to go into Italy in the latter end of Autumn, than in the
Spring; Because the Change of the Air is not so much from one Extreme to
another in that Season, as in the other; for the Mildness of the Winter in
Italy (especialy upon the South side of the Appennine) does not so much recede
from the Temperatness of Autumn in France, as the Heat of Summer in Italy
exceeds the Mildness of the Spring in France. It is certain, that if a Man
intend to stay but a half a Year, it is better to begin the Journey in Autumn,
and finish it in the Spring, than to begin in the Spring, and finish it in
Autumn, and so be obnoxious to the excessive Heats of Summer. If one intend to
stay one or more Years, it is undoubtedly best to begin the Journey in Autumn,
because the Winter, being much more clement than usually it falls out with us,
will be easily supported, and all the Heat that happens in the following
Summer, in regard it comes by degrees, will not so readily affect the Body,
that has been already inured to the Air of the climate, for some Time before.

The most convenient way of making the Toure of Italy, (in my opinion) is to go
through Provence to Cane, a small inconsiderable Town upon the Frontiers of
Provence, and there to hire a Felluck to Genoua, and, if you cannot get one at
Cane, to go to Nize, which is but six or seven Leagues further, where you will
be sure to find one; a Felluck is ordinarily of four Oars, and has this
advantage that you go in it Ter' a Terre, that is so near the land, that in the
case of any danger by Storm or otherwise, you may easily run on Shore and
escape it, and besides, land as often as there is any Town or other thing
worthy the seeing, and likewayes ly a Shore every Night, at some good Town or
other. A Felluck will serve to carry half a dozen of persons with ease,
besides the Rowers: The Price is not fixed but more or less as the Fellucks
happen to be more or fewer in number. Ours cost us about 11 or 12 Crowns, in
regard there were but few at Cane, but you may chance to get one for 8, or 9.
especially if ye be few in number and not much Baggage; You may provide every
morning to take along with you, Wine and what Victuals you please, the rather
because sometimes it will happen that you will have no convenience of any Town
about Midday, and therefore must Dine aboard Your Fellucke.

The first thing You will meet with, worthy the taking notice of, is Nize, a
City belonging to the Duke of Savoy, it lies near to the Sea side, at the very
foot of the Alps, and has a very strong Cittadale belonging thereto: some two
miles from thence stands Villa Franca, one of the best Ports in Italy, it
belongs likewise to the Duke of Savoy, and is guarded with two Castles, one
whereof stands on the top of a Rock, upon which grows in great abundance the
Ficus Indica. Some three miles farther upon the Coast stands the Town and
Palace of Monaco, or Morgues, It is a Principality by it self, and has very
little land belonging to it: The place is strong standing upon a Rock, which is
not accessible, save at the side where the Palace stands, and where it joins
with the land, all the rest being compassed with the Sea. In the Palace they
use to show 1. The Princes Wairdrob, in which there is good store of Silver
plate, and other Rich furniture, 2. Several rooms as Halls, Galleries,
Chambers etc. well furnished with Hangings, Cabinets, Pictures, etc. 3. A
little Garden upon the top of the Rock, behind the Palace, made up of earth
brought thither on purpose. At the foot of the Hill near the Town there are
store of Carobe Trees, or Siliqua Dulcis, Bauhini in Pinace.

I must not omit to tell You that you must be sure at your first leaving of
France in the last Town that You happen to be in, whither it be Cane or any
other, to get a Certificate of your health and freedom from the Plague, as
also of the freedom of that Town. There are persons appointed in every place
for giving of such Bills, or Patents de Saint, as they call them. Their
Subscriptions are known to the next Towns about, where you are to go, so that
it is not easy to counterfit, and besides it were very dangerous to do so;
They are very scrupulous in this matter upon all the Coast of Liguria, for fear
of contagion; So that when you arrive at any Town, before you go a shore, you
must send one of your Boat-men, with your Certification to be shown to such as
are appointed for those matters in that Place, who immediately upon the Sight
of the Bill permit you, la Practica, that is Liberty to stay in the Town as
long as you please, and do what you will. When you part from that, You must
take a new Certificat to the next Place, and so of the Rest until you come at
Ligorn, where this niceness will end.

You must carry with you no Secret Weapon, as Dagger, Pocket Pistols, or the
like: And this is general all over Italy, except only in the Kingdom of Naples,
and States of Venice and Milan, where it is permitted to wear Daggers. At most
Towns in Italy, You will be oblidged to leave yonr Hulster-Pistols, and
sometimes your Sword with the Guard at the Gate you enter in by: And then they
will ask you, by what Gate you are to go out, and accordingly Your Arms will
wait for you, which they will know to be yours, by the delivery of a Nick-stick
given You as you enter, and which for that purpose, You must carefully keep. In
most Places, Strangers are permitted to wear their Swords. Your Cloak-Bag
likeways will be visited at every Town, to to see that there be no Customable
Goods in it, and if there be any Books, you must give up a List of them to the
Visitor, or Inquisitor appointed for that end, and he will Sign it with Order
to let them pass, Providing, there be no Prohibited Book amongst them, For if
there were any such, it would be Dangerons; yet there are ways enough to
convey Books, or any other thing of whatsoever Nature, or Quality, from any
Seaport, without any Danger, which you will easily understand, after your
being a while in the Country.

From Monaco you will easily reach Oneglia, which is at about twelve Miles
distance, and about 5 Miles further Albenga, from thence you have seven Miles
to N^li, and ten more to Savona, from whence there rests five Miles to Genoua,

All the Coast, of Liguria, from Nize to Genoua, and some days Journey beyond
Genoua toward Ligorn, is nothing but rude Alps, for the most part infertile
and unhabitable, except toward the Bottom near the Sea, where there are little
Small Valleys here and there, both delicious and Fruitful. For the rest it is
wonderful to see with what industry and trouble, they have been able to place
little small Villages, as it were in the Clefts of the Hills, and Plant Olive
Trees, where one would think nothing but crows could venture to Big. All this
Tract is extremely hot, especially in Summer, being directly opposite to the
South, and altogether guarded from the North, So that the reflection of the Sun
beams, makes a Heat almost insupportable.

Genoua la Superba, so called from the sumptuousness of its Buildings, and so
they use to give other epithets to other Towns, as Roma la Saneta, Fiorenza la
Bella, Bolognia la Grassa, Padua la Dotta, Venetia la Rieta, etc. It is said
that Genoua has Montagnie senza legno, Mare senze pesce, Done senza Vergonia,
and Gente senza sede. It is a Republic and the Government administered by a
Senate. It is a City of great Trade and very Rich, and it is said they account
usury no great Sin: It being their Maxim, that Cento per Cento e Niente, Cento
Cinquanto per Cinto e quelcha cosa, du Cento per Cento e quadagnio Hone^io. You
may take notice in the Place; First, of the Situation of the Town, and so you
may Herbarize toward the West Side. 2ly. The Senate House, 3ly. The Churches,
and particularly that of St. Lorenzo, which is the Cathedral, a Stately
Fabric Crusted with Marble. 4ly. That famous Street, called la Strada Nova,
which is composed of so many Palaces, most of them of Marble: you must by all
means endeavor to see the most considerable Palaces. Within you will find them
most delicatly Adorned with all sorts of fine Things, as Statues, Paintings,
etc. You must also see their Gardens, where besides several sorts of Flowers,
Shrubs, and Trees, you will likeways find delicat Fountains, Fish Ponds, and
Grotto's; as particularly in the Palace of the Principe d'Oria; I would
likeways have you see the Palace of Signior Baldi, and some other Houses of
Pleasure especially toward the Seaport, where they stand at the foot of the
Hill over looking one another as they mount in degrees in form of a Theater,
and all of them having a full view of the Seaport, which is very spacious and
very deep; but in my Opinion, not so very well guarded from storms. That which
I find most considerable in it is, the Mole, which secures the entry thereof,
it being the best and strongest and in the deepest Water I ever saw. At the
east end of the port there is a little Promontory called Capo de Fara, upon
which stands a High Turret, which they call la Lanterna, from the Top whereof
they use to discover all Vessels at Sea at a considerable distance. 5ly.
Forget not to visit the Booksellers, but in Regard this is a general Remark
not to be omited, in every Town where there any, I shall say no more of it
here, but shall put You in mind of it now and then.

From Genoua You must again provide Your self of a Felluck to Ligorn, which you
will find readier and at an easier rate, because of the more frequent Traffic
and intercourse, than from Cane or Nize, you will pass by Porta Fino, Leresi,
Viaregia, etc. and you will not find many things considerable more than I have
already noted on the Coasts of Liguria betwixt Genoua and Nize, except that
when ye pass Leresi a little, you begin to discover a large plain, part of which
belongs to the state of Genoua, and therein are the Quarries that furnish all
Italy with the best Marble, and the rest is the Principality of Massa; For the
better seeing of which if you please you may go from Genoua by Horse to Ligorne.

Tuscany begins about Viaregia, the greatest part whereof is under the Dominion
of the Great Duke of Tuscany.

Ligorn is no ancient, but yet a very Handsome and well built City, by Ferdinand
the first, Great DUKE of Tuscany, of whom you will see a most stately Statue or
rather Colosse, with slaves Chained at his Feet, on each side kneeling; a little
without the Gate as you go to the Seaport. The Town is regularly fortified,
they say, by the contrivance of the Duke of Northumberland, who was banished
out of England in the Reign of Queen Eli^abeth, and well received and much
esteemed by the then Duke of Tuscany, for his excellent parts and
Qualifications. The Duke for incouragment of Trade has granted great
Immunities to Merchants of all Nations whatsomever, which is the great cause
that the Town flourishes so much in Trade, and is so well Peopled: Several
Nations have established great Factories here, but especialy the English and
Hollanders who have made this place, as it were the staple of all their
commerce into the Levant. The Jews also have a very great freedom here and are
not distinguished by any particular Mark, as in other places, from other
Merchants, but live Honorably in a particular Street of the Town, built by
themselves, yet not sequestrated from the rest of the Town by any Wall or Gate,
as they use to be in all other places, where I have seen them. The English
Merchants live very splendidly, and are very hospitable and courteous,
especially, to their Countrymen, that Travel that way, under which name they
comprehend all that are Subject to our King: The Jews Synagogue here is the
best in Italy; and therefore worthy your seeing. They observe our Saturnday, so
that if You please to stay, You may see their form of Worship. You must take
particular notice of the Seaport, which is undoubtedly the most secure and
finest in all Italy, in which You will see the great Dukes Galleys, which he
kee^s for a Guard, to his Country against the Turks men of War. It is worth
the while to see a Gallie put out to Sea, or, as she comes in, for so one may
see the Discipline of the Slaves to whom the Bosson delivers the word of
Command by the noise of a Whisle, the diversity whereof they are as well
acquainted with, as Horsemen with a Trumper, or foot with a Drum. If You be
diligent You may meet with several curiosities, some natural, some of Art,
especially from the Levant, and all at reasonable Rates: and for the more
commodious doing of this, it will be fitting to make acquaintance with several
Merchants, especially English, who will either inform You themselves, where
such things are to be found, or else address You to such Persons in the Town,
as may best hap to do it. It is likeways necessary for You to have such
acquaintance, and amongst them some one confident for returning You Money from
England, or at least for returning You, what Money You have not present Use
for, to Florence, as also for keeping correspondence with; that by this means,
You may send any thing you please to Your confident at London. And because this
advice may be useful in many other Places; I shall be more particular in it
here for all. I suppose then You were to send any little Ball for Trunk from
Ligorne to London; Your way would be first to pass it at the Custom house,
where, I think Books, and curiosities pay nothing but yet You must have an
Order for Shipping of them, then You must agree with some English Master of a
Ship, bound for London, for the portage, and accordingly draw a Bill of Loading
-- which is of a common Style bearing, that such a Ball or Coffer marked, --
(and sometimes it says, marked as on the Margen, and then the Mark whether it
be Letters or Figures or both, which is put upon the Goods, is likeways placed
upon the Margen of the Bill) is embarked This -- Day of -- and Year of God --
aboard the good Ship called -- now in the Port of Ligorn, and bound for London,
whereof Mr: -- under God is Master, the which Ball is consignable at London to
Mr -- Merchant etc. or bis Order, for which he is to Pay -- English Money, he
receiving the said Ball well conditioned, without Skaith or Damage, There must
be three Copies of this Bill, one You must subscribe, and give to the Master of
the Ship, for (...) Warrant to carry his Fraught. The other two he must
subscribe and give to You, whereof You must send one by Post with a particular
Letter of advice, to Your correspondent at London, to warrant him to call for
the Goods, at the Master of the Ship; and the other You must keep by You for
Your own security, in case there should be any miscarriage, either through the
Skipper, or Merchants fault, and then Your Goods may be embarked. If You were
to send from Florence, then you must in the like manner pass your Goods at the
Customhouse; if there be any Books among them, You must have a particular
License as I Noted formerly, and then cause unball them at the Custom-house,
and set your Mark upon them, and find out some Boat going for Ligorn, (which
you will be sure to do,) and take a Note under the Boat-Masters hand of the
recept of such Goods so marked, consignable to such a Ma^n Merchant in Ligorn,
for which he is to pay so much Fraught, he receiving the Goods well
conditioned. This Note you must send by the Post to your Merchant in Ligorn,
together with Your acquittance at the Custom house of Florence, which will
serve to acquit them at Ligorn; together also with particular advice to
dispatch them by the first good occasion for London, and to take Bills of
Loading for them, whereof you must desire one Copy to be sent to your self,
which you must keep for your Security, as said is; From Rome you must use the
same conveyance to Ligorn: But from Venice you must address immediately for
London, and in the same manner as from Ligorn. If you be to send any thing over
Land, where you go not along your self, you must make two Letters of Voiture
(having first agreed for the carriage at the Rate of so much per Cent.) whereof
you must give one to the carrier, which is a kind of advice to the Person you
address your Goods to, which is in this form: suppose from Turine to Lions, you
write thus,

Sir
I have sent a Bundel marked -- by -- Indweller in this Town, and Carrier to
Lions, addressed to You, which I desire you would be pleased to receive, and
being in good condition, Pay for it at the Rate of -- per Cent. and I shall
hold you account thereof, or otherways place it to the account of -- at Paris,
to whom I desire you to address the Bundell and send it with the first good
Occasion, and I shall be Accountable to him. The carrier will part from hence,
such a Day being the -- Day of -- and will arrive at Lions the -- Day
thereafter, the Bundell contains no Merchant Goods, being only Books, etc. for
my own Private use and therefore not Customable I rest.

SIR, Yours etc.


THe other Letter of Voiture is an Obligation under the carriers hand to You,
which you must send by the Post to your correspondent at Lions. The Form of it
ought to be as follows.

I Under Subscribed Carrier of Turin, acknowledge to have received from -- the
-- Day of -- at Turin a Bundell Marked -- Weighing -- addressed to -- Merchant
of Lions to whom I promise to deliver it in good condition at Lions, (with the
help of God) or to his Order, he paying me at the Rate of -- per Cent.
therefore. In witness whereof I have subscribed their presents with my hand at
Turin the -- Day of -- Anno --


I Have been the more particular in these things, because although they may seem
to be triffles, to those that are conversant in such matters, yet a small
mistake, may be the occasion of a great Miscarriage. I shall now return to put
You in mind of some other particulars, and 1. That in this Place, Oisters are a
very great Delicat, there being but one person that has Privilege to sell
them, for which he pays a considerable Sum to the great Duke; I know not well
from whence they are brought, but I am sure it is from a considerable Distance:
They are keept in the Town-Ditch, on the East side of the Town, which is full
of salt water, because it has communion with the Sea; the keeper has a little
House hard by, and according to the number Bargained for, takes them alive and
very fat out of the Ditch, and sells them at the Rate of a Pistole the Hundred.
They are many times put into the Ditch little, and keept until they be big
enough, they taste very well, and are by far the best in Italy. 2. To the
Eastward of the Town, about a Mile or little more, there is an Hill called
Monte Nero, upon which there is good harbarizing. You will do well to take a
Horse and a Guide with you to the Place. From Ligorn you have 15 Miles of
Smooth and Plain way to

Pisa. It is an Ancient City, sometimes a commonwealth by it self, and then
both Rich and populous: But since it was Reduced under the command of the great
Duke of Tuscany, it is neither of the two; the far greater part of the
Inhabitants, after the Town was Reduced, choosing rather to abandon their Native
Country, than their Liberty, or at least preferring a voluntar Subjection
abroad, to a necessitated Slavery at home. The City is large and Beautiful,
divided, as it were in two by the River Arno, and again conjoined by a
beautiful Bridge, of white Marble. The Air of this Place, in Winter, is judged
to be more Temperate than that at Florence, and therefore the great Duke uses
to pass the Winter here. There are many things considerable in this Town; as,
1st. The great Church, which is a Stately Fabric, and well adorned within, as
also the Batistaria whereof the Doors, as also of the great Church, are all
covered with Massive Brass, cast into delicat Figures. 2ly. The crooked
Steeple, which leanes to one side very far from the perpendicular; some people
allege it was purposely so built, but I am more apt to believe that the ground
has miss-given on the one side by little and little, or rather insensibly,
which may be some part of the Reason, why it has hung together so long without
falling, to which the excellency of the Cement and Workman-ship has
contributed very much; my opinion, to one that narrowly observes, will not
appear to be unreasonable, for the outside is of so many Rows of small Pillars
going round about, and the lower-most Row, on that side that it leanes to, is
more than half hid in the ground, where as those of the other are wholly to be
seen; which I suppose could not have happened otherways, than as I have said.
3ly. The Burial Place, which is the most stately I ever saw, being a long
quadrangle, well walled and galleried about, in the middle whereof are very many
Monuments of great antiquity, of many of the ancient noble Families of Pisa.
They are most of them of white Marble in shape like a Coffine, wherein the Body
of the Dead persons was laid: Some of them are carved in one Fashion and some
of them in another, and some of them into excellent Figures. 4ly The Dukes
Palace. 5ly. The Physical Garden, together with the Rarities that are keept in
a Gallery belonging to the Garden, where you will see a very great Collection
of Natural Curiosities. The Garden uses to have very rare exotic Plants; but
in regard you can have no access to it, except by the recommendation of the
Physician, that is Professor of Botany for the time, therefore I think it will
be worth your while to make your address to him, for a Liberty, first, to see
the Garden and Gallery; secondly, to get from the Gardener or himself, the
Seeds, of such as you have a mind to, and a Piece of the Plant for drying, if
you think fitting; you must not be negligent here, for this is one of the best
Gardens in Italy, and in my opinion preferable to that of Padua, especially for
exotic Plants. The University, for the whole Estate of Tuscany, is keep'd
here, and if you please you may see the Schools for all Professions, and
particularly that for the Laws, where the most renowned Bartholus did teach.
Amongst the Booksellers you may find something to accommodat you, because it is
an University Town, and I shall tell you here, because I do not remember to
have it done as yet, that, generally speaking, all sort of Books in Italy, are
cheaper than in any other place where I have been. I pray You remember to get a
Couple of the Catalogues of the Garden there, of the last Edition.

From Pisa, You have but a small half days Journey, of very pleasant Way, to
Luca, which is a Delicat little Town, a Republic by it self, and having but a
very small Territory belonging to it; it is well and regularly fortified with a
dry Ditch, which is keept very clean and in good Order, and allways Green: the
Republic is governed by a Prince or Chief Magistrate, whom they choose of their
own Town, and change him every two Month: So soon as any one is chosen, he must
leave his own House and Friends, and retire himself to the Public Palace,
where he is assisted by some other of the Nobles, and cannot come out until
his Government be finished.

The Humor of the people is Cheerful and very Civil, and contrary to the
Custom of all Italy, Men and Women converse freely amongst themselves or with
Strangers. They use Balls and Danceing, much after the French Fashion; The
Religious people use to distill Spirits and Essences, whereof you may provide
what Quantity you please, both good, and good cheap, I wish you might help a
Friend to some of Orange-Flowers and Myrtles; The religious Women likeways use
to make very pretty Things, and particularly I remember they use to sell
Stomagers of quilted Silk, which most people use to wear in the Wintertime, of
one Fashion or another.

From Luca, if you please, you may go to Pisloia, and so to Florence, or
otherways return to Pisa, and from thence, either by Coach or Horse, to
Florene. If the Weather be not too hot, it is better to go on Horseback, in
regard of the prospect of the Country, which cannot be had in a Coach.
Florence is a new Town, but one of the most beautiful in all Italy, and
therefore called Fioren^ a la Bella; it is situated upon the River Arno, which
divides it in two sev^rall places, over which stands four fair Bridges. The
City is Counted at least six miles in Compass; The Beauty of it consistes in
the Stateliness of the Buildings, the great number of Palaces, the neateness
and cleanness of the Streets, occasioned by the largeness and smoothnes of the
Stones, with which it is paved; the many large Places, Fountains, Statues,
Churches, Towers, Convents and Gardens; Of all which it has very many of the
best in Italy. There is scarce any thing in this City; which is not very well
worthy to be taken notice of* but particularly. 1. The Dukes two Palaces, the
Old and the New; In the new the great Duke himself keeps his Court. It is a
^ost magnificent Structure, o^ the T^scan Order of Architecture, but not
finished as yet; The Garden belonging thereto is very well furnished, with Rare
Plants and Flowers; of which the Catalogue is Printed, of which I desire You to
bring alongs a Couple of Copies. It will not be a miss to make Acquaintance
with the Gardener; for, so you will get what Seeds you please. The old Palace
stands in the great Place of the City, in the middle of which Place there is a
Stately Colossus of Brass, of Cosmus great Duke of Florence a Horse back, by
the Model whereof that of Henry the great upon the new Bridge of Paris was
made. Near to the Entry into the Palace there are several other Noble Statues
of Marble: within the Palace it self is that so much famed, over the World,
Gallerie, which is composed of many Rooms, containing great Variety of the
choicest Curiosities; as Sta^ues, Busta's, Baserelieues, Paintings, Drawings,
Prints, Cabinets, Jewels, Cameo's, Intaillia's, with all sorts of Anticailles,
with an infinite number of Master-peeces of latter times. Amongst other things,
there is a Chamber or two full of all sorts of Arms, amongst which those of
Charles the Great and Roland, with several Swords of Henry the great, also a
great Number of Cymiters, some whereof have their Scabbards set with Rubies,
Emeralds, and other precious Stones. There is an ancient Buckler with a
Medusa's Head, Painted by Michael Angelo bona rota. I remember to have observed
some ancient Casaques, whose weight I am confident no Head could sustain,
unless so adjusted to the rest of the Armor, and that to the Sadle, that the
Horse must have carried all. You must endeavor to get a Written Inventure of
the several Curiosities in the Gallerie, for without that it is not possible
to remember every particular; Within this Palace, the great Duke uses to keep
the most excellent Artisans he can meet with, of all Trades, to whom he gives
considerable Salaries and Privileges, whom you will do well to see, but
especially the Stone-Cutters, of whose Art I entreat you to take particular
notice, and what Instruments they use, and learn at least as much of it as may
serve to polish Stones. Amongst other Curiosities of this Trade, You may see a
New way of Mosaic Work, wherein the figure is completed most delicatly, both
as to the parts and Colors thereof, by the Natural Colors of the several
pieces of Stones assembled together; and which is strange, all the lights and
shadows requisite in Painting is herein observed; So that they can imitate
Nature almost as fully this way as in Painting it self. This way differs from
the old Mosaic, in that the particular Pieces that compose it, are of
different Figures according as the colors require; for example, a Cherrie
because it is all of one Color, therefore it may be represented by a Red stone
of a round Figure in one Piece, but the Stalk of it must be of an other
different figure: But in the old way, all the pieces were Quadrangular,
whatsoever might be the color or thing to be represented, and of this kind of
Mosaic you will see a most excellent Piece in St. Peter's Church at Rome,
representing St. Michael the Archangel treading upon the Devil. In this Palace
likeways, the great Duke keeps a Chemical Laboratorie, called la Funderia,
wherein are made very many notable preparations with great Faithfullness,
especially Spirits and Essences, which may be bought here at reasonable Rates,
and without fear of being cheated, as to the goodness of the things, 2ly.
Several Churches and Convents, particularly the Dome the outside whereof is
the most beautiful in Europe, being all crusted with Black. White and Red
Marble, fit^y placed together in regular figures. The Church within is Paved
with black and white Marble, and Richly adorned with Chapels and Altars; The
Cupola is very Large and Fine insomuch that the Golden Ball upon the Top of it,
which is able to contain a great many Persons, does not appear from the Ground
to be bigger than a good Foot-Bal; Near to the Dome stands Jota's Tower, one of
the most admirable Pieces of Architecture, in the World; being a square
Steeple, without any spite on the Top of it, all crusted with black, white and
red Marble, in most regular figures from the top to the bottom; near to it
stands the round Chapel of St. John delicately paid with Marble, and adorned
with statues, with a Rich Vase adorned with precious Stones, wherein the
Children are Baptized. The Doors of the Chapel are of Brass, all in Figures of
personage in Base-relieve of most admirable Workmanship; in this Chapel is the
Sepulcher of Jota, that renowned Painter and Architect, upon whom there are
some excellent Latin verses there engraven, which I have lost, but ^o^mend to
you to take a Copy thereof. In the Church of St. Spirito; there is an Altar
ha^cost above a Hundred Thousand Crowns, which were left by a Florentin
Gentleman for that effect. In the Church de Sancta Cr^ce, (I h^ve ^orgot
whether i^ belongs to the (...) or Ja^obi^^;) Michael Ang^^o bona rota i^
interred, and it is said at his own desire, that he might lie within the View
of Jota's Tower, which he did so much admire in his lifetime; Upon his Tome
there are three most delicate Statues, the one represents Painting; the second,
Sculpture; the third Architecture: in which three Arts, he was so great a
Master. St. Laurence Church was magnificently built by Cosmo de Medicis, whose
Scpulchre is to be seen there. There is that famous Chapel, which the Dukes
continually Labor to Finish. It is the most Glorious thing extant in the
World, there being already bestowed upon the Workman-ship thereof above eight
Millions of Gold, and I believe a considerable deal more will not perfect it.
It is not very large, but built round; it is all Mosaik, both the Floor, roof
and sides; and the least considerable Stones that compose it, are Jasper,
Porphir, Alabaster, Lapis Lazuli etc. there are several nests in the Wall
about, where the statues of the Dukes are to stand as they lived and succeeded
to the another. The Great Altar is not yet set up, because of peoples being
still at work in the Chapel, nor is it yet altogether finished, but yet there
is so much done, that to look upon it, one should hardly think there were any
thing wanting. It is keept in the Dukes Wardrobe in the Old Palace, of which I
forgot to speak formerly, and therefore tell You now that it is one part of
the old Palace which You must not fail to see, there being in it a vast
Treasure of Silver and Gold Plate, with many other Precious things. The Altar
is keept in a little Room by it self, I shall not under-take to descrive it
particularly, but only desire You to consider well every part of it, the
Richness of the Materials and excellency of the Workmanship, the Mosaicks,
and the Crystal Pillars, and I believe You will easily excuse my holding by
the general, and omitting to speak of particulars: I do truly think that the
beauties and excellencies of this Chapel and Altar, are so great and so many,
that they Deserve a Particular Book to make them known to the world, and it may
be there is some such work intended, or already extant, which if it be I am
confident You will take care to have it.

I must give You notice in this Place, that You will do well to Treat with
some of those men that Work about the Chapel, or else with some of those
stone-cutters in the Gallery for some small Pieces of all the species of
stones; let them be of such a Bigness as may easily serve to know them by. I
make no doubt but You may get them at a Reasonable Rate. But I must earnestly
entreat You to mind those two Species of stones which are found in Quarries not
far from Florence, whereof the one Naturally represents Towns and Landscapes,
the other is some what Whiter, and has Trees and Forests Represented on it, by
little Black Draughts; I remember to have shown you a small Piece of each sort,
but now I would have, two or three larger Pieces of both the sorts, of about a
span-Length, and of the best Marked, for I intend to put them in frames, as a
Chief ornament of my Tradescants. I shall hold You count for the price. 3. The
Place where the wild Beasts are keept. It is a long square Piece of ground
Walled about, and galleried on the Top for Spectators; under the galleries are
little cells that open to the Place, in each of which there is keept a several
Wild Beast, such as Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Woolfs, Bears, etc. These have
their keeper that waits upon them, and Feeds them, and when the great Duke
commands, they are brought out, one or more, as he Pleases, and bated with
Dogs, or otherwise set to fight with one another, Upon such occasions strangers
are Permitted to see. 4. The Booksellers; of which there are pretty store
here and those well furnished too. You cannot miss of a Casalpinus de Plantis
or two, for it was Printed in this Place. If You can get his appendix ad libros
de Plantis, You will oblidge me to bring it with You; it was Printed by it self
at Rome. You may possibly meet with other good Books, for it is ordinar when
Learned men die* for Booksellers to buy their Books. I must likeways put You
in mind to buy a Printed Paper for me, that was Published at Florence, called
Testis examinatus; it contains two or three figures of the Testicles with a
short Description thereof, in one single leaf.

There is one Dr. Kirton Dr. of Physic, He is a very civil and obligeing
Gentleman; If he be yet alive he will be Your Interpreter: and if You need not
that, he will help You to expede the rest of Your affairs; in short, both his
counsel and his company are to be esteemed; He is an English Man born, low in
stature and pretty ancient.

You must not faill in this Place to take notice, of the variety of Fruits, and
Wines; as the Red Florence Wine, which is counted the best for ordinar
Drinking, being stomachical and without Sweetness. The White Florence Wine,
which is Sweet; Verdea, which is delicious small Sweet white Wine; Monte
Pulciano, White and Red, both very good Wines, so called from the Place they
grow upon, and many more such.

If You happen to be here in the Summer time, especially when the Grapes are
Ripe, You will find in the Markets great Variety of Fowls and small Birds,
whereof I entreat You to take notice, but especially of those kinds, that are
not common with us, and try to get their Skins, which may be easily done, when
the bird has not been long Dead; the rump must be left at it for preserving of
the Tail; The Head, Wings and Feet must be likewise left, and only tbe body
taken out, and so the Skin filled with Flax or Cotton. This I entreat You to
remember to do wheresoever You shall happen to be in the Summer time, and if
any such occasion Present it self to You in Winter, not to ommit it.

From Florence to Rome You have 140. Miles; there are several ways of
Traveling, viz. by Coach, by Procaccio or Messenger with whom you agree for so
much; as is usual in France: and by the Viturin, that is, by hyring of Horse
at a certain Rate, and Paying for Your own entertainment at every part as you
pass. If you be acquainted with the customs of the Country, and have Language
enough to make Your self understood, this last way is the best, because you
will be sure to fare better, and cost you no more, than you would otherwise Pay
to the Messenger, who will be sure to provide the worst cheer for you, that he
may make the better for himself: in short, it is best to be Master of your own
Purse, and not live at the discretion of Your Conductor. I have forgot hitherto
to tell you that there is some Incommoditie for Travelers upon the Road, as to
their Bedding, their Clothes espiecially, the Sheets being for the most part
very nasty, and it is but now and then that either money or fair words can
procure a Pair of clean Sheets. The best remedy I know is not to put off ones
Clothes, and to wrap ones self, especialy the Head, in their Cloak, that the
face and Hands may not touch any unclean thing; in short a little Patience will
do it, and you will be sure to be better accomodated in good Towns.

The places You are to pass by, are Chiefly these as follows.

FLORENCE.
S. Casciano 9 Miles Le Tavernelle 8 Miles Pogibonzo 5 Miles Staggia 4 Miles
Siena 9 Miles Montarone 5 Miles Lucignano 3 Miles Bonconvento 5 Miles Tornieri
5 Miles S. Quirie 4 Miles La Scala 4 Miles Ricorso 4 Miles La Paglia 5 Miles
Ponte Centino 9 Miles Acquapendente 2 Miles S. Lorenzo 3 Miles Bolsena 4 Miles
Montefiascone 6 Miles Viterbo 8 Miles Ronciglione 10 Miles Monterosi 8 Miles
Roma 20 Miles
There are not many considerable things to be seen upon this Road; Siena was a
republic by itself, but was reduced by the Emperor Charles the 5th. and by
his Son Philip Gifted to the Great Duke of Tuscany, under whose Power it still
Remains. The Town is of a good bigness, and commended for it is Situation, and
the purity of the Italian Tongue. The Dome or great Church is a statly Fabric;
it is Paved with Marble, but especialy the Quire, upon which is most Curiously
Graven the History of Abraham Sacrificeing his Son, and History of the
Maccabees, and for the better Preservation of them they are covered with Matts.
There is likewise an entry from the Church to the Bibliotheck of Aeneas
Sylvius, who was born in this Town. He was once Legate from the Pope into
Scotland, and afterward Created Pope himself, and took the name of Pius
Secundus. He was a Man of great Learning. The late Pope Alexander VII. was
Native of this Place, of the Family of Chigi; his Statue is to be seen in the
great Church. The greatest Part of the and the Tower belonging to it are of
Black and White Marble without. In the Church of St. Dominic, amongst other
Relicts, is preserved the Head of St. Catharine of Siena. The Town is well
watered with many fine Fountains. The great place is made with a kind of
Descent Theater ways, so that from the middle of the Place You may see all that
walk in it. Montefiascone is famous for a most Delicious Kind of Muscatello
Wine, which You must be sure to Taste. The Messenger uses to Dine without the
Town, but you will be sure to fare better and get better Wine within; There
goes a story that a German killed himself in this Place with Drinking
excessivly of this Muscat. As you go from thence to Viterbo you will find a
kind of Aspalathus, which I take to be Acacia altera Angularae. It grows as
high as our Broom, and is plentiful enough, so that you will easily discover
it.

From Viterbo, all that distance to Rome is called the Campania of Rome, in
which it is thought most dangerous to sleep in the Summer time, therefore if
you fortune to travel it in Summer, whither to Rome or from it (the same is
under stood of 40. Miles distance round about Rome) you must be sure not to
sleep in the Campania, which you may easily avoid by Traveling in the night.
when you arrive at Rome you must give up your name at the Port; your Country,
the Place from which ^ou came last, and the house you go to Lodge at: and from
thence you must go a la dogano, or to the Custom House, where your Cloakbag
must be Searched, and from thence to your lodg^ng place, according to the
Billet given ^ou at the Port, without which no House ^eeper dare receave a
stranger; But they ^re things of Course and effectuat without any trouble. You
will do well to Lodge in a Pension for the first week, until you have made
some acquaintance, by means whereof you may be fully informed where to light
upon a convenient Camera locanda: There was two French Pensions, and one
English in my time. The first of the French was Al monte d'oro. The second was
nella strada del Populo The English pension was in the same strada del Populo,
alla villa di Londra: we had several Country men living in the Town in my
time, as particularly signior Roberto Pendrick, a worthy old Gentleman, and
most obligeing to his Country men, he was my particular good friend; and I
make no doubt but you will find him so, for I hear he is still alive, and I
wish he may be long so. He lives in a House of his own upon the Triuita di
monte. There is an other called Signior don Gulielmo Lesly, He is Chaplain to
Cardinal Carlo Barberino and lives nella Cancellaria. I dare be confident to
give you this man for one of the most faithful Friends in the World, and one
in whose goodness, prudence, Kindness, and good Conduct you may trust ten
Thousand Lives: to be short you will find I am not mistaken, when I call him
deliciae humani generis, for in all my lifetime I never knew another like him,
make it their whole work and study to find opportunities to oblige every
Countryman according to his condition: The p^^r of them, with Food and
Raiment and whatsoever else they may stand in need of, and all other men with
continual offices of civility. By his means you will get to see many of these
things I shall recommend to you hereafter. If I Know of your going to Italy in
time, I shall have a Letter there before you. Your best convenience for Lodging
and Diet will be a Camera Locanda. You may take it in that place of the town
that suits best with your occasions, you will pay for it by the month, less or
more according to the goodness of the Chamber and furniture thereof. As for
your diet it will be dressed in the House, and you must tell at night what you
Intend to eat next day, that they may provide it for you: As for the prices you
cannot be easily Cheated, because as to that, most things are Regulated, And in
the quantity it is not possible you should be overreached because all things
are sold by weight. There are several Kinds of Bread used in this City, but
that which is called Papaline is undoubtedly the best. There are likewise many
sorts of Wines, some of them Galliardi or strong, as Greco, Muscatello di
Saragosa, Lagrima etc. others are Legieri, or small, and they are many; the
best for common use is Albano, which You may drink pure: and it is remarkable
that there are but few places in Italy where Water may be Drunk safely, and
because one may be mistaken in the choice, the best remedy is to Drink none at
all. There are great variety of fruits according to the Seasons of the year, I
shall only desire you to be cautious, and not to eat too much or too often of
any, but especialy, of Melons, Cucumbers, and the Malanzane, or mala insana,
which are a Kind of Solanum Pomiferum. There are good store and Many Kinds of
Fishes, especialy Sea Fish, whereof the best are, Sols, il Pisce Capone etc.
The Tunino is a great Fish as big as our Salmond, and Red like it, but harder
and dryer a great deal, the belly of it is very fatt and they use to Salt
and sell it in the Taverns, being sliced in small pieces upon a Trencher; Fresh
Sturgeon is very common; Lobsters are much harder and worse to digest than
ours: as for fleshes, Bufalo is only eaten by the Poorer sort of people; Beif
which they call Vacina is good; Vitella campo reccia, or Hudron is good, but
above all the Vitella mongana or sucking Veal. Lamb is worth nothing, nor
Mutton either, which they call Castrato, and serves only to make Broth for
Sick People; Kids are good. In the Wintertime there is is abundance of
Sangliers or wild Boars, as also Porcepics. The Snow in that season, driving
them from the Hills to the Valleys, where they are Killed by the Hunters. There
is likeways great Variety of Fowl. There is none so common as Quails, at two
seasons of the year, that is, the Spring when they come into Italy, and the
latter end of Autumn, at which time they are much fatter and better when they
go from it. It is said that they draw together to the Coast side, and there
wait for the rest of their number a whole Month, and then at last, their
Caravan being complete, they flee away nearer the Sunn in a great cloud. The
Pigione Sotto hanca are the biggest and fattest, and best for eating in the
world: they are good in all seasons of the year. About the time of Vintage
there are great Variety of small Birds, all very fatt and good, and at easy
Rates, amongst which the Ortolani, and Beccafiche are most esteemed.

As for the things to be seen here, they are so many, and so considerable, that
it would require a large Volume to describe them, and there are abundance of
such Books extant, to which I referr you, and especially to one in 80. called
L' Antichita di Roma di Andrea Fulvio: but you must not fail to get an
Antiquario, who for a certain Sum of two or three Crowns will show you all the
particular Antiquities and considerable places of the Town, and as for the
fuller information of them your Book will serve you: I shall only hint at
somethings worthy to be taken notice of; 1. The Court; that is, the Pope,
Cardinals, Prelates, Monsigniorie etc. There are some great Holy days, when the
Pope Celebrats Mass in person; it will be sit to wait upon some of these
occasions, for then you will see the Grandeur of the Court and the form of a
Cavalcata, together with the Popes ordinary Guards. 2. The Churches. 3. The
Palaces; especially those of the Vatican, together with the Bibliotheck and
Gardens of Belvidere, in which amongst other things take particular notice of
the statue of Ly^aon with the Serpents wreathed about him; There is an other
Garden also belonging to the Vatican, in which there are many exotic Plants,
it was planted by the Popes order, by Tobias Aldinus and is Keept still in
reasonable good order; amongst other things you will find the Cameripses, or
Camedactylus, of the bigness of a Low Tree and carrying Fruit; there is
likewise a Grotta or water work, and very fine Fountains of water, about which
grows plentifully the Capillus veneris Major or Ramosus. and Arum Aegyptium
Mathioli, sive Colocasia, which is a plant carrying no stalk, flowr nor fruit in
Italy (I know not what it does in its native Soil) but only broad Leaves very
large and round.

The Palace of Farnese; and in it that Gallery whereof the Painting in Fresco
by Aniball Caraccio is so famous, and the Tauro which is kept in a little House
a part, in the back court of the Palace. It is the noblest piece of Art extant
in Rome although it be very ancient, as being one of those named by Pliny, to have
been in his time in Foro Trajani; yet it is not only entire, but as beautiful
as if it had never been moved out of the place it stands in now.

The Palace of Principe Pamphilio; it stands in the Piazza Navona, where you
may take notice of that Glorious Fountain made by Cavelier Bernini, whereupon
the top of a little artificial Rock, are placed, four great delicate Marble
Statues, representing the four great Rivers of the World, and each of them
pouring out of a Vale placed under one Arm, a great quantity of Water, and in
the middle of the four there stands one of these Gulias graven with Egyptian
Hieroglyphics, brought from A^gypt by the Ancient Romans. They use to stop the
way-goe of the Water, sometimes in the Summer, and let the Place overflow with
Water, and then People come toward the evening, in their Coaches, and drive
softly up and down the water to take the fresco, which is one of the greatest
Gusto's in Rome.

Palazzo Borghese, Standing near to the Ripetta. Palazza Palistrino; and in it
the library, where you may see two copies of the Hortus Eystetensis, one
illuminated and the other not; Mr. Lesty will command you a sight of that when
you please, for it belongs to Cardinal Francisco Barberino.

The Popes Palace of Monte Cavallo, and the Gardens thereof. 4. The Villa's: as
first that of Borghese, which is without the walls: there is a particular Book
to be sold by the House keeper, that sufficiently descrives it and all the
beauties of it, to which I Refer you. 2ly. the villa or Palazzo medici,
belonging to the great Duke of Tuscany. It stands upon the monte Trinita, the
Hall is adorned with a great many Pillars standing about the Walls, of most
delicat Marbles, and the Originalls of a great many Illustres and virtuosi. In
one of the Chambers there is a most beautiful statue of Venus, of Grecian
Antiquity. In the Garden there is a Noble statue of Cleopatra, the Ruins
whereof were repared by Michaell Angelo bona rota, and many other statues Base
Releiv's and Vases, which for Brevities sake I must omit, and refer you to the
particular Books that treat of those things, But most of all to your own
diligence in viewing them and keeping a punctual Register of all that you see,
and so I shall only name some of the Villa's that remain, and are most
considerable. As the Villa Montalto; The Villa Ludovisi, where amongst other
Admirable things the statue of the dying Gladiator is excellent. The Villa
Farnesi; The Villa Pamphilio, which is a pretty way without the walls, and the
rest which I leave to your sight.

5ly. The Castle of St. Angelo, which formerly was the Burial Place of Hadrian
the Emperor. 6. The Hospitalls; Particularly that of St. Spirito, which is a
most magnificent Structure, and well appointed in all things. They will show
you amongst other remarkable things, the Place where the Children of such a
Bigness are permitted to be put in, without any further inquiry made after
them, or who brought them. By this means the Life of many a Child has been
saved, which otherways would have been taken away to prevent the disgrace of
the Parents. They are no sooner put in, but Nurses are got for them: If they be
Boys, when they come to a convenient Age they are put to Trades, according to
their several Inclinations and Capacities. But if they be Girls, then when
they come to the Years of discretion, if they incline not to a Religious Life,
every one of them is provided with so much Portion to Marry her with, out of
the common revenue of the House; And then upon a certain Day appointed for that
purpose; all Zitelle or maids come in Procession, one after another, with their
Faces Veiled, and the Men that come there upon such Days, of purpose to choose
a Wife, (for all of them have a like Portions) pitch upon such as please them
best, and present them a Nosegay, after which, she is sequestered from the rest,
and the Marriage Solemnized, after the Man has given Information of himself and
sufficient Caution that he shall provide a Livelihood for her. There is a very
fine little Garden that belongs to the Hospital lying just upon the Tyber. It
uses to be well furnished with Plants, and I have seen the Dictamnus Creticus
in flower there. 7ly. The Convents; as particularly the French Minims upon the
Monte Trinita. In the upper Gallerie of their Cloister there is a Dyall, where
the Sun beams, entering by a small round hole, Point the Hours. It was made by
Marsennus that famous Mathematician, a Father of their Country and Order. They
have likeways, in a particular part of their Garden some rare Plants, as Malus
punica flore amplissimo pleno and Variegato.

The Minerva; which was anciently the Temple of Minerva, and now is the Chief
Convent of the Domini^ans in Rome. In my time there was a French Father there
called Padre Barilieri Secretary to the General for his Nation; He was a great
Virtuoso, and exceedingly well versed in the whole History of Nature; He had a
very Curious Collection of many Natural Things, and was about to have
Published a Large Book in Folio, wherein he had designed a Natural History,
with a great many cutts, which he showed me. If the Book be Published, I should
be very glad to see it; if he be alive, it will be worth your while to procure
his acquaintance. He has also a Garden well stored with Plants at St. Xisto.

The Roman College; where there is a famous shop and Laboratorie for
Pharmacie, as also a Garden.

8ly. The Capitol; the middle of the Place before it, is the Statue of the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius, a Horseback in Brass; It was brought thither from
the Place before St. John de Lateran, and is thought one of the best Modells in
the World. At the Top of the Stairs, as you enter into the place are two
Horses, one on every side held by a Slave in Marble. They were brought thither
from the Ruins of Pompey's Theater. There is also in the same Place two
Trophies of Marius; there is also Columna milliaris, with a Brass-ball on the
Top of it; there used to be such a one at every miles end, upon the common
Roads; and from thence came their Fashion of counting the miles per Lapides, as
primo ab urbe Lapide was a mile from the Town etc. The Capitol, as it now is,
consists of three Palaces all of Excellent Architecture, and beautified, both
within and without with Painting, Statues, and other Monuments of antiquity;
the particular Relation whereof I referr to the Books that are written thereof,
and particularly to one called Roma antica and Moderna, and to the particular
demonstration of the Antiquario, for I find it will be utterly impossible to
discourse of every particular, unless I should resolve to compile a Volumn.

The rest of the Monuments, and rests or rather ruins of Antiquity, I shall
pass over, and only name a few of them; as for example, first, the Walls of the
City, which were built by Bellisarius Captain of the Guards to Justinian the
Emperor. The breaches have been repaired by several Popes. The Ports for the
most part are the same they were anciently, only the Porta del populo was made
a great deal more stately, at the first Entry of Chris^ina Queen of Sweden
into Rome. There is a long courten of the Wall betwixt Porta del populo and
Villa Borghese, under which it seems the Ground has misgiven, so that the Wall
bends, and is therefore called Muro torto. Near to this place also, is the
Burial Place delle Cortegiane, there being no Christian Burial or Holy Ground
allowed to such persons. There is good Herbarizing about the walls, especially
on the outside, and particularly you will find a Plant there which is not
common else where, at least that I have observed, viz. Sature^a Spicata sive
Thymbra S. Juliani^ (...) Satureia vera Lobelii. Upon the Wall of the City,
close by the Port of St. Paul^ in via ostiensi; there is yet extant a Pyramid
built of Marble, which was the Burial Place of C. Ces^ius Septemvir Epulonum.
Secondly. The old Temples; whereof there are so many that it would be tedious
to describe them all, I shall only name some, viz. The Pantheon now called
Madonna della rotunda; It was built by Marcus Agrippa, Son-in law to Augustus
Caesar, in Honor of all the Gods. It had the Fortune to escape almost totaly,
the ruin, and fury, which the Goths and Vandals brought upon the Roman Empire
and magnificence thereof. I admire the Roof of it, being so large and so flat
without any Pillar, to support it, and although it be a Vault, it has no
nevilstone to bind it in the middle, but in place thereof a round hole so wide
that it lights the whole Room abundantly, nor is there any other Window in the
Fabric. The next thing I admire in it is ^he Doore-Cheeks and couple which is
all of one Piece of white Marble. The Door opens in two leaves, very wide and
very high, they were covered with Corinthian Brass, as was also the whole
Roof, until the time of Urban VIII. who took it off, and covered it with Lead
as it now is, and made thereof the great Altar of St. Peter's, and some pieces
of Ordinance, that are keept in the Castle St. Angelo, as will testify a
particular inscription at the side of the pantheon Door, made by the Popes
command. Upon this occasion was that Pasquinad; Quod non fecerunt Barbari,
fecere Barberini. It has a most stately Portico before the Gate, of a great
many large tall Pillars of Egyptian black and white speckled Marble; the
descent into the Portico from the Street is of ten or twelve steps, but it is
said, before the ruin of the City, that there was as great an ascent to it;
whence it may be gathered, what an universal and great devastation of buildings
must there have been to fill up so great a deepth. And indeed it is observed,
that when they have any occasion to dig, it is long before they come, in most
places, to the terra Virgin, that is, which has not formerly been broke upon:
and when they are digging into old ruins, for Anticails (as they are
continually doing in several places) they leave off when they come to the
Terra Virgin. Before the Portico there is a large coffine, with it is cover and
supporters of Porphyre which they commonly call Agrippa's Tomb.

Near to the entry of the Camp of Vacino, at the bottom of the back stairs
that lead to the Capitol, there is a Chapel under ground, which was formerly
the Prison of St. Peter and St. Paul, when they suffered for the Holy name of
JESUS. It was then called Tullianum, according to that of Cicero; est locus in
carcere quod Tullianum appellatur. The Temple of Saturn is hard by, which in
ancient times was the Aerarium publicum, in which the Public Treasury was
keept.

Thirdly, the Amphitheatres; most part of which are Ruined, especially that
which was built by Titus, now ^alled the Coliseo; by the part thereof that is
standing you may abundantly Judge of the Magnificence of the whole, when it was
extant. There is good Herborizing within it, and there is one Dominicus
Pa^arolus that has Written Catalogus Plantarum Amphitheatralium; with the rest
of his works in ^0. Romae, apud ^ranciscum Monetam 1652. to which I refer You.

Fourthly, the Aqueducts; of which the most part are ancient: when they come
near to the City, they are conveyed under ground to several Fountains in the
City, and some of them so deep, that it is Prodigious by what art they could
have Peirc't so deep, as for example, the Aqua Virgin, which is the sweetest
and best for use in all Rome, is conducted so deep through the Monte Trinita,
That in the French Minims Garden there is a descent of six or seven score steps
to come at it. Amongst all the Fountains in Rome the most beautiful are in the
Piazza Navona, in the Piazza St. Pietro, the Tree Fountane, etc,

5ly The Thermae, or Baths; as the Thermae Diocletianae built by the Emperor
Diocletian. It is said that ten thousand Christians were employed about this
work, and all cruely Massacred when they had finished it. It is now a Monastery
of Carthusians, in whose common Garden I remember to have seen the Myrtus
Buxifoliis. The ruins of Thermae Antonini Caracallae; they are situated ad
Radicem Collis Aventinae. I have seen amongst these Ruins that kind of
Capillary, which is called Hemionitis, and no where else that I Remember of.

Sixthly the two Columns of Antoninus, and Tra^an Emperors; The Statue of St.
Peter stands upon the Top of one, and that of St. Paul upon the other: Trajan
was so well beloved of the People that to make a place, which in honor of him
they called forum Trajani, in the middle of which this Column stands, they
levelled a great Hill, of the precise hight of the Column it self. Both the
Columns are of white Marble, and all the out side Historified in base relieve,
in a spirall line beginning at the bottom and ending at the top. That of Trajan
has the whole story of the Dacian War. There is a great Book in Folio of this
Column, wherein all the figures are cut in Brass, and the Large description
thereof added. I have forgot the Authors name, but I believe You will find the
Book Al insegna di Parigi alla pace from Jacomo Rossi. where you will likewise
find all other sorts of Prints and T^lledouces. The Column of Antoni^us* is
160 foot High and that of Trajan 128. Although they apear to be but small yet each
of them has a Staircase within, that leads to the Top. There are some others
but less Considerable, as that which stands before St. Maria Majore, which was
one of the Pillars of the Templum Pacis, brought hither by Paulus V. who placed
a Brazen Statue of the Blessed Virgin upon the Top thereof. There is likewise
not far from the same place a little Column with a Crucifix on the Top of it,
erected in memory of the absolution given to Henry the IV. King of France; In
the Capitol likewise there are two viz. the Columna milliaris, of which
already, and the Columna Rostrata, which you will see when you view the fine
things within that part of the Capitol which stands next to the River, where
the Hill is most steep and was anciently called Tarpeia Rupes.

Seventhly, the Triumphall Arches; as particularly that of Septimius Severus;
That of Titus; and that of Constantine etc.

Eighthly, the Bridges upon the River. Ninthly, the Obelisks; most part whereof
are graven with Egyptian Hieroglyphics. The best of them is erected in the
middle of the place before St. Peter's, upon the back of four Brazen Lions, and
a large Pedestal of Marble. The next best is at the Porta dell Populo.

Tenthly, the Septem Colles or Montes; upon which Rome is said to be built viz.
Mons Capitolinus, Mons Palatinus, Mons Aventinus, Mons Celius, Mons
Esquiline^s. (where the House of Virgil was and the Garden of Mecoenas,) Mons
Viminalis and Mons Quirinalis, called now Monte Cavallo where the Popes Palace
is.

Eleventhly, some other Hills: as the Janicular, which is a Chain of Hills
without the Walls in the Trans^evere. And the Mons Testaceus, which is nothing
but a heap of broken earthen Pots and bricks; for in ancient times these were
so much in use; and the Figuli or Tradesmen that made them, so numerous, that
there was a necessity of appointing them a particular place, and that by
public edict, for throwing the Ru^bish of their Furnaces and the pot sheards
that broke in the Baking into, least otherwise if it had been permitted to
throw them into the River, it might have occasioned an ^nundation of the City.
In process of time it grew to the bigness of the third part of a Mile in
Compass, and a Hundred and Sixty foot in hight. This Hill is within the Walls
not far from the side of the River, as also Mons Vaticanus in Trans^evere, so
called a Vaticiniis which used to be made there: The Palace of the Vatican
stands upon it.

Twelthly, Roma subterranea; commonly called the Catacombs, whereof Bosio has
written a large Volumn in Folio. There are two of them, both without the Walls.
One of them is at St. Sebastion's Church. They are Caverns dug under ground
in the form of a Town, that is, larger and lesser streets crossing one
another, in some place lower so that You must be forced to stoop, but in others
higher than a Man's hight, and all along as you go upon the one Hand and the
other, as thick as they can stand one by another, are holes or nests wherein
were placed the bodies of the Dead, one by one, upright upon their feet, and so
the nests Plastered over. The Bodies and relics of many Saints and Martyrs
have been found here, and were known to be such by the Cross found upon their
Sepulchers, with this Inscription Pro CHRISTO. You must take good lights and a
good guide to conduct You, for some have mistaken their Way and never found an
outgate. The Second, I need not describe it.

There are several things about Rome worthy the taking notice of, as 1. Ponte
mola a Bridge standing upon the Tevere; in Latin Anio, some two miles from the
Town, before it joins with the Tyber. You go to it by the Port del Populo. It
is considerable for it is Antiquity. It was at this Bridge that Constantine the
great vanquished Maxentius the Tyrant: There having appeared to him before the
Battle, in the Firmament, a red Cross with these words in hoc Signo vinces. the
story is Painted in fresco in the Palace of the vatican by a great Master,
where You may see it and You will seldom miss Painters in the Room a Copying
of it. 2. The City of Tivali, in Latin Tibur; by the way You will pass a little
River, The Sulphurous and noisome smell whereof You will perceive at a Miles
distance; it is of a whitish Color as if Meall were mingled with it; there is
a white slymie Sulphurous substance adhering to the sides and bottom of it,
which is soft whilst it is under Water, but being once dried becomes very
hard, they use to make counterfeit comfits, and which they call comfits of
Tivoli and use to Cheat People with them for sports sake. The River runs into
the Tiverone and spoils the Water thereof, and in my Opinion, does much harm
the Water of the Tyber it self, because the Tiverone joins with it before it
come at the City of Rome. The Town is very ancient, having several marks of
great Antiquity, as Sybilla's Temple, etc. close by the Town the River Teveron^
falling from a great hight over a Rock makes that famous Cascata so much talked
of. It makes a horrid noise and continues frothy and working for a good way
below the fall, and has made a Million of meanders and strange figures in the
Rock where it falls. A little below the fall there is a Bridge over it of a
considerable hight above the Water, where if You stand a while you will
perceive a dew able to wet you, which arises from the fall of the Water after
the River is fallen. Several parts of it are conveyed by aqueducts into the
Town for several uses; as namely one part for the Brass works, where You may
observe, that the Waeer blows the fire, not by moving the Bellows (which is
common) but by affording the Wind; an other part of it is carried to the Villa
d' Este where there is a curious Palace and most curious Gardens with all sorts
of Ingenious Water Works and other ornaments, as statues etc, belonging to
Gardens. Amongst other things there are several Artificial Birds, that sing
their natural Notes by the help of the Water. There is an Organ that plays
sweetly, moved only by the Water, which also furnishes it Wind. The Girandola
is considerable, where the water rises in a gross Body very High, and the air
being Artificially mixed therewith, makes a noice that exactly imitats Thunder.
Tivoli is some eighteen or twenty Miles distant from Rome You may easily go
from Rome and see all things considerable there, and return the same day to
Rome, unless You please rather to go to Frescati, which is a most delicious
little Town about twelve Miles distant from Rome, standing upon the side of a
Hill, from whence in clear weather You may easily discover Rome. The Place is
beautified with many delicat Villa's about it, amongst which the most
considerable are, first, the Belvidere belonging now to the Principe Pamphilio,
the water works whereof are esteemed the best in Italy: There is a Centaur that
Winds a Horn by the help of the Water, with that Loudness, that it can be
heard at six or seven Miles distance. There is a low Room which they call the
Apollo, at the end of which Apollo sits upon the Top of an artificial
Parnassus. with the nine Muses about him, he with his Harp, and they with their
several Instruments of Music, which play by the help of the Water, which is
convoyed under ground and is not seen within the Room. About the middle of the
Room there is a little hole, out of which the Wind (occasioned by the motion of
the Water underneath) comeing forth, has so much strength as to support a
wooden Ball, of the bigness of a Tennes ball, at half a ell's distance and more
from the floor, without ever letting it fall to the ground. 2ly. At half a
miles distance from Frescati are the Ruins of Cicero's Tusculanum, and
Lucullo's country House; as also a curious villa called monte Dragone, where
the House is well adorned with Paintings, etc. and the Gardens with water works.

3ly If You desire not to Return to Rome first, You may go directly from
hence to Castello gondolfo, which is about ^ive miles distant from Frescati,
and fourteen from Rome. It is a most delicious Country House of the Popes, To
which he uses to retire some Months in the Summer, for the good Air's sake, it
hes the Prospect of a most delicat lake, encompased with Hills, that are all
shadowed with Trees, where amongst other pleasures you will not want that of
Herbarizing.

Being returned to Rome you may make another little Journey with your
convenience to Ostia, which is some twelve miles distant from Rome down the
River Tyber, it was of old the great Harbor for all the Ships and Galleys that
belonged City and Empire, cut out as it seems by Art, but now through long
neglect filled up and useless. Having seen all and dyned, you may return
before night to Rome; it will be fit you be at the pains to make another
Journey to Caprarolla, one of the noblest Palaces in Italy, built by the famous
Architect Vignoli, by order of Cardinal Alexander Farnese. It belonges to the
Duke of Parma. It is distant from Rome Miles It is in figure, pentagone, having
five very High and equal faces, with a Court perfectly round in the middle, as
likewise are the Galleries and Corredor's about it. Morover there is almost as
much lodging below ground as above. The Hangings, Statues, Pictures, as also
the Gardens, Fountains, and other embellishments, do well suit the
magnificence of the Palace.

Having seen Rome and the Places about it. It will be fit to make the Voyage of
Naples. The Months of April and October are most convenient for this Journey,
the heat being too great in Summer, and the Snow and Rain troublesome in
Winter.

From Rome to Naples.
Miles. Marin^, 12 Velitre, 08. Sezza 15 Biperno, 04 Terrazina, 10. Portella,
03. Fondi, 05. Itri, 05. Mola. 04. Tragetto, 10.
Pass the River Garrigliano.
Sessa, 07. Carionole, 04. Capua, 12. Auersa, 07. Naples 08. 114.
As You go out at the Port St. Gioua^ni, all along the Campania on every side
of the Highway, You will meet with many Ruins of Ancient Burial-Places for
several Miles from the City.

Velitre; is an Ancient City of the Volsci, much famed also for the Parents of
Octavius Augustus, who were Originaly of this Place. Upon the Way from Veletri
to Sezza, upon the Hill-side under Sarninetta, there are some Ancient Ruins
supposed to be the Tres Taberna^, of which St. Luke speaks in the 28. Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles.

Sezza, formerly Setia; was much commended for its Wine, whence that of Juvenal.

-- Tunc illa time cum pocula sum* Gemmata and lato Setinum ardebit in auro.
Piperno; in Latin Privernum; and the Inhabitants Privernati; near to this
Place, Iris Florentina, grows abundantly.

Terracina; was Anciently called Auxur, in the Language of the Volsci, of whom
this was the Metropolis. Strabo says that it was called Trachina, quasi
Aspera from the Rockiness of the Hill upon which it is Placed; although the Town
be Ancient, it is not very considerable, it is the last Place of the
Ecclesiastic Estate toward Naples; Passengers use to Dine here at a pitiful
Inn without the Town, where there is no manner of Furniture, but VVood to make
Fire: it not being secure for any Body to live in it, because of the Turks that
often Land here, and take what they can meet with. When the People that keep
the House see any Strangers Arrive, instantly they make Fire and bring
Provision from the Town. The Sea comes very near to the Foot of the Hill where
the Town stands, and on that side which is toward Naples, the Rock is
precipitious, and betwixt it and the Sea, leaves but a very narrow and strait
Passage, which one Man may Guarde against a Hundred. Fondi is the first Town
you meet with in the Kingdom of Naples; here you must give notice to the
Officers appointed for that purpose of your intended Journey for Naples, and
cause registrat your Name, together with the marks of your Horse, that he may
be the better known when you return, to be the same that you brought along with
you from Rome, or otherways you will not miss to be challenged upon your
return, and stopped, until you can produce a Certificat that he is the very same
you brought into the Kingdom with you. There being a General Prohibition, the
observance whereof is Strictly looked to, against carrieing Horses or Mares out
of the Kingdom, into any foreign part, least the breed of them, which is
esteemed amongst the best in Europe, should become common to other Nations.
Notwithstanding of this severity, sometimes with credit, and sometimes with a
little Money, a Man may obtain permission for the Transporting of one or more,
either Horses or Mares.

Mola, is one of the most pleasant places in the World; being close upon the
Sea side, and but a little way from Gaieta, to which you may go either by Sea
or Land. It is likeways hard by the ruins of the Ancient City Formiae, where
Cicero had his Villa Formiana. The place abounds with many plants, and great
Variety of the choicest Fruits; especially the Agrumi, such as Citrons,
Oranges, Limons etc, of all sorts.

If ye please to go to Gaieta, it is worth the while: It stands at the
extremity of of a Promontory or Tongue of Land that runs out into the Sea, from
the main-Land about three miles, and by that means becomes peninsule, and
forms on the side toward Rome, betwixt it and Terracina, that Sinus
Gaitanus, about twelve miles in length. The Town is pleasantly Situated and
strongly. There is a great Rock hard by, which is rent from Top to Bottom,
which they say, happened when the Savior of the World Suffered upon the Cross.
There is excellent Herbarizing all the way betwixt it and Mola.

Trajetto is a Castle near the place where the Ancient City of Minturnae stood,
where there is yet to be seen an Amphitheatre almost entire, and the remains of
a great Aqueduct: It was amongst the Marshes near to Minturnae, that C. Marius
did hide himself, when he fled from his Enemies; whence that of Juvenal,
Exilium and carcer Minturnarumque Paludes,
Et Mendicatus victa Carthagine Panis.


You must pass at this place the River Garigliano, called Li^is Anciently.

Capua, is a new City standing upon the side of the River Vulturnus, and some
two miles from it, the Ruins of the Old famous Capua which in the Old Romans
Time, was esteemed one of the most delicious Places in the World. There are
yet Vestiges of the Gates of the City, of a Theater, of a great many sumptuous
Temples, Cisternes under gronnd, and a great many other things; that evidently
show it to have been a magnificent City. The Country from Vulturnus to Naples,
is called the Campania Felice, and is indeed the fertilest soil and
bautifullest Country that my Eyes ever beheld.

Aversa is a new City, extructed out of the Ruins of Atella, It is distant 8
Miles from Naples, and famed for a kind of Wine called Asprin^.

That way which leads from Rome to Naples, was Anciently called Via Appia,
from Appius Claudius the Censor, who caused Pave this way from Rome, just to
Capua. It begins at the Port now called St. Sebastian, but Anciently Porta
Capena, from the Capenati a people of Latium, to which that way did lead. The
Via Appia is of that breadth that one Chariot may easily pass another. The
Emperor Trajan did renew it, and continue the Pavement even to Brindici,
drying the marshes, plaining the Hills, and filling up the Valleys. By this
way Anciently did pass the greatest part of the Triumphs; whence it was called
Regina viarum: whence that of Papinius;

Appia cunctarum fertur Regina viarum.

Although this way be Ruined in many places, yet it is wonderful to see, in how
great perfection a great deal of it continues. Without doubt it has been a
matter of vast Expense to make a way of that Length, and Breadth so well paved,
with Quadrangular Stones, that even to this Day (although it be of common and
frequent Passage) continues as entire as if it were newly done. Upon both
sides of this way, as far as Capua, there are a great many Ancient Sepulchers;
many whereof are altogether ruined, and some almost entire, as yet; in one of
these Sepulchers, in the Reign of Alexander VI. (as Volateranus tells) the Body
of a Delicat young Woman, was found altogether entire in a Marble Chist. She
was of incomparable beauty having her long Flaxen Hair drawn together upon her
Head with a Circle of Gold. The Body did almost swim in a mervellous kind of
Liquor and had a burning Lamp at the Feet thereof, which the Air, coming in at
the opening of the Sepulcher, did instantly extinguish. The Body (as did appear
by the Letters graven upon the place) had lain there thirteen Hundred Years.
Some have been of Opinion that it was the Body of Tulliola, the dearly Beloved
Daughter of Cicero. It was presented in its integrity to the Conservators of
Rome, and for some Days keept in the Capitol as a singular curiosity; but Pope
Alexder coming to understand it, caused it to be thrown into the Tyber.

I must not omit to tell you, that there is some incommoditie in this Journey
both as to Dyeting and Lodging; and sometimes there is peril from the Banditi;
But he that will gather Roses, must not be afraid to prick his Fingers:
Besides, that danger is but sometimes, and you may probably find the way clear,
especially, if the Viceroy be a stirring Active Man, as it often happens: For
then the Banditi will hardly dare to come so far down from the Hills* as the
Via appia, or Highway to Naples.

Naples was Anciently called Parthenope, from one of the Sirens, Buried in this
place, (who as the Fables say) Drowned her self for Grief, that She could not
Charm Ulysses and his Companions. Hence Silius lib: 12.

Sirenum dedit una tuum memorab^^^ nomen.
Parthenope muris Acheloias, aequore cujus
Regnavere d^l cantus, cum dulce per undas,
Exitium miseris caneret non Prospera nautis.
It was built Closs upon the Sea, at the foot of most pleasant Hills; First
built by the Cumani or Inhabitants of Cuma; who being taken with the sweetness
of the Air and Pleasantness of the Place; did daily increase in number;
insomuch that the Cumani that lived at Cuma, took a Resolution utterly to Ruin
Parthen^pe ^east their own City should become deso^at. But it being Ruined,
there came so great a Pestilence upon Cuma, as carried away Multitudes, and
having consulted the Oracle about the cause of this Mortality; it was answered
that this fate had come upon them for the Ruin of Parthenope; and that if they
ever hoped to be free from this disease, they should first restore it, whence
with all diligence they went about the Restoration thereof, and called it
Neapolis, that is to say the new City. The sweetness of the Air, and delicacy
of the Country about is so great, that many Emperors and Roman Senators being
wearied with the Wars, and weightiness of Government, did repair to this place,
that they might live pleasantly and Peaceably, and give themselves to the Study
of Letters; amongst which were Virgil, T. Livius, Horatius, Claudianus ^ and a
great many more: At this very present it is no less frequented by the Nobility
and Gentry of the whole Kingdom, who for the most part have their own Palaces
and pass the greatest part of the Year here; so that for Nobility and Gentry
there are few Cities in the World more considerable than this. I think it is
for this Reason, that it is commonly called Napoli la Gentile: Nor is it to be
passed by, that it gives name to a Kingdom; which is not very Ordinary.

The City is big and sumptuously built from the Sea to these pleasant Hills
about it. It is very well fortified with strong Walls and Castles, especially
since the days of Charles V. who built the Castle of St. Elm and called it la
Brilia, that is, Bridle; intending to make it so, to the mutinous Humor of
that people, and it may be alluding to the Arms of the City, which is an
unbridled Horse; the exact emblem of the disposition of that people, as witness
the innumerable Tumults and revolts both of old and late Years made by them. I
confess there is no small occasion given them by the severe domination of
Strangers over them; and it is strange that having so many brave and valourous
Men amongst them, they should more readily agree to submit their necks to the
Yoke of a Stranger, than to the sweet Scepter of a Native of their own number
and Nation. It is thought the great emulation, (which the Spaniards as wisely,
as industriously keep up to the hight) amongst the Princes, who are but too
numerous for the extent of the Kingdom, is the great cause of their unhappiness.

You may take notice of these particulars within the Town. 1ly. The Churches;
of which this City has a greater number, than any other of its bigness in
Europe. Amongst the rest, that of the Annunciata, is so Rich; that the Rent of
the Hospital thereof is capable to entertain, 5000 Poor, part whereof are
Children found. St. Chiana, together with the Monastrie of Nuns consisting of
400 with as many servants, is very glorious; It was Built by Agnes of Spain
Queen to King Robert. There are many curious Sepulchers to be seen here of
Kings, Queens, and their Children. In the Church of St. Dominico is to be seen
the Image of the Crucifix, that said to St. Thomas Aquinas; been scripsisti do
me* Thoma. In the Church of the Frat^ di monte Oliueto, the true Pictures of
Ferdinand, the first and the second; and Alfonsus the First; both Kings of
Naples, are so Admirably well done that they seem to be living. There is
likewise Buried here Alexander ab Alexandro, who composed that learned work
Genialium dierum. The Church called the Domo, has a Chapel composed of
Marble, Jasper, Gold and Brass; wherein is keept the Head of St. Gennaro, and a
little Phiole of his Blood all together fixed, which being approached to the
Head of the St. ^immediatly begins to boyll, dissolves and becomes clear. The
most ancient of all the Churches is that of St. Paul, keept now by the Jesuits;
It was formerly the Temple of Castor and Pollux.

2. The Religious Houses or Convents; of which there are so great a number,
that the Dominicans alone have seventeen. The Chartrous convent stands upon the
Hill, a little beneath the Castle St. Elm^' It has the pleasantest Situation
that I ever beheld; one may discover from it the whole City and Suburbs of
Naples, a great part of the Campania Felice, the monte Vesuvio, all the Bay of
Naples, the Island of Capreae, the Hill Posilipo, Puteoli, Baii, Cuma, etc. The
Cloister of the convent is all of white Marble, and in short, both the Church
and whole Convent are altogether Magnificent.

3ly. The Hospitals; which are about twelve in number; amongst which, that of
the Annunciata and of the Incueabili are the most considerable. It is said that
they Marry 665. Maids every Year, and the least portion they give with any is
24 Ducats, and the greatest 300.

4ly. The Castles; of which there are 4. The Castle d'Ovo stands within the Sea
upon a Rock, built of an Oval Figure by Willam III. a Norman. The Castle Nov^
was built by Charles the first, Brother to St. Jews, but it was Ferdinand of
Aragon that fortified it so well. It is of a quadrangular figure, Built of
polished Stone as hard as Marble; it has four great Bastions, and five
Towers, together with strong ramparts, and deep Ditches, which the Sea water
fills: It is ordinarily keept by a Garrison of the Spaniards Consisting of 500.
There is a great Magazin of all kinds of Arms and Engines for War keept within
it. In the middle of it stands the Governors Palace, capable to Lodge a King.
It is excellently furnished with Hangings of silk and gold, many excellent
Statues and Pictures. Amongst other fine things there is a Cabinet furnished
with all sorts of curiosities. The Castle of St. Elm stands upon the top of a
Rock, commanding all about it; It Is Garrison consists of 250. Spainards. It was
built by King Robert the first, Son to Charles II. but afterward far better
fortified with great Bastions by the Emperor Charles V. who called it La
Brillia di Napoli.

The Castle Capuano (so called from it is situation which is near to the Port of
Capuano) is rather a Palace than a Fortress where the Magistrates of the City,
and Officers of justice keep their Assemblies.

5. The Palaces; whereof there are a very great number, amongst which that of
the Viceroy; That of the Prince of Salern* which the Jesuits now possess, are
very considerable. The Palace of the Duke of Gravina is most superb. That of
the Carafi is adorned with abundance of excellent statues of Marble and Brass.
There be many other worthy to be seen: as also the beautiful Garden of Don
Garcia di Toledo, which is full of Grotto's, Fountains, Water works, statues
etc.

6. The Harbor, or Sea Port; which is fortified with a Superb mole, first made
by Charles II. And then very much mended by Alfonsus the first, for the greater
security of the Harbor.

7. The Public Places, the streets, and the avenues of the Town.

8. The Suburbs; which are seven in number; amongst which the most
considerable, is that which leads A la grotio di Posilipo; near to the entry of
which Grotto stands la mergelina, looking into the Bay; it was sometimes the
House of pleasure of Sanazarius that famous Poet, who gave it to the Religious
men called Servi. This Suburb is no less than two miles in length from the City
to the Grotto of Po^lipo. The Circuit of the Town and Suburbs is counted to be
about six miles: and the Inhabitants to be about 30^000. Souls. Statius
Papinius and Jacobus Sanazarius; both excellent Poets; together with many other
great Virtuosi were borne in this City.

It will be worth the while also to take a view of the Booksellers Shops,
there being many good Books Printed here which hardly or not all can be found
with us; as for example, the works of Baptista Porta, whereof the Impressions
at Naples were both the first and fairest, and the Cutts for the most part
Tailledouce. The works of Fabius Columna, which are almost out of Print, and
especially his Phytobasanos. It may likewise happen that there are some new
pieces emitted which will never come to our hands for at least, not tell after
a great while. It is likely too that You may meet with many other Books, that
in other places You had sought in vain for: there are many learned and Curious
men in this City, and they are as mortal here as elsewhere, and as ordinary a
thing it is to sell their Books.

You will likewise meet with a great many curiosities of all sorts, espccially
from the Levant: some natural; as stones, shells, Animalls, or parts of them,
fruits etc. Others artificial; some of Leather, as Purses, Letter-cases, cups,
and a great many things of that kind, usualy brought from Allepo and
Constantinople: Some of Silk either alone, or mingled with gold and silver; as
Sashes, Girdles, Cravats, Night-Caps, wastcoats, stockings, etc. Outlandish
Arms, as Cimetres, Poyniards, Bows and Arrows, with several sorts of fire
Arms. Medalls ancient and modern: Intalio' s Chameo' s etc. But in these You
must take some heed, that You mistake not the modern for antique.

Having well viewed and considered the City and all things in it. It will be
necessary to see those things that are considerable about it. And first the
Hill Posilipus, famous for it is Gardens and Houses of Pleasure, for it is Fruits
and Wines, especially the greco di Posilipo. But that which is most Admirable
in this Hill is the Passage cut quite through it. By Cocceius of whom Pontanus
says, Nescio an is fuerit M. Cocceius Nerua Augusti Avus, qui Romae aquarum
curam habuit tulitque m^ximam Architecturae Laudem. Howeve^ it is certain he
must have been a man of great Riches that durst undertake so great a work, at
his oun expense. It is called la Grotta di Posilipo, and is very near a mile in
length, cut through the Rock. As for the breadth of it, one Coach may pass
another with ease. And for the Hight, I believe a man on Horseback will hardly
touch the Roof of it with a Lance; At the two ends it is some what higher than
in the middle, I think of purpose that the light might enter the farther. When
You enter at the one end You will very hardly perceive the light in the other
end, but as You advance it begins to appear by little and little. In the Just
middle of it, on that side which is next the Sea, there is a little Chapel,
where a Lamp is keept continually burning, but it is more out of Devotion than
for any light it gives: betwixt the Chapel and the end, as it were about the
middle on every side of the Chapel there is a hole cut through the Hill which
serves for a window, but it gives little light. It is exceeding dusty,
especeially if there be many Horses Ryding together although it be paven with
stone, because there comes no Rain to wash it, and none takes pains to make it
clean. Those that go from Naples to Pozzuolo if they hear any Horses Coaches
or Carts coming toward them, least they should stop the way, or unawares Justle
one another, they use to cry aloud dal mare, which when the others hear, they
cry in like manner dal monte and so those that go from Naples take that side
of the Grotto, which is next the Sea and these that go to it take the side next
the Hill; and so avoid all encumbrance. At the mouth of the Grotto, upon the
top thereof is the famous Sepulcher of Virgil. There is little remaning of it
now except a few Ruins of an old Brick wall in the middle whereof anciently
there did stand nine small Pillars, which sustained a Marble U^^, in which were
contained the Poets ashes, with this Distich. Mantua me genuit, Calabri
rapuere, tenet nunc
Parthonope; cecini pascua, rura, duces.


Not far from this Tomb, is the Sepulcher of that famous Poet Sanazarius, in a
Place called Mergelina, a Villa given him by King Frederick, where he built a
Church in Honor of the BIessed Virgin, and composed that incomparable Poem de
partu Virginis. He is Buried within the Church in a Tomb of pure Marble upon
which his statue done to the life stands with this Epitaph by Cardinal ^embo.

Da Sacro cineri flores, hic ille Maroni Sineerus, musa proximus, ut tumulo.
There are many other excellent Statues, Base Relieves, and Pictures within this
Church well worthy the seeing.

When you go to Pozzuolo, you must take a Guide with you to show you all the
considerable Places. It will be a good days Journey because You have many
Things to see and consider, and therefore you must part early in the Morning
from Naples. The first thing you will meet with upon the Way, (but you turn
out of the common way) is the Lago di Agnano at the side of which are the
Natural stoves of St. German, which are certain little rooms, where the hot
and Sulphurous Vapors entering from the Ground quickly provoke sweating, and
is commended in several diseases.

At a little distance from thence, upon the side of the Lake is the Grotto de I
Cani. It is a little hole dug out of the side of a Brae where two or three
Persons scarcely can stand. The Floor of it is ordinarily wet and dirtie, out
of which there rises a Poisonous Vapor, in form of Smoke, but it ascends
not above a Foot from the Ground. They use to try it with Torches and Dogs,
which you must carry from Naples with you, for you will not find them upon the
Place. As for the Torches, the guide lights two, and then reaches one of them
to the Smoke, which instantly extinguishes, as if it were blown out by the
force of Powder: Then he lights it at the other, and so renews the experiment
as often as you please, keeping always one lighted, until your Curiosity be
satisfied; as for the Dogs he holds their Nose into the Vapor, and instantly
they begin to fetch their Breath thick, and in a very little space are quite
suffocated. If ye let them ly long, they will never recover, but if ye take
them immediately when they are fallen down and throw them into the Lake, they
will by little and little return to live again. I guess this Vapor to be so
much like the Damps, that are sometimes found in our Coal-pitts, only, with us,
they are soon dissipated, but here this lasts continually, and (which is yet
more strange) in an open Air; but it may be the openness of the Air is the
Reason why the Vapor ascends no higher. I remember one of our Dogs did
recover without being thrown into the Lake, which makes me believe, that it is
not any peculiar Virtue in the water (as is commonly said) that restores them
to life, but only the freedom of the Air, with the help whereof Nature
reinforceth it self, the life being yet not quite extinct, which is cleared by
this, that if they lie any considerable time in the cave, neither Air nor water
will recover them. It is very True that, That which was thrown in the Lake
recovered much sooner, and better: whereas the other remained paralytick, and
impotent to move his hinder quarters: (though he could Sit upon his foremost
Legs and bark*) for almost two hours thereafter. It seems there is something
in this Vapor or Damp that coagulats or fixes the Spirits, that they cannot
move or circulat in the Body.

From hence you take the Way to Pazzuolo, near to which you will meet with a
Place called la Solfatara, it is a large plain, Oval in Figure, representing a
Theater, it is above 1200 Foot in length and 1000 in breadth, it is compassed
about with white and high Hills, from which in many Places, arise Clouds of
smoke, of a Sulphurous smell, rolling up into the Air impetuously, with great
crackling. Some of these spiracles are very small, so that it is a Pleasure, to
see the Smoke ascend, by a direct line of the bigness of cane, and sometimes
smaller by much. About these spiracles you will see Quantity of the Flowers of
Brimstone sublimed; but I suspect the internal use of them, because of the
mixture of other minerals wherewith they may be infected: But for external
uses, I am not so doubtful, as also of the Spirit which by the help of
convenient Glasses might be gathered in abundance from these spiracles. When
you consider the plain you will wonder to hear it sound under your Horse-feet,
as you were Riding over a large Floor, which is caused by the Vacuitie
underneath. All the Hills about abound in veins of Alum whereof some is
scissile; nitre, Sulphur, Vitriol and Salt Ammoniac. The Vitriol is of a
Delicat blew Color and much finer than that which is commonly called
Roman-Vitriol. It will be worth your while to take particular notice of these
minerals, how they are extracted out of their mines, what differences there are
of every Species, how they are mixed with one another sometimes, by what Art
they are purified, and with what Instruments, and to what use they are put. I
would have you take a Parcel of every sort and bring along with you, which you
may box up at Naples with Cotton, and send before you to Rome.

Having done these things, you come to Pozzuolo; in Latin Puteoli. The City is
now much Ruined; but was Stately and Rich of Old. Cicero writing to Atticus
says quid potui non videre cum per Emporeum puteolanum iter facerem; which is
Chieflly to be understood of that part of the Town, which stood upon the Shore
where the Arti^ans, and chiefly the Goldsmiths, had their Shops, whereof there
remains little now except the Ruins, and Vestiges: And yet beneath the Church
di Giesu Maria, possessed by the Dominicans, when the Wind dryves out the Sea,
they do find sometimes several Precious Stones, some cut, some uncutt; and if
you be Curious to enquire you will find People that make a Trade to sell such
things amongst other Anticails. I remember there came several of these Persons
to our Lodging-House, with Medals, Intaglio's, Lucerne Antiche etc. But I found
many of them to be cheats, and but modern, brought thither from Naples and
other Places, of purpose to cheat Strangers, who are ordinarily more Curious
than knowing of these things; As for Medals, were they never so Ancient, they
are little worth unless they be well preserved, and the Characters and
impressions easy to be discerned. And for Intaglio's unless the Figure be
good* and well done, and the Stone entire and unbroken, they are not worth
much. The great Church now dedicated to St. Proclus was anciently dedicated to
Octavianus Augustus. It is a Sumptuous Fabric of great square Marble Stones;
serving for the whole thickness of the Wall, with great and high Corinthian
Pillar's, and other Excellent Ornaments of Architecture.

Here are also be seen many Ruins of great antiquity, amongst which she
Gardens of Cicero famous for his Academy, where he wrote his Quaestiones
Academicae. But this City, in diverse ages has suffered so much by the tumults
of Wars, as also by the eruptions of fire and earthquakes, that it is
wonderful there should yet remain any vestiges of Antiquity. The Soil about
it is most fertile and fruitful, and nature produces here many Plants of it is
oun accord, which in other places are kept in Gardens, not without care: among
others I remember to have seen the Ricinus or Palma Christi not only growing
wild but out-living that Winter, and continuing fresh green and strong in the
month of March; although it be an Annual Plant with us, that can hardly be raised
upon a hot bed.

You may have your Horse at Pozzuolo, and hyre a boat to cross the Bay for
seeing of the following things, And 1. hard by the City the remains of that
Superb mole, which having been ruined by storm was afterward Restored by the
Emperor Antoninus: But at present all that Remains is 12. or 13. great Pillars
built of Brick and stones of vast bigness. They appear so many towrs, over
which there are yet remaining, but half Ruined, some Arches. This fashion of
Moles seem to be the best, because the Pillars and Arches are sufficient to
break the water and secure the Ships within, and by letting part of the water
enter betwixt the Pillars lessens it is violence, so that the Pillars suffer not
half so much, as if they were one continued wall. The Emperor Caligulae built
a bridge of boats from Pozzuolo to Baii upon which he went in Triumph first on
Horsback and then in Chariot, but it was of small continuance and served only
to be the subject of discourse in future ages. Having passed these Pillars. You
put ashore hard by the Lacus Lucrinus which as some said was so called a Lucro
from the profit which it yielded to the Romans by the great abundance of
excellent Fish especialie Oysters, which were esteemed before any other in
Italy: Whence Martial to express the Gluttony of a certain Person.

Ostrea tu sumis stagno saturata Lucrino.

But there is little water in it now, it being almost dried up by that most
Terrible eruption of the Solfatara which happned in the Year 1538. the 29. of
September two hours after Sun set, the whole country about having been
troubled for two Years before with Earthquakes: At which time there burst out
in one night so great a quantity of fire, Stones, Pumecks, and ashes, that
near to the monte Barbaro formerly called mons Gaurus it made another Hill,
near three miles in compass, and almost as high as the monte Barbaro. The south
part of it looks to the Sea, the north reaches to the Lacus Avernus, and on the
East it is joined with the foot of Monte Barbaro. It is called monte Nuovo.
These ashes did not only make this Hill, but covered likewise a great part of
the Country about, Killing both beasts and Trees, and ruining the Vintage for
that Year. The Sea in the mean time retired above 200 paces, leaving abundance
of Fish upon the dry sands, and many Wells of fresh Water, which sprung here
and there.

2. The Lacus Avernus is about half a miles distance from the Lago lucrino. It
is compassd about with small Hills which they say were formerly covered with
Trees, that did over shadow the water, and make it look black, and likewise
did hinder the Sulphurous Vapors that did arise from the water to dissipat,
so that the Air being infected with these vapors became so noisome especially
to Fowls, that they could not live in it, and hence came the Name Avernus. At
present there is little or no Wood about it, nor is the Air any thing more
noisome there, than in other places about, and I have seen Fowls haunting
about it and swimming in it. It is said to be very deep and for that reason
without Fish but I am not certain hereof.

3. Upon the west side of the Lake, cut into the Hill is the Antrum Sybillae
commonly called Grotta della Sybilla, but not truly, for the true Cave of
Sybill^ is at C^^^a. This seems rather to have been a common passage from
Avernus to P^ia, but is now stopped at the one end by the falling down of the
Hill above. The passage is large and High, but altogether dark, and therefore
You must be guided by Torch light. When You are got a good way in, upon the one
side there is a little narrow passage of about three or fourscore foot in
length, that leads into a handsome large Chamber, which although it be now much
ruined, appears to have been Richly adorned, the Roof of it being Painted with
Gold and Blew, and the Walls with curious figures of diverse colors and the
Pavement consisting of many small pieces like unto Mosaic. It is a vulgar
error that this was Sybilla's Chamber, and that the Temple of Apollo, where
she received her Responses, was hard by upon the Right Hand as you enter to the
Lake; But it is not so, for the Ruins of that Place appear not to have been
any Temple at all, But rather a Superb Bathing House, such as that of Baia, for
it has the same order of Windows, and Spiracles for conducting of the Vapors.
But to return to the Grotto, upon the left hand, as You enter into this
Chamber, there is another Passage, some what higher and larger than the first,
about 40. foot in length cut out into the Hill, which leads into another
Chamber, from which there is a narrow passage, which leads into another
Chamber, and several other little passages and Rooms which I do not
distinctly remember, only this much that in one of them, there is as it were a
little Pool of Warm Water. In this Room the heat is so great, that it is
impossible to continue any time in it without excessive Sweating, which makes
me to believe, that these Rooms were intended for no other use than Bathing and
Sweating.

4. The Remains or Ruins; and first Bagno di Cicerone. 2ly. Bagno di Tritoli;
quasi Frittoli, q^od Corpora ibi fricrentur, The Entry to it is large and
high. Toward the ground it is cold, but if you stand upright You must needs
Sweat for Heat, and the farther one goes in, the greater the Heat is. At the
bottom of the Rock within Sea-mark, and even where the Sea covers it, the Sand
is so Hot that one cannot lift a handful of it.

5. Baia; So called from Baius, the Companion of Ulysses, who was Buried there.
It was a most delicat City, but now altogether Ruined, and in the place of it
there is a Castle lately Built with a a Garrison of 30. Soldiers for Securing
the Port, which is very safe for Galleys, but not deep enough for Ships. The
whole Bay, or Sinus of Baia, is exceedingly Pleasant; all that Tract betwixt
Avernus and the Mons Misenus being full of the Remains of great and Noble
structures. Many of the Roman Emperors took great pleasure in this place, and
and spared no cost for the beautifying of it. Horace, who was no ill Judge,
gives this Testimony of it, Nullus in Orb locus Baiis praelucet amoenis.

As You go forward from Baia, You will still be finding something worthy the
Remarking; as, 1. The House of Agrippina, Nero's Mother, who was put to Death
here by her Sons Command. It is commonly said to be her Sepulcher, but it is
not true. There is yet to be seen the Plaster of the Roof and walls in
several Curious figures, but they are much defaced by the smoke of the Torches
which strangers from all parts so frequently carry down with them. 2. That
delicat Pleasant Field called the Eligium, so much renowned by Virgil in the
6th. Book of the Aeneids. All the Noble Persons that lived here abouts, or did
otherwise attend upon the Court, which did often happen to be here, likewise
those that for their Health's sake came to the Bath's, used to walk in this
place for their Recreation and Converse. I am easily inclined to believe that
considering it is Situation, Prospect, and the Order that it was keept in, when
so many great Persons frequented it, It could not choose but have been the most
delicious Place in the whole World, and no wonder that it Prompted Virgil to
Borrow both it is name and his Conceit in expressing and describing the Place of
the Blessed Souls Departed. I saw it in the beginning of the Month of March,
and then the Heat was considerable, and the Place not only green but covered
with Anemonies and other Flowers. Hard by this, is the Piscina Miraebilis: it
is a Cistern for keeping of fresh Water, of a vast Bigness, the Roof whereof is
supported by 48. great Pillars on every side. The whole inside of it is
Crusted over with a kind of Plaster as hard as Marble, which whither it was so
made by Art, or by the Continuance of the Water in it, I know not, but I think
it probable that both have contributed to it. Boccace in his Book of Rivers,
believes it to have been built by Agrippa, for preserving of fresh Water, for
the Commodity of the Navy which used to stay at Misenum. The Water was brought
to it by aquedu^ts from Serino. 3. Mons Misenus or the Promontorium Misenum, so
called from Misenus, Aeneas's Trumpeter, who was Buried here. It is of a
Reasonable Hight, and without doubt the prospect from it is Noble; but I did
not ascend it, by reason of the Company that would not stay for me.

4. The Centum Cellae; which are a continued Fabric built of Brick with great
Art under ground, it seems they have been Cisterns for Conserving of Water. In
short, all this piece of ground is full of ancient Ruins, and it is not easy
to Guess, what every one of them in Particular has been.

Having vieued all these things, you either go straight to Cuma, or else you
leave it for another Day, and so return to Pozzulo, by the same Boat that
waited upon you from it, and so return by Horse, by the lower but plainer and
more pleasant Way, to Naples, from from whence the next Day you may go to Cuma,
in Latin Cumae; a City built upon the Top of a Hill six Miles from Naples;
upon the highest Top of this Hill stood the Temple of Apollo built by Dedalus,
when he fled from the wrath of King Minos. It was in this Temple that Sybilla
Cumea did pronounce the Oracles of Apollo. Hence that of Virgil, At pius Aeneas
arces quibus altus Apollo
Praesidet, horrendaeque procul secreta Sybillae.


As you descend from Cuma upon that side that looks to the East, is to be seen
the Frontis-peece of the true Grotta of Sybilla, which was cut out of the solid
Rock, which Virgil describes, Excisum Euboicae latus ingens rupis in antrum.

There are many other Ancient Ruins worthy the taking notice of, which you may
have leisure enough to observe, and have time enough to return to Naples at
Night.

The next Day you may take Horse again and a Guide with you from the Town, to
see the burning Hill, about 8 Miles distant from the Town; It is called in
Latin Vesuvius, and in Italian Monte di soma, from the great Plenty of all
things wherewith it abounds. the Hill it self is of a very Large Compass, and
about the middle divided in two Tops, of which one is much abated of its length
by the burning. Before the first eruption of the Fire, it was much higher than
the other, but now it is by much the lower. It is not easily accessible both in
regard of its steepness, and the great Quantity of Ashes that cover it every
where, by Reason whereof, the ascent becomes slippery and uncertain. In the
ascending, you may take nottice of many several Channels, some larger and
deeper, some narrower and shallower made by the Torrents of burning Sulphur and
other Mineral Substances, which Boiled out at the Top in the last great
eruption it made, which torrents were carried several Miles into the Gulf or
bay of Naples without being quenched, and killed the Fishes in the middle of
the deep. You may likeways take notice of the various Mineral Substances, and
Stones burned to Pumick, which are scattered over the whole Hill. When you come
at the Top you will see the great Gulf made by the several eruptions, which is
suposed to be six Miles in compass about the Brimmes, so that it makes a very
large plain Field at the Bottom, that in deepness from the brimm is not above a
hundred Yards, it is all covered with Ashes, and nothing green in it, except it
be some few Tufts, of I cannot tell what, not being able to Judge of them at
that distance. The descent to the Bottom at some places seems to be easy
enough, but we could find none so hardy as to venture to show us the way,
although some of our Guides had undertaken it before, and to speak truth, it is
no great discretion to venture so far down upon a Ground, which probably is not
able to support one, being nothing in appearance but a Field of Ashes of
uncertain deepthness. You will see in a Hundred diverse Places, Spiracles, some
greater, some smaller, out of which the Smoke rises impetuously, as it were
shot out of a Gun, and with a continual Crackling, like that of Thunder at a
distance, or the quenching of Fire. When you have satisfied your Curiosity of
seeing all, you must return the same Day, and take your Horse where you left
him, about the middle of the Hill; and so return to Naples. It is usual for
Strangers to light at a Village about midway to the City, to Taste of these
excellent Wines, that grow upon the fertile places of the Hill, and
particularly of Lachryma Christi, otherways called Lagrima di Soma, which is a
gross bodied Red Wine, strong and sweet to the taste, and very pleasant.

In the suburbs of the Town, as you return, you may see the Kings Stables,
where the choicest Horses of the Kingdom are menaged and keept for the Kings
use.

Thus having vieued all in and about Naples, it will be time to order your
return for Rome, by the same way you came, nor do I remember any other thing
needful to be observed or advised, except that you must l^t^ your Baggage ^e
vieued at the Gate* as you go out, and take a Pass from the Customers; or which
you will pay some small thing. You will likeways do well to rid your self of
all Spanish Money (gold excepted) unless it be so much as will serve to bear
your expenses to Fu^die, because it will not pass in any place of Italy, except
such as are under the Spanish Dominion.

If the Season of the Year be good, there is excellent Her^^rising upon this
^oade to Naples. You will find Wild in the Fields, many sorts of Narcissus's,
many Colors of single Anemone's, Squills: As^h^delus albus ma^or; Tithymalus
Dendroides. It is a Plant I never saw, except upon the way from Pipern^ (...)
T^rrachina, about mid way upon a Hill side, where it grows in great
abundance. It is a stately tall Plant, (...) reading it self into several
Branches, some whereof I observed to be as big as a Man's Wrist. It had few or
no leaves on it in the Season when I saw it, which was March, but abundance of
Yellow Flowers at the Top's of the Branches: The Ficus indica lati-folia, is a
Beastly weed in the same Place, and spoils all the Ground; every leaf that
falls springing up into a new Plant, which at last becomes hard and woodie.
Tuchr^um lusit anicum arborescens, of which I saw some goodly tufts near to
Terachina. There be many other, which for brevities sake I omit to mention, and
likeways a great many that I have forgot, having lost those notes I made of
their names and places; but I hope you will supply this defect, being your self
much more able to do it.

Being returned to Rome, which I shall suppose to be about the middle or end of
April: It will be fit for you to think of the next Voyage toward Loretto,
unless you resolve to pass the Summer at Rome, for after the 20th. of May,
until the latter Rains fall (which is commonly about the middle of September,
or the beginning of October, the extreme heat makes Travel very unseasonable.
But if in the case of necessity, such as Pestilence, or War, you should be
forced to undertake the Journey, you must order it so as to Travel most in the
Night, and Rest in the heat of the Day, and be sure not to Sleep till you have
passed the Campania of Rome, as I have formerly marked.

The Way to Loretto from Rome.
Miles. Prima porta 7 Castle Novo 8 Rignano 7 Civita 9 O^ricoli 8 Nar^i ^ Terni
^ Strettur^ 8 Spolet^ 8 Passo di Spel^to 8 Verchi^no B^rg^ 9 Pi^ di dignano ^
Mucc^a Castello 7 Valcimara 8 To^entino 9 Macerata 10 Loretto 6
I have not much to say of the particular places upon this Road, only Tern^ is
an Ancient City and pleasantly situated; the River Negra, in Latin Nar being
divided in many Branches, and drawn through the Town, are as it were so many
little Rivers, whence also the Town in Latin is called Interamna: the Meadows
and Fields about it, are exceedingly fertile, in so much that the meadows are
mowen three or four times a Year; and they talk that Turnips are often found
there of five or six and thirty weight, of which seven or eight will load an
Ass; it is also renowned for Pigeons, which are thought the biggest and most
savoury in Italy. If you can take the leisure to stay here any time, it will be
worth your while to see the Lago di piedi luco, in Latin Lacus velinus (not
far from Terni) which is said to be the middle of all Italy, that which is most
considerable in it, is the Issue of the Waters from it, which was cut by a
Roman Consul through a Rock, whence it Rushes out, and falls over so great a
hight of Rocks, that it makes a noise which may be heard at ten Miles distance,
and makes a greater cascata then that of Tivoli. From Verchian^ you have the
Appennine to pass, which is that ridg of Hills that divides all Italy by the
length.

From Valcimara, the way is exceeding good to Loretto.

Loretto it self is a little Town not very Ancient, built upon the Top of a
Hill, not above 3 or 4 Miles from the Adriatic Sea, it is fortified reasonably
well: the most considerable thing in it, is the Church, in the Quire whereof
stands the Casa S^ncta, brought thither from Judeae Miraculously by Angels, as
is believed. This is the House in which the blessed Virgin is said to have been
Born. The outside of it is walled about with Marble cut into excellent
Figures, but yet so as the Walls touch not the Holy House. The inside has
continually Lamps burning in it, some of Gold, some of Silver. There is in it a
Picture of our Savior and the Virgin, which they say were painted by St. Luke.
The Image of the Virgin, which stands upon the Altar, has a Garment upon it
all covered with Pearls, and upon the Head a Crown of Gold, enriched with
Jewels; upon the Top whereof there is a Carbuncle of the bigness of an Egg.
There is likeways shown within the House a little Dish, out of which our
Savior is said to have Eat his Meat whilst he was yet a Babe. People commonly
bring their Beads, Medals, and other pieces of Devotion to be put in this Dish,
and to touch the other relicts. The Sacristia is well worthy the seeing because
of the Jewels, and other Rich presents and Ornaments belonging to the House,
which are keept there, and have been given and offered continualy, by almost
all Princes and great Persons in Christendom. The Cellar is likeways worthy
the seeing, being exceedingly Large and full of Wines. Amongst others they
ordinarily show one great Tun out of which they draw 3 or 4 sorts of Wine, some
red, some white. The number of Pilgrims, and other Persons, that out of
Devotion resort to this Place, from all the parts of Christendom, is almost
infinite, insomuch that every Day appears to be a holy Day and the whole Year
but one continued Feast. So soon as the Gates are opened in the morning, they
begin to enter as it were in Procession. I believe there are but few
Inhabitants in the Town, except a few Tradesmen of all sorts, for the
Accommodation of Strangers, the greatest part are Merchants, that sell nothing
but Beads and pieces of Devotion, such as Medals of Silver, Gold, Brass,
Crystal etc. Books of Devotion, and such like. There is good Accommodation in
the Town, at a reasonable Rate. The City is Commanded by a Governor, who has
his Palace near to the Church. We were Recommended to him by Cardinal Charles
Barbarini, and were treated by him with great Civilitie; his Secretary being
commanded to wait upon us, and show us all that was considerable in the place.

After two days stay here we dismissed our Horses that we brought from Rome,
and Hired new ones from Loretto to Bolognia.

From Loretto to Bolognia.
Miles Ancona 15 La casa Brugiata 9 Cenigalia 9 Fano 9 Pesaro 6 Rimini 20
Sanigniana Castello 9 Cesena 10 Furli 10 Faenza 10 Imola 10 St. Nicola Castello
10 Bolognia 10
Ancona is about half a days Journey from Loretto. It is a very ancient City
and the best Sea Port in Italy, at least upon the Adriatic Coast: The Port was
Built, at least Restored and Beautified, by Trajan the Emperor, in whose
Honor a most stately Triumphal Arch was Raised upon it, which it yet extant,
with this Inscription in Capital Letters. Imp. Caes. di^i Nervae F. Nervae
Trajano optimo August. Germanic. Daetico. Pontef. max. Tr. Pot. xix. Imp. xi.
Cos. vii. P. P. Providentissimo Princ. S. P. Q. R. Quod adcessum Italiae, Hoc
etiam addito ex pecunia sua Portum tutiorem Navigantibus reddiderit. And upon
the Right side thereof You may Read this Inscription Plotinoe Aug. Conjugi Aug.
And upon the left, Divae Marcian: Aug: sorori August.

Cenigalia is a little Town having a Seaport* It seems from the name to have
been built, and to have belonged to the Galli Cenones.

Fano, Anciently Fanum; because of the Temple of Fortune that stood here; There
is a stately Triumphall Arch of Marble 30, Cubits High. Pesaro is a very
Pleasant and handsome City having many fine Houses and a Magnificent Palace, It
is well Peopled and well Fortified. The Duke of Vrbin, to whom this City did
belong, used to pass one half of the Year here; But since his Death without
Heirs Male the whole Duchy is Reunited to the Ecclesiastic state.

Rimini, in Latin Ariminum; is like to be so called from the River Arimine
that passes by it. There are several fair Palaces in it, built by the
Mala-testi ancient Lords of the Place. There is a Triumphal Arch erected in
Honor of Augustus, yet extant, and the Ruins of a great Theater. But the most
considerable thing of all is the Bridge, Built of great square Marble stones,
of twenty foot in length and 15. in breadth, with five Arches. The Bridge
Joins the Via Flaminia and the Via Emilia together. It is said to have been
Built by Tiberius Caesar. In the Market place there is to be seen the stone
upon which Julius Caesar stood, and encouraged his Officers, when he began the
Civil War. This Stone has this Inscription C. Caesar D. Rubicone superato,
civili Bello, Comilitones suos hic in for^ Ariminensi adlocutus.

Within a Mile of Cesina, or there abouts, You must pass the Rubicon, which
seems to be but a Torrent, and in the Summer time for the most part dry; At the
place where You pass there is yet extant an ancient Pillar, the Inscription
whereof has made the name of Rubicon so famous. it is as follows; Jussu
mandatuve P. R. Cos. Imp. Myli Tyro Comilito manipulariaeve Cent. Turmaeve
Legionariae armat quis quis est hic sistito. Vexillum sinito, ne citra hunc
amnem Rubiconem signa, Arma, ductum, commeatum, Exercitumque traducito; siquis
hujusce Jussionis ergo adversum ierit, feceritve, adjudicatus esto hostis P: R.
ac si contra Patriam armaverit, Sacrosque Penatos e penetralibus asportaverit
Sanctio plebisci Senatus.

NE Consulto ultra hos fines Armae proferre liceat nemini. S. P. Q. R. And upon
the other side of the Pillar, the following Inscription; Rubiconem ponta
subjectum transis viator, Romano interdicto Caesaris ausu, and adagio, Jactae
alcae, Celebratum.

Flumini huic stabilem imponere trajectum, Ethnica diu vetuit pavida
Superstitio, Catholica nunc suasit socura Religio.

Innocent: Xo Summo Pont:
Card: D: Legato 1654.
Furli; in Latin Forum Livii, where there is little thing considerable except
the Market Place.

Faenza; is divided in two by the River Lamone, over which stands a goodly
Bridge that Joins the two parts of the Town together, it is called in Latin
Faventia, and the People Faventini.

The whole way from Ancona to Bolognia is Plain and Smooth, and the Country on
all sides very Rich and Fertile, but especially near to Bolognia, (which
deservedly is called la Crassa) where the whole Country, on every s^de of the
high way, looks like Gardens, being Hedged and closed in on all sides, and
Planted with Olive and while Mulberry Trees, the Leaves whereof ^erve to the
^eeding of Silk Worms, and at the Roots of which the Vines being Planted, run
up and spread themselves through all the Branches of the Trees, and load them
with Grapes. The distance betwixt the Ranges of Trees is Sown sometimes with
Wheat, or other useful Grain, or Kitchen Herbs and Roots, Nor is there wanting
here abundance of the Choicest Fruits that Italy affoords.

Bolognia; is the second Town of the Ecclesiastic State, sweetly situated in a
large Plain, near to some Hills at the one side. The City is near two Miles in
length and one in breadth, and about 5 Miles in Compass. The Inhabitants are
not esteemed to be under 80 Thousand in number, amongst which it is thought
there are two Thousand Gentlemen, whereof many have the Titles of Count and
Marquis. There is a famous University and many fine Colleges worthy to be
seen: As also many fine Churches and Religious Houses. The Archdean of the
Cathedral of St. Peter's, has the Privilege of making Doctors, above others. In
the Church of Corpus Christi, may be seen the entire Body of St. Katharine of
Vigri, a Religious Woman of the Order of St. Clare, that Died at Bolognia, in
the Year 1463. She sits in a Chair, with a Religious Habit. The Skin of her
Face seems to be bent and streacht, her Eyes open, her Hands and Feet bare: In
one Hand She holds a Crucifix, the other is placed upon a Pillow. They use in
the presence of a great deal of Company to pair her Nails every Month, and to
cut her Hair once a Year, after they are grown. In the Iacobins Church is keept
the Head of St. Dominick in a Rich Tabernacle, and his Body in a Curious Tomb
of white Marble cut in several figures of Base relieve; In the Choire may be
seen the Histories of the New and Old Testament, with wonderful Artifice
represented in mosaic of of Wood. There is also to be seen here, a rare Piece
of Painting, of the Innocents made by Guido Reni; all the parts of this Convent
are worthy the taking notice of, the Cloisters, the Dormitories of above 150
Religious, the Refictory Painted by great Masters, the Apothecaries Shop, and
the Bibliotheck, and the Cellar which is extraordinarly Big.

There be many fine Palaces worthy the seeing, and very well Ornamented
within, but especially the Popes own Palace, where the Legate resides, and in it
you must take particular care to see Aldrovandi's Study, and Collection of
Curiosities, which are keept in this Palace, and commonly entrusted to the
Legates Physician. There is likeways to be seen in the Back Court Aldrovandi's
Garden, in which there are some Curious Plants. In the Study you will see a
great Herball, in water Colors, but without any description, as also a whole
press full of Manuscripts, written all with his own Hand.

There are several Towers in the Town, but especially that of Degli Pisanelli,
which is one of the highest I remember to have ever seen; it stands about the
middle of the Town, and near by it there is an other which is not finished, and
the reason they give for it is very apparent, that the Builders mistook the
perpendicular; when one stands near to it, it is so very crooked that it
appears to be just a falling. I had the Curiosity to go as high in the other
Tower as I could, and rather because I thought I might more easily discover the
situation of the Town, it is avenues, and the Country about, but I had much
Reason to repent me: The ladders for the most part being old and rotten, so
that I was in continual apprehension of falling, and one slip would have done
my turn as well as a hundred. I shall advise you rather to take the pains to
see a Convent, a little without the Town, toward the Hills, called St. Michaele
in Bosco, from whence you will have a most Delicate Prospect of the Town and
Country about. The Town appears in the form of a Ship, and the Tower
Deglipisanelli, may be the maine Mast of it. This Convent is one of the most
Glorious in Italy; the Religious are of the Order di Monte Olivetto, there are
many other things in the Town worthy the taking notice of, which for brevities
sake I omit.

You must not forget to see the Silk-Work, which is a most Curious contrivance;
it is three or four Story high, in the Highest Story there are Innumerable
Pirns of Silk, which are all moved by the general Motion that the Water gives
to some Wheels below, and there they receive the first Twist; in the Story
next to that, they receive the second; and in the lowermost Story the last:
which brings it to that form of raw Silk that we commonly see sold.

This Place above all others in Italy, or in the World, is famous for excellent
Soap-Balls, of which you will do well to provide your self abundantly; they
will keep in their perfection above 20 Years: You may have them of several
Sizes, bigger or lesser as you please. It is likeways famous for Sassadges,
which are the best cetainly in tke World: I have seen of them of 5 Crowns the
Piece.

There is good Herbarising toward the Hills, if your leisure can permit you;
you may take a Guide along with you. Upon these Hills, you will likeways find
that famous Stone called Lapis phosphorus Bononiensis, of which Fortunatus
Lic^t^s has written a particular Book. It is very hard and Flintie like, but
more glistering; when it is calcined 48 hours in a reverberatory Fire and then
set to cooll: If you expose it a little to the light and free Air, and on the
sudden bring it to the dark, it shines for a little while as if it were a Red
burning Coal, but there is a kind of efflorescence like Rust or greenish Dust
that grows upon the Top of it, whilst it is a Calcineing, which is most
effectual for the shining, and which if it by lost by any Accident, the rest
will not be much worth, and for saving of this they use ordinarily to fix the
Stone in Wax in the bottom of a Box, and so sell them to Strangers, but this
way does not secure them, to my certain Experience. The best way is to bring
the Stone uncalcined and prepare it at home. I would have you to see an
Apothecarie, who is a great Virtuoso especially in Plants. He is called Jacomo
Zanoni speciale da san Biaggio custode de simplici in Bolognia; I believe he
has Published something of Plants by this time, for he showed me a Number of
Brass cutts, which were allreadie Graven, and told me the intention he had as
soon as he could get the rest perfected, to cause print them. If they may be
had, I entreat you to procure me one of them; you will do well to see his
Garden, which is very Curious. And the best way to engage all such Men as he
is, is to have allways a Parcel of rare Seeds with you, and to give them some,
by which means you will find them ready to give you whatever they can spare,
in like manner.

I shall advise you to Visit the Booksellers Shops, concerning which I must
give you this general advice, for finding out Botanick Books, that you take
pains to look them all over your self; for many times the Booksellers do not
know their names. You will find here Panacea ex herbis quae a Sanctis
denominantur Item Historia and Icones Capsicorum Bartholomaei Ambrosini in 80.
Bononiae 1630. also Hyacinthi Ambrosini hortus Studiosorum and Novarum
Plantarum hactenus non S^ulptarum Historia in 40. Bononiae 1657. But above all
I must entreat you to buy me Aldrovandus's works, which ate 13 or 14 Tomes in
Folio; you may buy them in Sheets, and have them packt up in your own things
for Venice, where you will not fail to meet with frequent Occasions of sending
them for London. I believe they will not cost above 18 or 20 Crowns. and if
they do I shall be ready to allow it.

It will not be a miss here, if you think fit, to go by Land to Modena, Parma
and Piatzena and return by the River Po to Ferrara: But because I had not the
Fortune to see them my self, I shall not say any thing of them, but return to
Ferrara, which is not above half a Days Journie, or thereabouts, from Bolognia.

Ferrara, is situated in a large Plain about half a mile distance from the Po.
It belongs to the Ecclesiastic State, and is governed by the Popes Legate. The
Streets, Houses and Places, are very handsome and fine, as also the Churches
and Religious Houses. In the Monastery of S. Bennet, you may see the Sepulcher
and Epitaph of the famous Poet Ariosto. It has a very strong and well
contrived Cittadale.

From hence you go to Venice by Water, that is in an open Boat, by a Canale
near to the side of the Po, where ye imbarke in a bigger Vessel, which goes
constantly twice a Week to Venice. If the Wind be favorable, you will easily
accomplish the Voyage in 10 or 12 hours time, but if otherways, you may be
longer, and therefore you will do well to make Provision of Victuals, to take
along with you. When you Arrive at Venice, it will be needful to Lodge in a
convenient Place of the Town, and for that end, you will do well to provide
your self of a Recommendation to the English Consul; from Rome or from
Bolognia. Giles Jones was Consul in my time, and entertained Lodgers himself,
he was a very honest Man, and did faithfully send my things to London,
according to the address I gave him. When you are settled in a Lodging, It will
be time to take a View of the Town, for the doing of which and considering it
well, 3 or 4 Weeks is little enough. Nothing in Nature can appear more
prodigious than to see a Vast big Town seated in the middle of the Sea; every
House whereof at one side or another is touched by the Water, and the nearest
Land being 4 or 5 Miles distance. It was built at first upon the little Island
of Rialto in the Year 421, perhaps later by the Inhabitants of the firm Land
that were chaced from their own homes by Attila King of the Huns, and forced to
make choice of this place for their safety; since that time they have built
upon 70 or 71 Isles more, which are joined together by upwards of 450 Bridges.
The Town is about 8 Miles in compass. There are but few Streets built on both
sides, except some open places. The most part of the Streets have a Canale or
Ditch in the middle, by which the Gondols pass, which is a great commodity,
for there is scarce a House in the Town, but one may be carried this way,
either close to it or within a few steps of it. The Canals are different in
breadth, some more some less large, the narrowest is broad enough for one
Gondole to go by another; It is remarkable, that the Water Ebbs and Flows here
4 or 5 foot, which is not observed in the Adriatic farther down toward
Naples, nor in any other Port of the Mediterranian Sea; The Gondals are
believed to be above fourteen or fifteen thousand in Number; they are small
tight Boats much cleaner and finer than Oars upon the Thames, having a pretty
Tilt over the seat where the Passingers sit, and will be able to accommodat 5
or 6 Persons: It is usual for Gentlemen or Persons of Quality to have their
own Gondols, and those Richer than the ordinary; some are rowed by one, some by
two, and it is somewhat extraordinary that the Rower does not sit within the
Boat, but stands upon one side of it, and looks the same way that he rows. At
the turning of any Corner, after they come within such a distance of it, they
are obliged to cry, to give notice to the Gondols on the otherside whom they
cannot see, and he that cries first has this advantage, that he turns close
by the corner, and the others are obliged to give him way and take it larger:
And I assure you it is no small wonder to me that there being so many corners
to tur^e, and so continual and frequent intercourse of Gondols going some the
one way, and some the other; and in the dark as well in the Day: there should
be so few Accidents of running one another down, especially, considering with
what swiftness they go. The largest Canale, called Canale grande, is about 13
or 14 hundred paces in length; and forty in breadth, and divides the Town as
it were in two. The Bridge of the Rivo alto, or as it is commonly pronounced
Rialto, is one of the most magnificent Structures in the City: it consists but
of one Arch, and yet is said to have cost above 250 thousand Ducats; at the
one end of the Bridge, there are three large Streets divided by 2 rows of
Houses, which are so many Merchant shops. This serves for the Exchange, where
the Merchants meet about Noon to do their affairs.

There are so many things considerable in this Place that it is difficult to
comprehend them in this short Narration, and therefore I shall only name a few
of them, and leave the rest to your particular inquiry, which will not be hard
for you to make, when you are upon the place. Be pleased then first to take
notice among the Churches of that of St Mark, which properly, is only the
Dukes Chapel belonging to the Palace of St. Mark, whose Body being brought
from Alexandria is preserved here; The Church has 24 Chanoines belonging to it
under one Head, called Primicero. He is commonly chosen by the Doge, and wears
the Miter and other Ornaments of a Bishop, and uses to give his Benediction to
the People as Bishops do. The inside of the Church is of Marble of diverse
sorts, and all very fine, with above 40 Marble Pillars; It is paved with
Porphire, Serpentine etc. in Mosaic Work; Upon the Top of the great Altar,
there is a Globe enriched with a great number of Pearls and other Jewels of
price; The Roof of the Church consists of 5 Cupula's covered with lead; It has
5 Doors of Brass, and over the great entry on the outside there stands four
Delicat Horses, equal in bigness to the Natural, of Brass Gilded, which at
first were placed upon the Triumphal Arch of Nero, after he subdued the Parths,
but were afterward carried to Constantinople, when the Seat of the Empire was
removed from Rome and at last brought hither by the Venetians when they took
Constantinople. 2ly. That which is most worthy of the seeing (it may be in all
the World) is the Treasure of St. Mark, where amongst other things you will see
12 Royal Crowns and 12 Breast Plates of Gold, full of Pearls and Jewels; taken
as they say at Constantinople; And the Tradition is, that they were the
Ornaments of the 12 Maids of Honor that waited upon St. Helena Mother to
Constantine the Emperor; several Rubies weighing 8 Ounces a Piece, and a
Saphir that weighs ten Ounces; two Unicorns Horns; several Vessels of Precious
Stones* as Agat, J^spir etc; one of Emerauld which a King of Persia presented
the Senate with. One of one single Turkis; another capable to hold a Scots Quart
of one single Granat; The Tiar or Bonnet wherewith the Duke is Crowned, is
Garnished with Jewels of inestimable price; There is a vast deal of other
Riches, which I cannot particularly remember; There is likewa^s to be seen the
Picture of the blessed Virgin done by St Luke. The Acts of the Apostles written
in golden Letters by the hand of St John Chrysostom, Patriarch of
Con^tantinople. It will be worth your while to go to the Top of the Steeple,
from whence you will have a delicat Prospect of the whole City and Neighboring
Islands, of a part of Lumbardie, of the several Mouths of the River Po, The
Hills of ^tria; and the Sea about* 3ly: The Palace of St Mark, whereof the
Arches, Pillars, Halls and Chambers are all most Stately, especialy the great
Halls, which are Painted by the greatest Masters of their time; for the fetter
understanding of which, it will be fit, that you get a Printed Inventorie ^f
all the particular Ornaments of this Palace.

4ly, The Piazza of St Marco, which is one of the Largest and finest that can
be (...) in any Town in Italy; being com^^^sed with most Stately and regular
Buildings* with large Arches and Portic^es to walk in, in the time of Heat or
Rain* with all sorts of Merchandise and Trades. This Place is the most
diverticeing in all Venice, for here you may see People of many Nations with
different Habits. At that end of that place which looks to the Sea, there
stands two Marble Pillars, each of them of them one Piece, of a great hight and
bigness, at a reasonable Distance one from another. Upon the Top of the one is
placed a flying Lion gilded, which is the Arms of Venice, and the Symbol of
St Mark; Upon the Top of the other the Statue of St Theodore gilded. Betwixt
these Pillars, Justice is usuallie done upon Male-factors. About the middle of
the place stands 3 very Tall Poles like unto Ships Masts, whereupon the
Standards of the Republic are displaied at great Solemnities. On that side of
the place, which is opposite to the Dukes Palace, stands the Mint-House, a very
goodly Fabric, composed of Stone and Iron, without any Wood at all. 5ly. The
Arsenal, which is the largest and best Furnished in the World; it is strongly
Walled about, and the Sea drawn about it likeways. There are fifteen or sixteen
hundred Men constantly at Work, besides Old Men, who are not able to work, but
entertained for instructing the younger. Here are keept all sort of Amunitions
of War both for Sea and Land, in vast Quantities, and in that good Order, that
I have heard some confidentlie say, that there were Workmen within the Arsenal,
that were able to build a Gally, and reik her out completely in one Hours time;
which if it be true, argues a great deal of sharpness in the Workmen, and
readiness of the Materials.

There are several lesser Islands at some distance from the Town, worthy to
be seen, and particularly, 1. Murain about a Mile Northward from the City. It
is well built and many good Houses in it; It is in this Island, that all those
famous Crystal Glasses so much talked of, and so much sought after throughout
the World, are made. It is observed here, that the Glass-works succeed much
better on the one side of the Street than on the other. They have likeways a
great Art of whitneing Wax, which is observed to succeed better in this Island
than any other place in or about the City. There are abundance of Oysters
likeways in this Island; they ordinarily keep them in Baskets near the Shore,
to have them in readiness when they are called for, but in my opinion they are
neither so pleasant, no^ so wholesome as at Lighorn and other places,
especially being eaten raw, for I have often found the eating of them so, to
give a very troublesome Flux of the Belly to several Persons. 2ly. The Isle
of St Helena, where there is a very stately Monastery and Church, with Monks
of the Order of Mont Olivet. In this Church is keept the Body of the Emperess
St Helena. This Isle lies to the Eastward of the Town, and about two Miles
further the same way, stand the two Forts del L^do and Casielnovo, which both
defend them selves mutuallie, and secure the entry to the City from Enemies in
time of War* 3ly. Malamocco, where all Ships and Vessels of any considerable
Burden do Arrive because of the deepness of the Harbor. 4ly. The Isle of St.
George, lying just before the place of St. Mark, at half a Miles distance,
where there is an Abbace of the Order of St. Benedict, with a most Stately and
Glorious Church, together with a Garden and fair Walks, which is thought no
small thing in that Place.

Although a Traveller cannot be altogether sure of his times, there being so
many Contingencies that may force him either to Arive too soon or too late; yet
it were to be wished that a Man might happen to be at Venice in the time of
Carnoval, because of the Opera's and fine shows that are to be seen, and the
Extraordinary Music at that time. In the Summer time the great Divertisement
is to go in Gondole upon the great Canale, where toward the Evening, one may
see Five, or six hundred Gondols touring up and down, full of Ladies and
Gentlemen, and severalls of them with Music, both Vocal and Instrumental;
which is one of the greatest Gusto's imaginable.

You cannot miss to meet with a great many Curiosities here, both Natural and
Artif^cial, because of the great resort that Strangers have to this Place,
especially from the Levant; you will find Medals, Intaleo's, Chamaeo's etc.
amongst the Goldsmiths. I have seen several Curiosities to sell in the place
of St. Mark, and sometime within the Court of the Palace, and in many other
corners throughout the City. You may meet with maby Curiosities of Glass, that
are both useful and delightful. It will be worth your while to Visit the
Booksellers Shops, for besides many Curious Books, that you may light upon
here, and particularly of Botany; you may likeways find very many Books, that
are prohibited in many other places of Italy. Be pleased to inquire diligently
for a thin 40. called Trattato de simplici Pietre. and pesci marini che nascono
del lito di Venetia di Antonio Donati Farmacopeo all'insegn^ di St. Liberale in
Venetia 1631. Printed by Pietro Maria Bertano. Donati himself was Dead before I
came thither, but I found out his Brother, a Man of the same Profession and
living at the same place, but nothing knowing in Simples. After I had told him
the respect I had for his Brothers Memory, and my regrate for the loss of so
worthy a person; he was pleased to show me a great many Brass-Plates of so
many Plants not yet described, together with their description done by his
Brother; I am confident were they Published, they would make a bigger Volume
than the first. They were in Confusion when I saw them, but I put them in Order
and prayed him to keep them so, until he should find the opportunity of
printing them, which I found him willing to do at his own Expense, nor to trust
it with an other, least his Brothers name should have been stolen from it. If
it be not as yet printed, you may see what you can do, either to purchase the
Manuscript and Plates, or promise the printing of it.

There are many Virtuosi in the City, that have great Collections of fine
things which you may be pleased to inquire after and see.

From Venice you have twenty five Miles to Padua, whereof fo^r by Berg to the
Terra ferma, and the rest you go by Boat, drawn with Horses by the River
Brent, which is a most pleasant and soft running River, having plain, Fertile
and most delicious Fields on either side, full of Villages and pleasure-Houses,
to which the Inhabitants of Venice use to resort in the Summertime.

The River runs not all of a Level, and therefore there are three or four
Locks or Sluices, by means whereof, at several places the River is made
portable; which otherways it would not be. There is such an other Lock upon the
Canale of Briar, near to Montargis in France. You will more easily understand
the manner of them by seeing them, than by any description I can make of them.

Padua, in Latin Pattavium. Is a very Ancient and Large Town; famous over the
World, for its University; whence it is called Padua la dotta. There are many
things considerable in the Town fit to be seen and take notice of. As 1. The
Churches as namely that of S. Sophia, that of Justino, which is all Pavemented
with white and red Marble; there is an Abbacy joining to it of the Order of St.
Benedict; the Reformation of which Order did begin first here. It was Anciently
the Temple of Concord. The place before the Church is very large and spacious.
They say ten Thousand Men might be drawn up within it. The Church of St.
Antonia de Lisbon, is notably designed, and has many Rich things belonging to
it; many Relique's, but amongst others the most considerable is the Body of St.
Antonia, commonly called of Padua, because he Died and was in^erred here. There
is great a Devotion paid to this Saint, and a great concourse daily to the
place, as well of the Inhabitants of the Town, as of Pilgrims that come from
other places. They use to kiss the Marble-Stone that covers his Sepulcher; and
they say it smells of Musk. 2ly. The palace of Justice, which is most stately.
The Stairs are all of Marble covered with Lead without the support of any
Pillar. The great Hall is 256 foot in length, and 86 foot in breadth, and very
well painted, and at the end of it, that Statue of Titus Livius, whose Tomb is
likeways to be seen in the Town. 3ly. The Schools, which is a very stately
Fabric, being a 4 square court, where you will see a great many of the Statues
or Busta's, Names and Arms of so many Consuls, that have been of the several
Nations that compose the University; the Scholars here have large Privileges,
and many times abuse them, and become very insolent, insomuch that they have
been sometimes known to threaten the Podesta himself or Governor of the Town;
they have, likeways a beastly custom of carrieing Arms in the Night, insomuch
that it is never safe to be abroad after it hegins to be Dark, for many are
this way unhappity Murdered without any Offense given or taken, but only by
wantoness, or rather Wickedness of the Scholars. 4ly. The Physical Garden,
which is exceedingly fine, not so much for the number as rareness of the
Plants. You may easily make your addrefs to the Professor that keeps the Garden
who in my time was the Excellentissimus Signeur Tore, but the Gardener will be
sufficient to do your turn, for in giving him a small piece of Money, you will
command both Seeds, Plants, and all that he has. We have a very worthy
Gentleman of our Country, called Doctor Cadenhead; in my time he was Public
Professor of Logic nel Bo, which is the Public Schools. He is a most
courteous and obliging Gentleman, and will be ready to do you all the
kindness's Imaginable. 5ly. You may see the Hospitals for sick Folk, and many
other things, which for Brevities sake I omit, only I entreat you be at the
pains to Visit the Booksellers Shops; and if there be any new thing in
Physic, since the 62 or 63 Year of God, I entreat you to bring them along with
you for me, especialy if there be any thing of Rhodius, who has promised us
his commenta^s upon Cornelius Celsus long ago.

If you please, you may make a little Journey to the Euganean Hills, which are
not far from P^dua. There is very good Herborsing upon them. It will be worth
your while, likeways to see Abbano, a Village 3. or 4 Miles distant from Padua;
famous for its Natural Baths. At the end of the Village there is a little
rising or know; upon the Top of which there are a great many Springs of hot
Water, some where of are scalding hot. The Water is convoyed by little Conduits
to several Houses about, where Baths are keept for sick People, but the greater
part of it is convoyed the other way by a trough, where, at the distance of a
Musket shot, it moves a Milne. The water it self is whitish, having a white
slimy substance in it, which it deposes every where, where it runs, and which
in process of time becomes as hard as a Stone; in so much that the Miln-Wheel,
and all the Wood that is touched by it, becomes crusted as it were with Marble;
and if it be not broken of timeously, it stops the Motion of the Wheel just as
I^eicles use to do with us. The Country about Padua is very Plain and
exceedingly Fertile, insomuch that they use to say, B^lognia la grassa, ma
Padua la passa; yet the Wine is not good, but a red small Claret Wine such as
they use at Venice for ordinary drink. When you ha^^ past some time at Padua,
and satisfied your self, of all that is to be seen and known there, it will be
time to set ^orward for Milan.

From Padua to Verona.
Mil^s Vicenza 17 Montebello 12 Scaldere 10 Veron^ 12
In going from Padua to Vicenza, you will do well to turn a little out of
(...) way to see a place called Gus^^so, (...) is a House of Pleasure belonging
to a ^^r^ticular Person, where, besides many ^^riosities, of Gardens etc. there
is p^^ticular ways of conveying the Win^ (...) the Caves below to the upper
(...) which makes a Delicat Fresco in the greatest heats of Summer. It stands
at the foot of a very great Mountain, under which are the vastest and biggest
Caves I ever saw; but seem not to be Natural, but rather Quarries, out of which
the greatest part of the Stone that Vicenza has been built with, has been
taken. In one place of these Caves, there is a little Well made by the Water
that drops from the Top of the Cave, which petrifies any Wood, Straw etc. that
lies any time in it, and yet the Water keeps clear it self, without
congealing. Near to the City of Vicenza, upon your left hand, you will see a
delicat Piece of Architecture, made by the famous Architect Vinogli, which is
likeways designed in his Book; It is only a House of Pleasure, and stands upon
a considerable hight from the City, discovering all the Country round about.

Vicenza is a good large Town, having many fine Churches and Palaces, with a
large place for Tilting and other Exercises: there is likeways in it a Noble
Theater built by Vinogly: the Country about is exceedingly Fertile, and abounds
with all sort of good Fruit, and is therefore called the Garden of Venice.

Verona is an easy days Journey from Vicenza; It is an Ancient City, large and
well built, having many stately Palaces, Churches etc. and an old Amphitheatre,
yet more entire than any other in Italy. The Town is divided in two by the
River Adice, it is well Fortified, having 13 Royal Bastions, and three Castles;
the two parts of the Town, are conjoined by 4 large Stone Bridges. There is
excellent Herborizing upon the Hills near to the City, but especially upon the
Monte baldo, which is about 20 Miles distant from this City, and which is
described at great length by Joannes Pona, whose Book I suppose you have seen.
The Palace del Conte Justi, is worthy the seeing, together with the Gardens
and Grotta's. Amongst the rest, there is one of a Reasonable Capacity built
with that Artifice, that four Persons being placed in the four Corners, may
speak each of them to his Neighbor in the opposite Corner, and yet not be
heard by those that stand in the middle between them. In the Palace of the
Signeur Conte Gregorio Bevila^^^* there is a Gallerie, in which you may see a
great many fine Pictures, Statues, Medals, and other Rarities.

from Verona you pass by la peso^eira, which is a strong Fort, upon the River
(...) issues from the lago di Garda: from (...) you go to Dissanzano, which
though (...) big Town, but rather a Village, I look upon it as one of the
pleasantest (...) in Italy; being upon the side of (...) lago di Garda, a Lake
not so (...) as long, for in length it reaches to (...) Rhetici. The Country
about (...) and Fertile, and the Lake it (...) ^^ounds with all sorts of
Excellent (...) such as Pykes, Pearches, red and (...) Trouts etc. and of all
there are (...) very big. In my time there was (...) ^rench-man, that keept a
very good (...), where we had excellent Fare (...) of fish and Flesh, and the
best Wine (...) the whole State of Venice, and all at (...) Rate.

From Dissanzano, you go to Bre^cia, which is not above half a days Journey
distant from Dissanzano. It is a large and very strong Town, especialy the
Castle thereof placed upon a Hill, that Commands the Town. It is famous for
making of Guns, and Pistols, especialy the Cannons of them, which are the best
I ever saw by far. If you have the opportunity of carriage, it would be worth
your while to make Provision for your self here. If you resolve to make your
return, not to Lions but, throw Switzer-Land and Germany, down the Rhen, and so
throw Flanders and Holland, then it will be fit when you are at Bol^gnia to go
up the Po, by Modena, Parma, Piazz^nza, and so to Millan, and from thence to
Turrin, and then back to Millan again, and so return by the other way of
Bergamo, Brescia, Dissanzano, Verona, Vicenza and Padua to Venice, by which
means you will not only see the sweetest and most Fertile places of Lumbardie,
but also have the commodity of bringing what ever you find in all that way to
Venice, from whence it may easily be Convoyed into England. From Bres^i^ to
Bergamo you have a days Journey: You must Dine at a Place called Pallazolo; It
is a little inconsiderable Town. I remember we had a Letter of Recommendation
from the Duke of Norfolks Major-Domo at Padua, to a Gentleman in this place,
who was exceedingly Civil to us and sent us a Present of excellent Wine, and
(which was of far greater importance to us) gave us the assurance of the
peaceableness of the Country and security of Traveling, which sometimes is
not without the danger of being robbed; it being near the Frontiers of the
state of Millan: and in such cases, it is usual for Rogues, when they have done
a Mischief to pape into the next state, where the Laws of the other State
cannot reach them. The project of our recommendation, was to have been
conducted by this Gentleman on our way; if there had been any such need. He
willingly proffered it, but we, upon the assurance he gave us did as willingly
deny to accept it.

Bergamo is situated upon the side of a Hill, Fortify with 9 Bastions besides
the Castle, which is extremely strong. There is, as I take it, in the
Dominicans a Rare Bibliotheque, Collected by the great expense of Alexander
Martinengo, You will do well here to exchange all your Venetian Money into
Spanish Money, and such as will pass into the State of Millan. You have a Days
Journey from hence to Millan, and must Dine at a Place called Villa nova: as
soon as ye have Dined, you pass the River Tesin: And then enter the State of
Millan.

As you enter the State of Millan, you will find some Searchers or wayters of
the Custom-House, to whom you must give some small thing to let your Baggage
pass, or else you may be troubled with them.

The State of Millan, although but small in extent, is yet one of the pleasantest
and Fertilest places in Italy. The Country is very Plain. The Highways for the
most part very large and straight, planted with Trees and Hedges, on every
side, and having Canales of water, for the most part, on every side; and
Travelers have this Advantage also to meet with better Inns and better
accommodation here than on any other Road in Italy. The Inhabitants are not
given to mutiny and Rebellion as those of Naples, but willingly submit to their
Prince. It is said that the King of Spain Governs the Kingdom of Sicilie with
mildness: Naples with subtilitie and the Duchy of Millan with Authority.
They say likeways that the inferior Governors of Sicilie, only but Gently:
Those of Naples eat lustilie, but that in Millan they devour. I have observed
throughout all Italy, that the greatest part of the Innkeepers and Taverners
even in Rome it self are Milanese: as also that the greatest part of the Masons
that serve all Italy, are of this Country: and it is a very great Mark both
of their love to their Country and loyalty to their Prince, that when they
are not able to get so much by staying at home, as to entertain their Wives and
Children, and pay Public Burdens, they are contented to live abroad most part
of their lives, and return that home which they Gain abroad; for they never
carry their Wives with them, nor Children till they be able to Gain for
themselves: Only it may be they make them a Visit sometimes. The City of
Millan, which is Capital of the Duchy, is one of the stateliest in Italy: it
is near ten Miles in compass, but a considerable part of it, especially toward
the Walls, is Gardens. The Streets are large and handsome; Many stately
Churches and Palaces: But I shall Mark them a little more particularly as I
have done in other Towns: And 1. to begin with the Churches, It is said there
are above 230 in the City and Suburbs, whereof 96 are parochial: 40 Convents
of Religious Men, and 50 of Religious Women. The Cathedral Church called il
Domo, is one of the greatest and most Glorious in Italy except St. Peter's at
Rome. It is entirely built of white Marble within and without, but that which
is to be pitied is, that the design is Gothic; it is not yet quite finished;
but they are still at work, and you may guess when they are like to come to an
end, they having been up wards of 200 Years at work allreadie. There are above
600 Marble statues about the Walls, every one of which cost at least 1000
Crowns, amongst which the statue of Adam and St. Bartholomew are much esteemed,
especially the latter which is thought to be one of the best in Europe. The
Pend of the Church is supported by 160 white Marble Pillars, each of them of
that bigness, that scarcely can three Men fathom them. It is believed that
they stand not under 10000 Crowns a piece. All the rest of the parts of the
Church are correspondent in Magnificenee, only it appears to me to be somewhat
darker than need were. Amongst many other things that are considerable in this
Church is the Body of St. Charles Boromeus in a Chapel under Ground. It has a
Lamp burning before it, and you look down through an Iron Tirles from the
Church to see it. You may see the Head and Feet, but the rest of the Body is
covered with his pontifical Habit. There is a rich Treasure belonging to the
Church, where you will see, amongst other things* a Silver statue of the same
St. Charles in his Pontifical Habit, with many precious Stones of great Value
upon the Myter thereof. It was presented by the Jewellers and Goldsmiths of
Millan. In the Church of St. Ambrose, you may see a Pillar in the middle of the
Church, upon which stands the Brazen Serpent that Moses elevated in the
Wilderness. You may likeways see two stately Tombs, one of the Emperor Luis,
and the other of Pepin King of Italy, both Sons of Charles the Great. Here also
you may see the Chapel where St. Augustine was Baptized. In the Church of St.
Satyr, upon the great Altar there is a Picture of the blessed Virgin with the
Babe Jesus in her Arms, of which they tell a wonderful Story, that it being
placed upon the Church-Yard-Wall, a certain Gamester called Massario
Vigonzonio, being mad to have lost his Money, struck the little Jesus with a
poynard, whereupon immediately there gusht out abundance of Blood, after which
it was placed upon the great Altar where it is yet to be seen.

2ly. The Palaces; amongst the rest that of the Governor.

3ly. The Hospitals; which are said to entertain above 9000 poor People all the
Year long, at the expense of the Public. That which is called the great
Hospital, entertaines alone more than 4000, and so it may, for it has three
Score ten Thousand Crowns of Yearlie revenue. The Lazaretto is a kind of
Hospital without the Walls, It is a large Square court about a Mile in Compass,
not unlike the form of the Carthusians Houses; that are divided into so many
little appartments. The chief Design and use of it, is in the time of the
Plague: at other times it stands empty, only some few persons that have the
keeping of it, remain there.

4ly. The places in the Town; chiefly the Exchange, where the Merchants meet;
there you will see the statue of St* Augustine, and the place where he taught
Rhetoric before his conversion to the Christian Faith.

5ly. St. Ambrose's Bibliotheck, where not only these Books that belonged to
St. Ambrose himself, but many other Books that have been presented since, are
kept.

6ly. Septalie's Galerie. This Manfredo Septali, is Son to that famous
Physician Ludovicus Septalius, who has written many things, and learnedly in
Philosophy and Medicine. He is at present one of the Canons of the great
Church; And one of the greatest Virtuosi in Italy. His Study of Books consists
of 2 or 3 Rooms. His Galerie of Curiosities of three Rooms. The Curiosities
are both Natural and Artificial, of so great a Number and Variety, that I must
not insist upon particulars; but only refer you to the description thereof in
Latin by Paulus Maria Tersagus, the Book is in 40. Dertono 1664, and bears the
name of Musaeum Septalianum. He has also an other Room or two, full of working
Tools, ^ome for turning, others for Grinding of optic Glasses of all sorts
and Fashion; and here you will see a great Variety of Musical Instruments. Most
part of the Booksellers live near to the Exchange, but their Magasins are in
several other places of the Town; you must be careful to see them all. You
will undoubtedly find some to please, on which perhaps you will not readily
fall else where.

You will meet with many Curiosities in this place, especially of Cristal,
brought hither from the Alps, and a Thousand Conceits, most delicatly wrought
of Straw. I have heard of pieces of Cristal, with several shapes represented
within them naturally, as of Trees, Flees, etc. others with a drop of water
within them, that one might perceive to move, but is was not my Fortune to
light on any such.

7ly. The Castle of Milan, is one of the greatest Forts in Italy, with six
Royal Bastions, a large Fossey full of running water, and within it a second
Wall of strength. The Place within will admit of 6000 Men to be drawn up, It
has above 200 piece of Cannon* all sorts of Ammunition and 600 Spaniards in
Garrison. It has a Water Miln within it for Grinding of Corn, which is moved by
the running Water that fills the Ditches.

At a Miles distance from the Town, there is a Private Gentleman's House, where
the Echo is so excellent that it repeats above 40 times, which you may try,
either by speaking Loud or otherways with a Trumpet; but the surest way is with
Pistol Shot, for then you may distinctly tell to 40, one after another.

The Carthusians have a stately Monastery at 10 Miles distance from Millan,
wihin five Miles of Pavia, which has 500000 Crowns of Yearly revenue; The
Monks use to entertain Strangers for one Night. The Church is of a most Delicat
Fabric and very Rich. If you please you may go from hence to Pavia, Anciently
Ticinum, and afterward called Pavia. The Town is very strong and stands upon
the Tesin* It is the Chief University of the Duchy of Millan, but because I
was not in it my self I cannot say much of it, only I have heard that in the
great place of the City stands the Brazen Statue of the Emperor Constantine,
or as some think of Antoninus, very much esteemed. If you list to go thither I
believe it may be well worth your seeing, because of the University, for, for
any thing I know, there may be both good Books, and a Physical Garden there.

From Millan to Turin, you have about 73 Miles.

From Millan to Turin.
Buffalora 9 Novara 16 Vercelli 15 S. Germano 13 Ci^uas 10 Turin^ 10
You have two Rivers to pass, by Boat viz. the Dorn, after you pass Vereelli
and the Tesin near to Ci^uas: Near to Vercelli you enter into Piedmont, and
there you will meet with waiters or Customers to whom you must give some thing,
and before this time it will be fit that you have changed all your Spanish
Money except it be Pistols, or half Pistols of Gold, for these will pass any
where, either in Piedmont or France. When you Arrive at Turin you will think
your self already in France, for their Apparel, Customs and Discourse, are
almost altogether French.

Turin, Augusta Taurinorum is the Capital City of Piedmont, and is situated in
a Plain about 20 Miles distant from the Alps; having the Po on the one side and
the Dorn on the other. The Dukes of Savoye keep their Court here, and have made
it both very pleasant and very strong: There is the old and new City, which is
very well and regularly built. It is compassed with Royal Bastions, and Walls.
It has a Citadale, consisting of 5 strong Bastions. They say it is after the
Model of the Citadale of Antwerp. The great Church is called the Domo, where
amongst other relicts is keept and had in Veneration the Sanctum Sudarium, upon
which the Visage of our Savior and the greatest part of his Body is impressed.
There is a famous University here, and this is said to be the first Town in
Italy that had the first use of Printing. The Castle serves now the Duke for a
Palace. There is a rare Galerie to be seen, with many fine Pictures, Antic
Statues etc. and a great Collection of Manuscrips. Amongst the new Buildings
the Royal Place is considerable; the walks thereof being full of Shops and
Merchandice of all sorts. You may likeways see the Valentine, which is a
beautiful Palace, built by Madam Royal a little beneath the Town upon the Bank
of the Po* In the Suburbs of the Po, there is a House called Albergo worthy
the seeing, because of the many excellent Manufactories of Silk, and other
Stuffs that are made there.

I leave the rest to your own observa^ion, that I may haste to bring you over
^he Alps; the ordinary way is to Tra^el with the Messenger to Lions or to
Ge^eva. We came to Lions. It is a Jour^ey of 8 or 9 days. The first day we
^arted from Turin about ten a Clock in ^he forenoon, and came to lie all Night
^ome 10 or 12 Miles from Turin, having ^llready entered into one of the Valleys
that leads to the foot of the Hill; the next day we Dined at an other little
Village hard by the foot of the Hill, cal^ed Monte Cene, here we hired Mulets
to ^arrieus up the Hill; it being impossible for our Horses to do it. You must
likeways ^ire Men to carry you down on the other side of the Hill, because it
is a great deal too far to walk, and the way that the Horse goes, is far
about, because of the steepness of the Hill. And yet I mnst tell you that the
Hill is three times steeper and less accessible on the Italian side than on the
French side. As you mount the Hill, at first you will find the soil somewhat
fertile at least ways for pasturage and abundance of Wood; but when you are
^ot higher you will find nothing but Rocks, and Shrubs, here and there; there
is a little beck in the face of the Hill, where there stands a few Houses, or
rather corbie nests; a habitation which some People have chosen for the benefit
they may make by Accommodating Strangers that pass that way, for they are all
Victualing-Houses, and (as I take it) a Smith or two. When you pass this and
continue still to Mount, you will be about the middle Region of the Air, and
it is a hundred to one; but you may see Clouds enough beneath you, and it may be
the Rain falling from them; and then you will begin to find it cold what ever
time of the Year it be, and the the higher you go it will still* be the ^older,
till you come to the very highest pitch you are to go, and there you will meet
with a little House, in which one can scarce stand upright, where, if you have
leisure, you will get some Bread and Drink to buy; they usually have white
Hares and white Partridges to sell, and as usual it is for Strangers to buy
them for curiosities sake, and have them dressed at their next Lodging. From
this you have a Plain of above half a mile in length, which for the most part
is coveted with Snow, except in the heat of Summer and then it will be green in
some places that are most exposed to the Sunn. The great Pike of the Hill,
which yo^ leave upon the right hand as you enter the plain, is above two miles
higher, and perpetualie covered with deep Snow. About the middle of the plain
stands the ruin of a great House, which Madam Ro^al began to build, but whither
she finished it or not, I cannot tell; however I am sure nothing but
omnipotency could make a House resist the Rage of so much Wind and Storm, as
that Place is Subject to. When you come to the end of the plain, there is an
other little Victualling House, but it was Desolate, when I passed. You quite
your moulets at the entry into the Plain, and take your own Horses, and here
you quite them again, and leave your Messenger to wait upon them to the bottom
of the Hill, the best way he can, and permit your self to be carried by two men
which came along with you (for according to the number of the Company there
comes two for one from the Italian side, as I hinted at before) It is a kind of
Barrow, with a little Seat, and a back at it, with two little handles to hold
by, and a foot board for streaching your limbs before you, tied at both ends
with a piece of small Rope, that they set ^ou upon; and then carry you the
nearest way down the Hill, which you would think steep enough for Goats to
climb. They go at the Rate of an Ordinary Horse trot, and as they go will trist
the stones to step upon, which lie confusedly here and there, as exactly as if
they were a pair of stairs and yet they will not fall once in 500 times, and
if they should it would be a fall without any great Peril. But indeed the
danger on the Italian side is much greater; there being great Precipices on the
one hand, where into, if one should fall it were impossible to escape, insomuch
that I have often wondered how any Body durst adventure to climb upon a Beasts
back: and yet is admirable to see with it what dexterity these poor Moulets
pick out their way, where scarce any man could crawle all four, and how sure
footed they are. But I must return to the French side, where you may pay off
your porters when they have brought you to your Lodging at a little Village
near to the foot of the Hill. The ordinary rate is a Crown a Head that is,
half a Crown to every Porter.

I have told you the way of passing the Mount Cene at such Seasons, of the
Year, as there is little or no Snow: But in the Winter time when the Snows are
fallen the Passage is much more uneasy and unsafe, especially if they be
newly fallen, and the paths not trod; for then it is not only impossible to go
without 2 or 3 Guides, that in case one should drop throw the Snow there may be
more hands to let fall a Rope and bring him up again; for sometimes that will
happen, as when a Courier is necessitat to pass upon important affairs, and any
of the Guides chance to mistake a step, he will some times slip down 100 fathom
or two. But this is not the greatest Danger neither, for in the French side,
from the foot of the Hills, you have a whole days Journey and more through a
narrow Valley with a small River in the middle of it, which, at the foot of the
Mount Cene, one may easily step over, but it grows still bigger, as it
advances throw the Valley; being increased by the water that pours from every
cleft of the Hills and Rocks, which are on every side of the Valley, of a
prodigious height, and most precipitious: The current of the River falling
sometimes to be on one side of the Valley, and sometimes on the other, for the
most part casts the highway on the contrary side; So that very often you will
chance to pass under horrible Rocks that hang over the high way, and when the
Snow is new fallen and they laden with it, the least noise in the World would
bring down a whole Mountain of Snow, So that if a Passinger were so caught, you
might look upon him as buried till the following Spring.

But I shall advise you to choose a fitter Season, and then you will have the
Satisfaction of Herborising, for the lower parts of the Hills are all covered
with Trees and many sorts of Plants, that do not grow Naturalie in an other
Soil. I confess my Fortune, as to this, was ill; for after I past the Monte
Cene, we had a constant deluge of Rain, till I came the length of Chamberrie.
But I must not here forforget to acquaint you with an other particular that had
almost escaped me, in time of Snow: and it is this. When you come to the French
side (supposing the Snow to be frozen and able to bear above;) there is a
singular way of going down the Hill, which they call R^masser, ou se faict
Ramasse. That is to have a little hurdle of Wood, upon which the Passingers is
placed, with a little bit of Board behind it, upon which the fellow stands that
Guides the way, and so you come hurling down together, at a greater rate than
the swiftest Horse in the World is able to go.

I do not remember to have remarked any thing worthy the troubling you with,
upon the way from Mont Cene until you come the length of Momilian, except only
that the Inhabitants near the Alps, are troubled with a certain Disease called
Bronchocele, which is an outward swelling in their Throats from the Chin
downward, sometimes to the middle of their Breast, so that they appear at first
to have no Neck or Chin, but one continued Thing from their Mouth downward. It
is exceedingly hard and easily affected with Cold; the cause of it is believed
to be their continual Drinking of Snow-water, which runs continually from the
Neigbouring Hills.

Montmelian, is a Fortress of great strength upon the Borders of Savoye near to
Daufin; it is the only considerable place for strength in all Savoye, and
stand^ within 3 leagues of Chamberrie, and within 5 or 6 of Granoble, which is
a Parliament Town, and the Capital City o^ Daufine; as Chamberrie is of Savoye.
(...) the necessity of your occasions and you^ Engagement to the Messenger
oblige you not to go straight to Lions, it will be very proper to see Granoble,
Anciently called Gratianopolis from the Emperor Gratian: not that he was the
first Founder of it, but because he enlarged it much, and beautified it. It
lies in a plain at the foot of the Hill Chelmont, and has the River Isere on
the one side, and Drac, which is an impetuous torrent on the other. A little
beyond the Drac, there is a wonderful Curiosity to be seen; that is, a
Fountain that burns constantly. The Fields about the Town are exceeding
Fertile, and carry good Wine, but the neighboring Hills are so high, that you
may see Snow all the days of Summer upon their Tops. The Manufactorie of
Gloves and dressing of Skins of all sorts is much commended in this City.

But the most considerable thing in all this Country to be seen is the great
Charter House, so called because the General of the Order is obliged to Reside
here. It is a stately Monastery, but stands in the wildest place that ever my
feet trod upon. The Reason they give for choosing this place is, because St.
Bruno, the first Instituter of their Order, did penance here; It stands very
near the Mount Chelmount, being three Miles distant from Granoble by a
continual ascent. These three leagues will take you eight or nine good Hours
riding, for in many places it is not safe to ride, and you must be forced to
walk a foot. About the midway there stands a little inconsiderable Village of
4 or 5 Houses, where it will be fit to repose a little; you will get Bread and
Wine, and it is forty to one but you may meet with some good piece of
sanglier, which abounds upon the Hill; being it is for the most part covered
with Trees. When you come within a Mile of the House, you meet with a great
Port and a Porter to wait upon it, who I suppose shuts it in the Night time.
Within the Port there is a Bridge over a great Cleft, within, which runs a
little Rivolet; there is no possibility of entering any where on that side,
but by this Port, from which you ascend still to the Monastery, but, the way
is easy, and all within the top^ of the Hills covered with Oaks, Beeches, and
Firr-Trees; within half a Mile of the Monastery or some less, stands their
Stables, Garnels and other Office-Houses, which indeed are stately and well
appointed, for there* they have lay-brothers of all Trades that serve to their
purpose, and to this place it is that your Horses are sent back from the
Monastery to be ^eept till your going away, and if by chance any of your own
or Horse-Furniture had been broken by the way, or your Horses lost a Shoe,
they will be all repaired next Morning without your desiring it. They have good
store of Hay, and have made several Closes near to the Monastery, (which
stands on that side of the Hill that hangs to the Southwest, and consequently
has most of the Sun for making of Hay,) having felled down all the Wood that
grew upon them. When you Arrive at the Monastery, you alight from your Horses
and then the Porter desires you to stay until he call the Prefect, who
presently comes and informs himself of your Names, Qualities, Country, and the
Occasion of your coming (for most part come out of Devotion, and they be but
few Strangers that come for Curiosity, but however all are welcome,) which
being done he craves you Patience to acquaint the General, but he very soon
returns to conduct you to your apartement, only you must leave your Swords and
Pistols with the Porter at the Gate. The Monastery is very large, and they
have a different apartment for most Nations. We were carried into one that was
very convenient, being a large Room wanscoted about with Firr-^^ords; and for
Fireing, every Log of Wood they put on, is like the End of a Ships-Mast. Our
Beds for the most part were at the sides of the Room within the Wall, all
boorded about like a Ships Cabin; and for Courtens having two folding leaves,
which you may shut or leave open at pleasure. Upon our first Arrival into this
Room, we were presented with a Collation of very good Wine, Bread, Butter and
Cheese; and then a Guide given us to conduct us up the Hill, yet half a Mile
further, to see St. Bruno's Chapel, that stands in the place where he did his
Penance for many Years together, as they will more particularly inform you,
and as you return they will let you see another Chapel Dedicated to our Lady.
By that time you are returned to the Monastery it will be time to Supp, and
then according to your number you will be treated with more or fewer Dishes. We
were only six in Company, and we had above 30 Dish of Meat, but there was not
above three or four Varieties, except in the way of dressing; and for that they
are admirable. I believe we had at least a Dussen of different dishes of Eggs,
all prepared in different manners; the rest were a few Fishes and Fritato's, for
seeing they never eat Flesh themselves, it cannot be exspected they should give
it to any other Body within their Monastery. The next Morning the Prefect
conducts you through the House, shows you the different Apartments, and
particularly to us was shown that of the English Nation, which they used to
Assign for them in former times, but now because of their defection from the
Faith, they have given it to the German Nation. They show you painted about the
Walls the several Torments and Deaths inflicted upon those of their Order in
England, in the time of King Henry the 8. and Queen Elizabeth. They let you see
the Church, the Library, the Refectory, the Religious Cells, the Kitchen,
(which is the best I have seen in France after that of the Jesuits at
L^-Flesch,) and lastly the Cellers, which are well enough furnished, but
nothing so well as those at Naples of the same Order. If any Gentleman be
desirous to see the General, and speak with him, it will be granted him, and
he will find him very Civil. All this being done you Breakfast, the Prefect
waits upon you to the Gate, where your Horses attend you, and your Arms are
delivered you, and so leaveing a little Drink-Money to the Servan^s, (about a
Crown a Head for Gentlemen,) you take leave and return again to Granoble. I
must only add that all this Hill over there is excellent Herbarizing.

From Granoble to Lions, you have a Matter of 15 leagues, in which there is
little considerable.

From Chamberrie to Lions there is 16 leagues, but nothing considerable upon
the way; save only that within 2 Miles of Chamberrie you have only the
Gabelette to pass, which is a very steep and high Mountain in several parts
precipicious, especially on the Savoy side, yet you mount that side on your
own Horses, and must carry along with you from Chamberrie Porters to carry
you down the Hill, on the French side. I think you will pay but half a Crown
for your two Porters, and you will find them as dexterous in their Trade, as
those of Mount Ceni's.

Some that have a mind to see Geneva pass the Alps, either by the Mount Sampion
or the Mount St. Bernard, and so from Geneva either go straight to Lio^s, which
is a Matter of 26 Leagues, or else from Geneva go to Chamberrie, which is 12
Leagues, and from thence to Montmelian, the Grand Charterhouse, and so pass by
Granoble to Lions. This is all that occurs to my Memory at present, concerning
this Journey.

In truth I am very sensible that it might have been much more accurat, had I
been so diligent as to write of it in the time I made the Journey, when all
things were fresh in my Memory. But that occasion being lost; I had no more
left me, but to Recol^ect my Thoughts as carefully as I could to satisfy your
desire, and the rather because I am hopeful, it will provoke you to make a
more diligent Inquiry after all things, and to set them down Orderly, without
trusting your Memory. This I conjure you to do; and assure your self, it is
one of the greatest things I will expect from you at your return. I confess, I
have been somewhat prolix in my narration, but, if you consider the vastness
and Fertility of the Subject, you will find few Towns in Italy, of which there
might not have been more said than I have said of them all; and this you will
easily find to be true if you please to make a Collection of those Books that
are written of the Antiquities, and Curiosities, of each of them: For there is
scarcely any Town in Italy, where, you may not find such Books. However such
as it is I offer it you, and wish it were better for your sake, for whole
service it was only undertaken; and if it prove acceptable and useful to you,
I have my design. I shall o^lie add that it had been sent you much sooner, had
not the Necessity of an Extraordinary attendance upon this Winter-Session, so
often withdrawn me, together with the other Duties of my Profession, which I
was Obliged to perform.

Postscript.

A List of those Things, which I desire The Lord of LEVINGSTONE to procure for
me in Italy.
1. All the new Books of Physic, Botany, and that any way relate to the
History of Nature, that have been printed since the 64. and of Old Books,
Aldrovandi's works at Bolognia, together with any other he can meet with, that
was contained in the first List I gave him when he parted from hence, as also
at Rome I desire him to buy me a Book in Taildouce, containing all the
Antiquities, Palaces Statues, Churches, Villa's, Fountains, Pyramids etc. in
Rome. I would have it of the best, largest and finest Impression; and if you
cannot get them so in one Book, I would have you take them in several Fashions
as you can best find them: You may inquire appresso Giacomo di Rossi a la Pace
in Roma. Also Caroli Avantij, Paraleipomena Botanica, if it be to be had, for I
never saw it, only he promises it in his Notes in Caenam Baptiste Fiera 4.
Patav 1649.

2. At Florence I desire that you would remember to procure me a small Parcel
of all the Varieties of Stones you can come by. The ready way will be to
inquire for them at the Stone Cutters in the great Dukes Chapel at St. Laurence
Church, or else at the Workmen that work in Stone for Cabinets at the Dukes
Gallerie. But above all, of these two kinds of Stone that are most common at
Florence; whereof the one Represents Trees, and Forests; the other, Towns and
Villages: I would have of each two or three large handsome choice Pieces, fit
to be put in Frames. I would likeways have of those pieces of Cristal that are
extraordinary for Color, or otherwise that have any Substance, contained
within them; as water, etc. you may possibly find such, either at Florence or
Millan, or it may be Venice or any other where. There is likeways a Stone
called Lapis Fungiferus; It is a Stone that being placed in the Ground produces
large Mushroms; I had one of them given me at Rome, but unhappily lost it at
London. To the best of my Memory, they are commonly found about Praenestae,
commonly called Palestrina. Some honest Virtuoso, and particularly Padre
Barilieri alla Minerva in Roma, will tell you where they may be got; I have
likeways heard that they were in many places of the Kingdom of Naples.

3. I humbly desire likeways some parcel of Antieails, some^three or 4 of the
Antiche Lucerne of the best fashioned and best preserved. In my time there was
2 or 3 in the Piazza navona, that sold such things, and particularly an Old
Man, whose Name I have forgot, that had whole Cabinets full of Intalio's and
Medales. I desire likeways some Intalio's that be truly Antique: the
excellency of the Impression, and the deepness of it commends them,
especially if they be well preserved, and neither the Stone nor impression
spoiled. I would likeways have some Brass-Medals of the 1st. or second
Magnitude, that be well preserved. There are many things that commend Medals to
be good, particularly, 1. to be Antique and not Counterfeit. 2. To be well
preserved, 3ly. to have a good Reverse; and it is to be observed, that the
differences of reverses make different Medals, although they be of the same
Emperor, or Consul, and of the same Magnitude, and it is likeways to be
observed that those Emperors who Reigned longest had the greatest Variety of
Medals; As for Reverses, the best are such as are least common; as for example
a Chariot, a Triumphal Arch, a Trophie of War, a Man or a Woman's Head for the
Reverse, two Faces on one side, a Galey, the Instruments of Sacrifice, an
Amphitheatre, a Mousolium, an Elephant, a Lion, a Dolphin, and many more such
that I cannot remember of; as also a Reverse charged with many Figures, can
never be ill, nor one that relates any known History, as one that I have of
Titus Vespasian with a Palm^Tree, a Slave sitting at the foot of it, with this
Word, Judea capta for the Reverse thereof. But I doubt mine is only a Copy,
and not truly Antique. I would likeways have a few Chamaeo's providing they be
not dear; that which commends them is to have the Figures well done, and to be
well preserved. The Pretiousnes of the Stone does likeways contribute much to
their Value. In all there, that is, Medales, Intaglias, Chameo's, I would be
content that ye did bestow 4 or 5 Pistolls for me, which though I confess it be a
very small Sum; yet you may chance to make a better purchase for it at Rome
than any where else for a far bigger. Lastly, to conclude this Article, I
would fain have some of the Ancient Glass, which through time looks now as it
were Opal; Nothing will commend it so much as to find an entire vase or Phiol,
for example a Lachrimatory, such as the Ancients used to cape their own or
their Friends Tears in.

4ly. There is the Face of a Hill near to Rome, as I remember, it is at the End
of the Janicular, not far from Cardinal Francis Barherin's Villa, that is full
of Shells of all sorts Petrified, or if ye please to call them Stones,
resembling all the Species of Shells. By what means they came there, I leave
you to find out* only I would fain have you to make good Provision of all the
Varieties of them, and these as entire as you can get them.

5ly. At Naples I would desire you to buy me a couple of black Sashes, Network
such as they use. I think the best use to cost 3 or 4 Crowns a Piece, and I
would have the best. I would likeways have you to buy me at Luca, or at
Florence, I think you may do it in either, two of the largest quilted Silk
Stomagers, or Breast-Plates, such as people use to wear there in Winter time.
And at Rome I entreat you to buy me a Dossen a pair of Gloves, Concia di Roma,
not exceeding a Testone, or 4 Julio's a pair: and at Venice two pound, of the
best Old Theriae. At Bolognia a Dossen or two of Soap-Balls.

6ly. All the Natural Curiosities that you can meet with, with your
conveniencie of Fowls, Fish, Insects or other Animals, the manner of Ordering,
of which I have written to you formerly. I confess these you sent me from Paris
were the best ordered I ever saw; but besides that it is too Expensive, you
will not allways meet with the Opportunity, of having them so ordered; therefore
it will be sufficient, if the Skins (being carefully taken of, and stuffed with
Flax, or Cotton) be so preserved: But for the smaller sort of Insects, their
whole Bodies will easily preserve; the Guts being first taken out. Of this kind
I would have these viz. a Viper or two both the kinds of Tarantula, viz. the
Stellio, which is a kind of Lizard Curiously, Spotted, but accounted Poisonous;
and the other true one, which is shaped like a Spider: and what others you
think fit.

7ly. Be pleased to make me some purchase of Outlandish Curiosities,
especially, such as are from the Levant, of whatsoever Sort that you can meet
with. Buy me at Venice, a Stilletto, and a pair of Armenian Shoos, shod with
Iron on the heels, such as they use to wear undermost.


For the rest I refer you to the Itinerary, and shall earnestly entreat you to
do me the Favor to Remember all my desires, as far as may Stand with your
Convenience, for further I should be very sorry to trouble you. I do likeways
with much Earnestness Recommend to you those Particulars, concerning my self,
mentioned in such Places of the French Itinerary (which I sent you last Year)
as you have not yet seen. Thus, once again wishing you all happiness,

I Remain Your etc.


