CHIROLOGIA: OR THE NATVRALL LANGVAGE OF THE HAND. Composed of the Speaking
Motions, and Discoursing Gestures thereof. Whereunto is added CHIRONOMIA: Or,
the Art of MANVALL RHETORIC. Consisting of the Natural Expressions, digested
by Art in the HAND, as the chiefest Instrument of Eloquence, BY HISTORICAL
MANIFESTO'S, EXEMPLIFIED Out of the Authentic Registers of Common Life, and
Civil Conversation. With TYPES, or CHYROGRAMS: A long-wish'd for illustration
of this Argument. By J. B. Gent. Philochirosophus.

Manus membrum hominis loquacissimum. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper, and are
to be sold by R. Whitaker, at his shop in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO HIS HEROIQVE FRIEND, EDWARD GOLDSMITH of GRAIES-INNE, Esquire.
SIR,
WHen I first (according to my open and free manner of communication to my
Intellectual Friends) showed you a Copy of my Idea, which acquainted you
with my scope and general projection upon Gesture; you were pleased (as in a
Platonique ecstasy of apprehension) to admire the vastness of the Design, to
applaud the rise thereof, and the promising aspect it had to the advancement of
Learning; insomuch as filled with the benevolent influence and illustration of
a Prophetique rapture, you turned Chiromancer, divining by the lines of life
and prosperity, which appeared fair unto you in the first draught; that the
Hand would be embraced and kissed by the more intelligent part of the world,
and in time travel and learn to speak (as it does naturally) so literally
all Languages. This strong reflection of your conceits on my early
undertakings, you have by the vivacity of a mastering fancy, oftentimes
endeavored to propagate in the opinions of your most generous Acquaintances,
which as they were the friendly efforts of a subtle perspicacity of your
Judgment (which I have heard a Great Critique to acknowledge to be the genuine
felicity of your intellect, whereby you are able to dissect the least atome of
a Philosophical projection:) I have (though the raising of expectation proves
many times an injurious courtesy) took as a good omen to advance upon. What
was then a cloud that had neither the shape, nor bigness of a man's Hand, is now
grown fit to be held up, and by its own suffrage to choose and confirm you
its Patron: For, I affecting no Dedication that rises above the level of
Friendship, having intentionally consecrated all the issues of my recesse and
leisure to certain select Friends; This both by prescription and signiority of
acquaintance as by a Prerogative, and by a reciprocation of love for your
affection to it, falls to your Tuition. I confess some other of my digested
thoughts strugled for precedencie, claiming by the analogy of Natures usual
course, and the Head would have had the privilege of primogeniture: But it
fell out in the contention somewhat like as in the case of Tamars twins, where
Zarah put forth his Hand, and the midwife said, This is come out first. However
this Chirosophie or first Fruits of my Hand be accepted abroad, having put
forth my Right Hand in sign of amity to you, and for performance of promise:
there remains nothing (most noble Chirophilus) but that you take it between
Yours in token of warranty and protection, as the tender offspring of one who
is

Your affectionate Friend, JOHN BULVVER.

TO THE Candid and Ingenious READER.
This Copy of my IDEA; OR THE Hint, Scope, and general Projection.
THe consideration in general, and at large of humane Nature, that great Light
of Learning has adjudged worthy Franc. L. Verul. V^s^ount St. Albans de Aug^.
Scient. l 4.
to be emancipate and made a knowledge of it self. In which continent of
Humanity he has noted (as a maine deficiencie) one Province not to have been
visited, and that is Gesture. Aristotle (says he) ingeniose and solerter,
corporis fabricam, dum quiescit, tractavit, eandem in motu, nimirum gestus
corporis, omisit, that is, he has very ingeniously and diligently handled the
factures of the Body, but not the Gestures of the Body, which are no less
comprehensible by Art, and of great use and advantage, as being no small part
of civil prudence. For, the lineaments of the Body do disclose the
disposition and inclination of the mind in general; but the motions do not
only so, but do further disclose the present humor and state of the mind and
will; for as the Tongue speaks to the Ear, so Gesture speaks to the Eye,
and therefore a number of such persons whose Eyes do dwell upon the Faces and
fashions of men, do well know the advantage of this observation, as being most
part of their ability; neither can it be denied but that it is a great
discoverer of dissimulation, and great direction in business. For, after one
manner almost we clappe our Hands in joy, wring them in sorrow, advance them in
prayer and admiration; shake our Head in disdain, wrinkle our Forehead in
dislike, crispe our nose in anger, blush in shame, and so for the most part of
the more subtle motions. Taking (therefore) from hence my Hint, I shall attempt
to advance in the scrutinie and search after the scattered glances, and touches
of Antiquity, tracing them through most classical Authors, with intent to
reduce them into one continued and entire History, propounding this form to my
self, to handle Gesture, as the only speech and general language of Humane
Nature. For ballast to the subject, and to make the matter in Hand more sollid
and substantive, I shall annex consultations with Nature, affording a gloss of
their causes: And for the further embellishing thereof, I shall enrich most
points of expression with examples both of Sacred and profane Authority, more
especially drawn from Poets and Historians, the only great Doctors in this
point of Humane literature; wherein, by the way, I shall lay claim to all
metaphors, proverbiall translations or usurpations, and all kind of
symbolicall Elegancies taken and borrowed from Gestures of the Body, with the
depredations the subtiler Arts of Speech have made upon them for the
advancement and exaltation of their particular inventions and designs. All
these (together with the civil rites, and ceremonious customs and fashions of
diverse Nations in their national expressions by Gesture, with the personal
properties and genuine habits particular men) being but as so many several
lines that meet in an angle, and touch in this point; I intend to reduce and
bring home to their fountain and common parent the Body of man. Two
Amphitheaters there are in the Body, whereon most of these patheticall
subtilties are exhibited by Nature, in way of discovery or impression,
proceeding either from the effect of sufferance, or the voluntary motions of
the Mind, which effect those impressions on the parts which we call the
Speaking Motions, or Discoursing Gestures, and natural Language of the Body,
to wit, the Hand and the Head; in answer whereof, I intend two receptacles of
the observations, falling within the compass of their particular Districts,
under the general Titles of Chirologia and Cephalelogia, The natural language
of the Hand, and The natural language of the Head; and these two comprise the
best part of the expressions of Humane Nature. Chironomia, or the Rule of the
Hand is adjoined as the perfection and sublimation of Chirologie; as
Cephalenomia, or the Rule of the Head, is to appear with Cephalelogia, as
being the qualification of all Cephalicall expressions, according to the Laws
of Civil Prudence. The personal or genuine expressions fall in with these.
What I find remarkable in the natural expressions of the other parts, I shall
refer to a general Rendevouze, wherein I shall take a muster of the Postures
and Gestures of the Body in general. All that I shall have to say more to the
Hand in point of Gesture, is under the Title of Chirethnicalogia, or the
National expression of the Hand. This I account my left Hand. By this Clavis
(I suppose) the Intellectual Reader will see that the Work will be
supplementall to Learning, and not of supererogation, New, and in regard of the
generality of the Design, never attempted by any, affording profitable hints
to such ingenious spirits, who desire to understand the mysterious properties,
of so admirable and important a piece of themselves.

In candidissimam amicissimamque Johannis Bulweri Manum.
DA, Bulwere, Manu^: cui redda^t oscula Musae,
Quam mirata velit Pallas, and esse suam.
Talem formosae Veneri pinxisset Apelles,
Hoc quoque Posteritas non imitetur opus.
Delicias Scenae nec Roscius ille movebat
Talem, visa fuit quae sine voce loqui.
Candidior non illa, volentem docta Senatum
Ducere, facundi quae Ciceronis erat.
Dignior ecce Manus tua formas induit omnes,
Invenit atque arts ingentosa novas.
Eloquii pandens nunc melleaflumina fundit,
Nunc contracta brevi rem ratione probat.
Nunc sublata Dei lauds ad sydera tollit,
Nunc conjuncta humiles mittit ab ore preces.
Jam demissa pavet; jam se complexa potitur
Voto; jam pectus, sed gemibunda quatit.
Quid mihi vel centum linguae sint, oraque centum,
Unica mill tua haec si Manus instar erit?
At tu Chirosophus Digito monstrabere, Palma^
Deferat, and plaudens jam Tibi cuncta manus.
Ad eundem.
ALciden pede cognoscamus, and ungue Leonem:
Gratulor ostendi Te potuisse MANU.
FRA: GOLDSMITH.

To his ingenious Friend the Author; on his CHIROLOGIA.
THe Hands discoursing Gestures, ever rife,
Though not so much observed in common life,
(Notes wherein History delights to place
The circumstantiall beauties of her grace)
Thy Hand has, like a cunning Motist, found
In all the Senses, wherein they abound:
Which in one Bundle with thy Language ty'de,
Ore-tops the poring Book-wormes highest pride.
At the first sight we learn to read; and then
By Natures rules to perce and construe Men:
So commenting upon their Gesture, find
In them the truest copy of the Mind.
The Tongue and Heart th'intention often divide:
The Hand and Meaning ever are ally'de.
All that are deaf and dumb may here recrute
Their language, and then bless Thee for the mute
Enlargemeut of Thy Alphabets, whose brief
Expresses gave their Minds so free relief.
And of this silent speech, Thy Hand does show
More to the World then ere it looked to know.
He is (that does deny Thy Hand this right)
A Stoique or an Areopagite.
GUIL. DICONSON.

To his singular good and approved Friend: this Express or Signature of
intellectual Amity, Upon his CHIROLOGIA.
I joy (dear friend) to see thy Palm display
A new Chirosophie, which hidden lay
In Natures Hieroglyphique grasped, the grand
And express Pantotype of Speech, the Hand.
Me thought thy Enchiridion, at first view,
Seemed like that Manual cloud, that swiftly grew,
Till the moist Curtain had the heavens ore-spread,
For straight ways it became the Encycloped.
Who Will not believe, with deep Charon, that men
May have more senses then they erst did ken?
Since Speech, that does within thy Hand commence,
Deserves the double honor of a Sense,
And may obtain unto a better end,
That, to which Lingua did in vain pretend.
How might Antiquity now blush to see
Such maine deficiencies supplied by Thee?
Interpreters henceforth grow out of date,
While Politiques usurp the Sultans state;
And (fellow-Communers) in dumb disputes
Outv^e th'intelligence of all his Mutes.
The babe, whose harp of Speech is yet unstrung,
Speaks sense and reason in this Infant-Tongue.
All Tribes shall now each other understand,
Which (though not of one lip) are of one Hand.
Chirologie redeemes from Babels doom,
And is the universal Idiome.
Ad eundem.
REmove the Pillars, and set out the Bar,
The Old Ne plus ultra's narrow bounds, as far
As active Wit imployes a speaking Hand:
For, Science though it have an unknown land,
Yet there is no Straights or utmost Thule set,
Inventions new Discoveries to let.
Since the Great Instauration of the Arts
By Verulamian Socrates, whole parts
Advanced Learning to a perfect state.
Thou art the first that from his hints durst date
For Arts bemoaned defects, a new supply;
(The hardest Province in Humanity.)
Which does in thy Projections ample sphere
Another Novum Organum appear.
And as we much unto Thy Hand do owe
For Augmentation, some as far shall go
Another way, to show their learned might,
While Science, Crescent-like, extends her light.
Thus while the grateful Age offer whole springs
Of Palm, my zeal an humble Dactyle brings:
Which lawful pride (like Batrachus his name
He strove to fasten on Octavia's frame)
Shall be my highest glory: May I stand
But as Excrescence on thy well-limb'd Hand.
THOMAS DICONSON, Med. Templ.

To his deservedly honored Friend, Mr. I. B. Upon his excellent piece, his
CHIROLOGIA.
SIR:
IN those Antique times, when men were good,
And studied the now vice called Gratitude:
Those that in Arts inventions first did shine,
Were honored with the Title of Divine.
Physic and Versing, in his flaming Chair
Placed Phoebus, and bestowed that blazing Hair:
Whence often it has been observed and seen,
Physicians have the best of Poets been.
How should we honor Thee then, whose Hands gain
Has added to his Gifts a higher vein?
In these consuming days, have eased our Tongues,
And raised an Art in favor of the Lungs.
Let Bacons soul sleep sweet: the time is come
That Gesture shall no longer now be dumb;
And Natures silent motions shall advance
Above the Vocal key of Utterance:
Where every Digit dictates, and does reach
Unto our sense a mouth-excelling Speech.
Arts Perfector! What Babell did deny
To Lips and Ear, Thou Have given the Hand and Eye;
Have reconciled the World, and its defect
Supplied, by one unerring Dialect.
To Thee this boon we owe; for which great worth
We all desirous are to limb Thee forth:
But blushing, must confess, none can command
A pencill worthy Thee, but Thy own Hand.
JO. DICKENSON.

Ad eruditum CHIROLOGIAE Authorem, omnisque reconditioris Philosophiae
Scrutatorem assiduum.
NOn prius auditae Sophiae dasfercula Mystis,
Et Tua convivas excipit una MANVS.
Das quod pollicitus saepe es; laetorque videre
Te summam scriptis imposuisse Manum:
Expansaque Manu, Capitis mysteria pandes;
Hoc te facturum das mihi Chirographum.
Ad eundem.
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Ad eundem.
SEe here appears a Hand, one limb alone,
Borne to the World, a perfect (...).
And mark how well it is muscled, how it speaks
Fresh from the Presses womb? and view the freakes
Of this emphatique silence, which does sound
Only to the Eye: beyond which ovall round
It roves not; and this mute Vocalitie
Is practiced, where there wants ability
Of mutual knowledge of each others tongue.
The Hand alone does intimate our strong
Or faint desires: In this garb long ago
We spoke with th'Indian Apochankano.
Thus may we trade with the dumb Ginnie Drills
By Exercise: and make our secret wills
Known to those rational Brutes; and thus we
May make the World one University.
Bacon the Britaine-Stagerite, found fault
With all the Ancients, 'cause they never taught
This in their Schools: Now the Work is ended;
Which best of all is by it self commended.
So, our Briareus; of whose new design
By Chiromancies leave I must divine:
He need not fear bold Atropos her knife,
For in his Hand each line's a line of life.
JO: HARMARUS, Oxoniensis (...).

To his excellent Friend the Author; on his CHIROLOGIA.
CAn swelling rage, without a Genius, streine
To the true pitch of a Poetique vein?
And shall not Loves harmonious heat inspire
My thoughts, and set them to Apollo's lyre?
I feel my Hand, deep struck in friendships vein,
With rich invention flowing out amain.
And where such force the Pens engagement draws,
There an unskilful Hand may give applause.
Were I Bellona's D^rling, I would fight:
But at that Spirits rate that Thou dare write;
Mercuriall valor in Thy conquering Pen
Equals the Hand of War in ord'ring men.
I find Thee (Friend) well armed to repel
Th'affronts of any scoffing Ismael;
Whose carping Hand against every man is bent,
And each man's Hand against his Hands cross intent.
Thou may such blows without a Gauntlet ward,
Or any Second of Thy Fames life's Guard:
But if a Viper through the glove invade
Thy harmless Hand; shake'^ off, and to Thy aid
Raise Thy own new Militia, Thy Hands,
Natures best squadron, and Arts Trained Bands.
I. W.

Meissimo in deliciis, CHIROLOGIAE Authori; Amanuensi Musarum, Polihymniae
Alumno, Motistarum Clarissimo, and MANUS public praehensantium Candidato.
INdigitare tuas per ter tria nomina lauds,
Nomenelatorem Turma Novena jubet
Chirologus: manibus signas, gestuque loquaci
Exempla Historici multa notantis habes.
Chirophilus pangis rapti modulamen amoris,
Verbaque Palmari saepe canenda choro.
Chirocrates nodosa Manu subjecta potenti
Arguta Digiti calliditate valent
Chirographus miranda notas, subscripta coloras,
Talia nec poterit Penelopea Manus.
Chiromantis acutus ab apparentibus infers
Mores, and Manibus pectora far facis.
Chirocrites Criticis Digitalia dicta profaris,
Gestu Philologis Oedipus alter eris.
Chirimimus agis variatas dicere formas,
Pollice multiplicem Protea vincis acer.
Chiromysta orare doces, penetralia signi
Scrutaris, praxi stat pietatis honos.
Chirodorus opem Musis das munere Dextram,
Tendens doctrinae, magna docentis opus.
Sed palmata novo nutans Polihymnia voto
Omnia complectens, nomen and omen erit;
Assensere omnes, Palmis te digna locutum,
Pleronymi titulo dicere Chirosophum.
R. G. Nomenclator Chiro-musae.

Chirologia? OR THE NATVRALL LANGVAGE Of the HAND.
IN all the declarative conceits of Gesture, whereby the Body, instructed by
Nature, can emphatically vent, and communicate a thought, and in the propriety
of its utterance express the silent agitations of the mind; the Hand, that
busy instrument, is most talkative, whose language is as easily perceived and
understood, as if Man had another mouth or fountain of discourse in his Hand.
So proper and apt to make signs, and work great matters is the Hand of Man; It
seems to me observable, that when Moses covertly desired Exodus 4. 2, 3, 4, 6,
7, 8, 9, verses.
a sign of God, to make the Egyptians believe He had appeared unto him, God
presently asked him what he had in his Hand? and commands him natural gestures
which had thence the force of miraculous signification: and to these signs,
God attributes a voice, for He says, If they will not hearken to the voice of
the first sign, they will believe the voice of the latter sign: (and as there
is in the supernatural, so there is a signifying voice in the natural signs
of the Hand.) Althusius calls these miraculous Althusius de civili
conversatione, li. 1.
expressions of the Hand, habitus portentosos, which by their rare and
illustrious action denote and express some singular and memorable intention by
the command of God, besides their natural signification. For, the Hand being
the Substitute and Vicegerent of the Tongue, in a full, and majestique way of
expression, presents the signifying faculties of the soul, and the inward
discourse of Reason: and as another Tongue, which we may justly call the
Spokesman of the Body, it speaks for all the members thereof, denoting their
Suffrages, and including their Votes. So that whatsoever thought can be
delivered, or made significantly manifest, by the united motions and connative
endeavors of all the other members: the same may be as evidently exhibited by
the sole devoyre, and discoursing gestures of the Hand. The intendments of
which demonstrative gestures (being natural signs) have no dependence on any
ordinance or Statute of Art, which may be broken off, or taken in hand; as it
is either repealed, or stands in force: but these being part of the unalterable
Laws and Institutes of Nature, are by their own perpetual constitution, and
by a native consequence significant. As smoke which in dark vapors expires
from incensed fuel is a certain sign of fire; or as rich smells by whose
aromatique breath the ayer's perfumed, do sweetly declare the presence of the
ascended odor: and as the blushes of Aurora bewray the early approach of the
bright Emperor of the day: So that in these Art has no Hand, since they
proceed from the mere instinct of Nature: and all these motions and habits of
the Hand are purely natural, not positive; nor in their senses remote from the
true nature of the things that are employed. The natural resemblance and
congruity of which expressions, result from the habits of the mind, by the
effort of an impetuous affection wrought in the invaded Hand, which is made
very plyant for such impressions. But whereas these speaking Organs are
couplets, an active pair; sometimes they both, and not seldom one alone does
by a neat insinuation of speech, make and accomplish the habit. Sometimes
differing words, which visibly grow on one root of action, go for Synonima's
in gesture: and we shall sometimes see contrariety of patheticall expression,
in identity of posture.

Nor does the Hand in one speech or kind of language serve to intimate and
express our mind: It speaks all languages, and as an universal character of
Reason, is generally understood and known by all Nations, among the formal
differences of their Tongue. And being the only speech that is natural to
Man, it may well be called the Tongue and general language of Humane Nature,
which, without teaching, men in all regions of the habitable world do at the
first sight most easily understand. This is evident by that trade and commerce
with those salvage Nations who have long enjoyed the late discovered
principalities of the West, with whom (although their Language be strange and
unknown) our Merchants barter and exchange their Wares, driving a rich and
silent Trade, by signs, whereby many a dumb bargain without the crafty
Brocage of the Tongue, is advantageously made. Hence it is apparent, that
there is no native law, or absolute necessity, that those thoughts which arise
in our pregnant mind, must by mediation of our Tongue flow out in a vocal
stream of words; unto which purpose we must attend the leisure of that
enclosed instrument of speech: Since whatsoever is perceptible unto sense, and
capable of a due and fitting difference; has a natural competency to express
the motives and affections of the Mind; in whose labors, the Hand, which is a
ready Midwife, takes oftentimes the thoughts from the forestalled Tongue,
making a more quick dispatch by gesture: for when the fancy has once wrought
upon the Hand, our conceptions are displayed and uttered in the very moment of
a thought. For, the gesture of the Hand many times gives a hint of our
intention, and speaks out a good part of our meaning, before our words, which
accompany or follow it, can put themselves into a vocal posture to be
understood. And as in the report of a Piece, the eye being the nimbler sense,
discernes the discharge before any intelligence by conduct of the vocal Wave
arrive at the ear; although the flash and the report are twins born at the
instant of the Pieces going off: so although Speech and Gesture are conceived
together in the mind, yet the Hand first appearing in the delivery,
anticipates the Tongue, in so much as many times the Tongue perceiving her self
forestalled, spares it self a labor; to prevent a needless Tautologie: And
if words ensue upon the gesture, their addition serves but as a Comment for the
fuller explication of the manual Text of utterance; and implies nothing over
and above but a general devoyre of the mind to be perfectly understood. A
notable argument we have of this discoursing faculty of the Hand in our common
Jesters, who without their voice, speaking only by gestures, can counterfeit
the manners, fashions, and significant actions of men. Which may be more
confirmed by that wonder of ^^cessity which Nature works in men that are
borne deaf and dumb; who can argue and dispute rhetorically by signs, and
with a kind of mute and logistique eloquence overcome their amazed opponents;
wherein some are so ready and excellent, they seem to want nothing to have
their meanings perfectly understood. It Is parallel to this, what Natures grand
Inquisitor reports of certain Nations, that have no other language Plin. Hist.
Not.
wherein to impart their minds; the common tongue of Beasts, who by gestures
declare their senses, and dumb affections. For although Seneca Seneca de Ira
lib. 1. cap. 3.
will not allow their motions to be affections, but certain characters and
impressions ad similitudinem passionum, like unto passions in men, which he
calls impetus, the risings, forces and impulsions of Nature, upon the view of
such objects as are apt to strike any impressions upon it: yet as Montaigne (in
that elegant Essay of his, where he in Montaign Essay in Raimond Sebond.
imitation of Plutarch, maintains that Beasts participate with us in the
rationality of their discourses) shows, that even they that have no voice at
all, by their reciprocal kindness, which we see in them, we easily infer
there are some other means of entercommunication: their gestures treat, and
their motions discourse. Non alia long ratione atque ipsa videtur
Protrahere ad Gestum, pueros infantia linguae.
No otherwise, then for they cannot speak,
Children are drawn by signs their minds to break.


And why not (says he) as well as our dumb men dispute and tell histories by
signs? Certainly (as he well observes) there is a society and communion of
justice, fellowship, good will, and affection between us and Brutes: they being
not so remote from good nature, gentleness, and sweet converse, but that they
can express their desire of honor, generositie, industrious sagacity,
courage, magnanimity, and their love and fear; neither are they void of
subtilty and wisdom. For by reason of their affinity as it were, and daily
conversation with men, they get a tincture from us of our manners and fashions,
and consequently enjoy a kind of nurture and teaching discipline, and
apprentising by imitation, which does enable them to understand and express
themselves in this language of gesture, teaching us by learning of us, that
capable they be not only of the inward discourse of Reason, but of the outward
gift of utterance by gesture: and if there be some gestures of ours that they
do not understand, so there are some of theirs which need an Interpretor, a
greater Critique in their language then Democritus Melampus, or Apollonius
Thyaneus were, who understood all the idiomes of Birds and Beasts, to expound
them unto us. Plato in setting out the golden Age under Saturn, reckons among
the chiefest advantages, this kind of communication. And indeed it is a kind
of knowledge that Adam partly lost with his innocence, yet might be repaired in
us, by a diligent observation and marking of the outward effects of the inward
and secret motions of beasts.

This natural Language of the Hand, as it had the happiness to escape the
curse at the confusion of Babel: so it has since been sanctified and made a
holy language by the expressions of our Saviors Hands; whose gestures have
given a sacred allowance to the natural significations of ours. And God
speaks to us by the signs of his Hand (as Bernard observes) when he works
wonders, which are the proper signs of his Hand. Hic est Digitus Dei, say the
astonished Magi, when they acknowledged the expression of a Divine Hand. These
signs in Bernards language, Bernard. lib. 2. in Cantica.
are notae stelliferae, blazing and Starrie expressions. In another Dialect of
his Divine Hand he expresses his revealed will to his Prophets by inspiration,
as Ribera notes: which the Ribera comment. in Proph. M. Beda lib. de Indig
tatione.
Prophets in Scripture acknowledge to be the still voice of the Hand of the
Lord. Bid takes notice of another Dialect or way of expression which God uses
with his Hand, when he persuades men, working upon them by the examples of good
works. After this manner Christ our Lord to his doctrine added the signs of
his Hand, that is, his works: according to that of the Evangelist, Jesus began
to do and teach. And Act. 1. 1
as God speaks to us with his Hand by a supernatural way: so we naturally
speak to Him, as well as unto men, by the appeal of our Hands in admiration,
attestation, and prayer. Nay when we are beyond the vocal lines of
communication with men, and that distance of place has made the highest tone
of our Tongue too low to reach the auditory nerve of one that is remote: or
when the noise of some eare-deafing crowd has rendered our Tongue unserviceable
to declare our mind; we use the visible expressions of our Hand, as more loud
and demonstrative, which are afar off perceived and understood by those who
were incapable of an auricular intimation. And as concerning those manual
expressions which we use to those are less distant from us, the Hand is so
ready and cunning to expound our intentions, abounding in a sense so copious,
and so connaturall a kind of eloquence, wherein all things are so lively
expressed; the Hand seems to enter into contestation, and to vie expresses with
the Tongue, and to over-match it in speaking labors, and the significant
variety of important motions, that it almost transcends the faculty of Art to
enumerate the postures of the Hand, and the discoursing gestures which present
the interpretation of the Mind. Whose manifest habits rise to so high an
account in the Hand, that if their total sum could be cast up, they would
seem to exceed the numericall store of words, and the flowery amplifications of
Rhetorical Phrases. For, with our Hands we

Sue, entreat, beseech, solicit, call, allure, entice, dismiss, grant,
deny, reprove, are suppliant, fear, threaten, abhor, repent, pray, instruct,
witness, accuse, declare our silence, condemn, absolve, show our
astonishment, profer, refuse, respect, give honor, adore, worship, despise,
prohibit, reject, challenge, bargain, vow, swear, imprecate, humor, allow,
give warning, command, reconcile, submit, defy, affront, offer injury,
complement, argue, dispute, explode, confute, exhort, admonish, affirm,
distinguish, urge, doubt, reproach, mock, approve, dislike, encourage,
recommend, flatter, applaud, exalt, humble, insult, adjure, yield, confess,
cherish, demand, crave, covet, bless, number, prove, confirm, congee, salute,
congratulate, entertain, give thanks, welcome, bid farewell, chide, brawle,
consent, upbraid, envy, reward, offer force, pacify, invite, justify,
contemn, disdain, disallow, forgive, offer peace, promise, perform, reply,
invoke, request, repel, charge, satisfy, deprecate, lament, condole, bemoane,
put in mind, hinder, praise, commend, brag, boast, warrant, assure, enquire,
direct, adopt, rejoice, show gladness, complain, despair, grieve, are sad
and sorrowful, cry out, bewail, forbid, discomfort, ask, are angry, wonder,
admire, pity, assent, order, rebuke, favor, slight, dispraise, disparage,
are earnest, importunate, refer, put to comprimise, plight our faith, make a
league of friendship, strike one good luck, give handsell, take earnest, buy,
barter, exchange, show our agreement, express our liberality, show our
benevolence, are illiberall, ask mercy, exhibit grace, show our displeasure,
fret, chafe, fume, rage, revenge, crave audience, call for silence, prepare for
an apology, give liberty of speech, bid one take notice, warn one to forbear,
keep off and be gone; take acquaintance, confess our selves deceived by a
mistake, make remonstrance of another error, weep, give a pledge of aid,
comfort, relieve, demonstrate, redargue, persuade, revolve, speak to, appeal,
profess a willingness to strike, show our selves convinced, say we know
somewhat which yet we will not tell, present a check for silence, promise
secrecy, protest our innocence, manifest our love, enmity, hate and despite;
provoke, hyperbolically extol, enlarge our mirth with jollity and triumphant
acclamations of delight, note and signify another actions, the manner, place,
and time, as how, where, when, etc.

A COROLLARIE Of the Speaking motions, discoursing gestures, or habits of the
Hand. WITH AN Historical Manifesto, exemplifying the natural significations
of those Manual Expressions.
Supplico. Gestus. I.
THE STRETCHING OUT OF THE HANDS is a natural expression of gesture, wherein
we are significantly importunate, entreat, request, sue, solicit, beseech,
and ask mercy and grace at the Hands of others. History, the grave Mistress of
the Rolls of Action and manual expressions, from whose Hand we receive the
placard of Time, subscribed by the reverend Hand of Antiquity, and made letters
Patents under the Broad-seale of Truth: as she is the most faithful guide to
the exemplary knowledge of any matter of Fact passed: so she presents a lively
image of the Hands present estate, and by reflection of her light, affords
subsidiarie presidents and patterns of significant actions to come. For, this
Schoole-mistris of our discoursing gestures, contending with a high Hand, that
no Chiramnestia or act of oblivion should pass against Nature, by transcripts
out of her own Chiridiographicall observations, has sufficiently testified
the natural signification of this Chiridiome, or proper form of speech in the
beseeching Hand.

An example of this natural gesture and expression, we find to have appeared
in the Hand of Julius, who endeavoring to satisfy the desires of Constantius,
but the soldiers forcing him to accept of the style of Augustus, with a
resolute and well grounded mind withstood them all Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 20.
and some, one time showing himself to be wroth and highly displeased, other
whiles STRETCHING FORTH HIS HANDS, requesting and beseeching them to forbear
their unseasonable offer. When Annibal after the battle of Cannae had granted
the Romans the favor and liberty to redeem their prisoners, and M. Junius
had ended his Oration in the Senate, immediately Livie lib. 22.
the multitude that were gathered together in the common place, set up a
lamentable and piteous cry, and HELD OUT THEIR HANDS to the Councell-house,
beseeching the Lords of the Senate that they might have and enjoy their
children, their brethren, and kinsfolks again. The Noblemen in the behalf of
Coriolanus used Plutarch in the life of Coriolanus.
this gesture of the Hand when Sicinius the Tribune had pronounced sentence of
death upon him, for, some of them HOLDING FORTH THEIR HANDS to the people,
besought them not to handle them so cruelly. Thus Manlius and Fulvius coming
unto Tiberius with tears in their eyes, and HOLDING UP THEIR HANDS, besought
him to let the Law Agraria alone, which Plut. in the life of Tiberius and Caius
he would then have passed. And Plutarch in that notable description of
Aemilius triumph relates, how King Perseus children were led prisoners with the
train of their Schoolmasters and other Officers and their servants, weeping
and lamenting, HOLDING OUT THEIR HANDS unto Ib. in the life of Paulus Aemylius.
the people that looked upon them, and taught the Kings young children to do
the like, to ask mercy and grace at the peoples Hands. The force of this
expression has sometimes remained in the Arm when the Hand has been lost.
For Amynias the brother of Aeschylus the Tragedian, when the people of Athens
would have stoned his brother for some impiety brought on the Aelian. var.
Hist. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Stage, he held up his Elbow and Arm without a Hand, lost at the fight at
Salamis: by which spectacle the Judges calling to mind the merits of Amynias,
dismissed the Poet.

Scripture, the most sacred Spring of pregnant Metaphors, and lending gestures,
among other of these kind of speaking apparitions, or divine elegancies, which
are able to enrich a sanctified understanding, the Hebraismes and mysterious
notions resulting from the properties of the Hand, do everywhere obtain, by
divine permission, an ineffable latitude of significations: whose vulgarismes
varied through such multiplicity of senses, are of that note and consequence,
that they much conduce to the advancement of the dignity and reputation of the
Hand. Among other remarkable expressions borrowed from the Hand, wherein God is
pleased to condescend to the capacity of man, and to cloth His expressions in
the natural language of our Hand. That of the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah
has reference to this requesting gesture, where the Lord Isai. 65. 2.
complaining after the manner of men, says, he had STRETCHED OUT HIS HANDS all
day to a rebellious people.

Oro. Gestus II.
TO RAISE THE HAND CONJOINED OR SPREAD OUT TOWARD HEAVEN is the habit of
Devotion, and a natural and universal form of Prayer, practiced by those who
are in adversity, and in bitter anguish of Mind; and by those who give
public thanks and praise to the most High. Thus we acknowledge our offenses,
ask mercy, beg relief, pay our vows, imprecate, complain, submit, invoke,
and are suppliant. Hence it is the Scriptures do most emphatically 1 Timothy 2. 8
define prayer by this outward sign, not that this speaking habit of the Hand
is all or the most principal part of devotion, for, Hyppocrites, as if fired
with zeal, EXTEND THEIR ARMS AND HANDS, who yet but mock God by seeming to
draw nigh unto Him, when their Hearts belie their Hands. But, this gesture is
an outward help unto devotion, appointed by the ordinance of Nature to
express the holy fervor of our affections. For since it is impossible by
reason of our great infirmity, we should with our soaring thoughts move beyond
the center of our bodies; we stand in need of some outward help to declare the
ascension of our inward zeal, which we reveal by the EXTENSION OF OUR HANDS,
which supplying the place of wings, help our hearts in their flight upward.
For unless our hearts are polluted with the leaven of hypocrisy, they raise
the heart to the throne of grace, before which we present our supplications.
But the Soul being invisible, unles she show her self by demonstration of
gesture, the Hand was instituted Surrogate, and Vicar of of the Heart, to
testify by outward gesture, the offering and lifting up of the Heart, and that
our prayers are seriously poured out from the bottom of our Breast. Hence in
those sacred Monuments that keep alive the memories of the Dead, whether their
effigies be exhibited in brass or marble their monumentall Statues are
commonly hewed into this form of prayer. From the practice and natural
propensity of the Hands to prayer, as from the premises, Athanasius (as it is
likely) drew this conclusion: That therefore man had Hands given him, that they
might serve to necessary uses, and to be SPREAD FORTH AND LIFTED UP in offering
prayer to Him who made them. It being on all hands confessed, that this gesture
is an original rite, and a piece of the discipline of Nature, polished also by
the rule of reason, and solemnized by the examples and exhortations of wise
men. For there was no Nation instructed in any kind of piety, who did not know
before hand by a tacit acknowledgement of a God, that the Hands in prayer were
to be LIFTED UP. Omnes homines Arist. lib. de Mund.
tendimus manus ad Coelum cum [praeces fundimus,] says that Prince of
Peripatetiques. And Gobrias in Xenophon seems to confirm the same. Xenoph. Cyr.
Apuleius elegantly and roundly to this purpose. Habitus orantium hic est, ut
Apuleius tit. de mundo.
manibus extensis in coelum [praecemur.] To this purpose Horace. Horac.
Coelo supinas si tuleris manus.
And Lucretius of the same gesture, -- Et Lucret. lib. 5.
pandere palmas
Ante Deum delubra. --
And Pedo Albin. joining in the harmony of all the Heathen Prophets. Atque
aliquis de plebe pius, pro paupere nato
Ped. Albin. in carm. Cons. ad Liviam.
Sustulerat [timidas] sidera ad alta manus.
Hence Jarbas in Virgil is said Multa Iovem Virgil. Aeneid.
manibus [supplex orasse] supinis.
Thus Anchises in the same Poet, At pater Anchises passis Idem lib. 3. Aeneid.
de littore palmis
Numina magna vocat. --
So Cleanthus, Ni Idem li. 5.
palmas ponto tendens utrasque Cleanthus
[Fudissetque praeces, divosque in vota vocasset.]
Thus Cressa in Ovid, -- Ovid. lib. 8. Metam.
ad Sydera supplex
Cressa manus tollens
So Scipio in Sil. Italicus, Sil. Ital. lib. 4.
Sublatis in Coelum manibus [praecatur.]
Their manner was to turn themselves to the East, with an erected countenance,
HANDS OPEN SPREAD, LIFTED UP, AND STRETCHED OUT TOWARD HEAVEN. Whence Valerius
Flaccus, Imperat hinc Valor. Flacc. li. 2.
alte Phoebi surgentis ad orbem Far manus -- --
In this posture we find Antonius Plutarch in the life of Antonius.
LIFTING UP HIS HANDS TO HEAVEN, making a charitable prayer to the gods for his
army when he was to encounter the Parthians. And M. Furius Idem in the life of
Camillus.
Camillus used the same gesture of his Hands in his prayer at the taking of the
City Veies.

Thus Alexander in his third battle with Darius, Idem in the life of Alex.
the great.
before he gave charge upon the enemies, he took his Lance in his left hand,
and HOLDING HIS RIGHT HAND UNTO HEAVEN, besought Idem in the life of Alex. the
Great.
the gods (as Calisthenes writes) that if it were true he was begotten of
Jupiter, that it would please them that day to help him, and to encourage the
Grecians. And the Heathens when they came forth in the morning to plough, they
laid one Hand upon the stilt of the plough, and LIFTED THE OTHER UP to Ceres
the goddess of Corn: beginning both their actions of war and peace with
this gesture. So remarkable was the mixed and double office wherein Nature has
interessed the Hand. For as we raise these to Heaven, so with them we work;
and the Hand thrives but ill that works, unless it prays: which these
Heathens by the instinct of Nature were wrought to acknowledge. And the most
desperate Atheists and Hypocrites, in some extremities and damages, do LIFT UP
THEIR JOINED HANDS TO HEAVEN, as a sign and token of some devotion, though
they have no faith nor belief. Thus also they gave thanks. It is reported that
when Archidamas had overcome the Arcadians, and returned home Plutarch in the
life of Agesilaus.
victorious to Sparta, from that tearlesse battle; neither man nor woman
would keep the City, but came flocking down to the River side, HOLDING UP
THEIR HANDS TO HEAVEN, and thanked the gods, as if their City had redeemed and
recovered her shame and lost honor, and began to rise again as before it did.
And to the signification of this gesture that of Virgil may be referred.
Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
Sustulit exutis vinclis ad sydera palmas.
The LIFTING UP THE HANDS in prayer, as it is a natural expression, so it
seems necessary, for, God requires the whole man; there being a woe pronounced
to fainting Hands, that is, which faint in prayer. When Moses HELD UP HIS
HANDS, Israel prevailed: but when Moses LET Ex. 17. 11.
HIS HANDS DOWN, Amalech prevailed. And when Moses Hands were heavy, they
took a stone and put it under him, and he sat upon it: and Aaron and Hur
stayed up his Hands the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; so
his Hands were steady until the going down of the Sun: and Josuah
discomfited Amalech. Upon which Philo allegorizing, shows that victorious
Philo Judaeus in Exodus
gesture of Moses Hands does signify that by the virtue and intention of
prayer all things are overcome: or it implies the elevation of the intellect to
sublime contemplations, and then Amalech, that is, the affections are overcome.

Origin descanting upon the posture of Moses Origin Hom. 11. in Exodus
Hands, observes that he did elevate, not extend his Hands, that is his works
and actions to God, and had not his HANDS DEJECTED. He LIFTS UP HIS HANDS, that
lays up treasure in heaven. For where we love, thither resorts the eye and the
Hand. He that keeps the Law, orecomes; he that does not, lets Amalech prevail.

Elias Cretensis thus: This gesture of Moses Elias Cretens. comment. in opera
Greg. Naz.
Hands, if you look to that which falls under the aspect of the eye signifies
prayer. Hence in an old Scheme of Clodovaeus there are two arms erected to
Heaven, supported by two others, with this Motto, TUTISSIMUS, with reference to
the conquering Hands of Moses. To teach Commanders, Sil. Petra Sanct.
that piety strikes the greatest stroke in all battles. G^ropius who with an
over strained Gorop. in Hierogl. lib. 9.
phancie following his own conceit, makes use of the natural expressions of
the Hand, for the exalting the Cimbrian or old Teutonique tongue into the
preheminencies of the original language, presen^s his superstitious
observations thus: To join the hands in prayer, and so to apply their upper
parts to the mouth, does signify that men in prayer should seek to be
conjoined to one that is most High: and because prayer proceeds from the mouth,
and the Hands upright with the mouth transverse, seem to delineate a Roman T,
he has another inference from that similitude.

The STRETCHING OUT THE HANDS TO GOD is sometimes taken in Scripture for the
acknowledgement of an offense, as in the prayer 1 King. 8. 38.
of Solomon at the consecration of the Temple: and Solomon praying, STRETCHED
FORTH 1 King. 8. 22.
HIS HANDS TO HEAVEN after this manner, And thus Moses praying STRSETCHED OUT
Exodus 9. 29. and 33.
HIS HANDS UNTO THE LORD. Thus Judas Macchabeus encountering the army of
Nicanor, 2 Macch. 15. 21.
STRETCHED OUT HIS HANDS TOWARD HEAVEN, and called upon the Lord that works
wonders. To the signification of anguish and affliction belongs that of the
Prophet Jeremiah, Zion SPREADS FORTH HER HANDS, Lament. 1. 17.
and there is none to comfort her. For they who pray sometimes STRETCH OUT
THEIR HANDS and sometimes LIFT THEM UP. Hence Lauretus, to SPREAD OUT, or EXTEND
THE HAND, is to open, dilate, and unfold that which was straightened Lauret. in
Sylv. Alleg.
and folded in. To SPREAD OUT THE HAND is also to lift it up: but to EXTEND, is
to erect and raise them up. So he expoundin^ the sacred sense of these speaking
gestures of prayer. S. Hillarie S. Hillar. in Psalm.
very elegantly distinguishes between the EXPANSION and ELEVATION of the
Hands, which in this matter of prayer are promiscuously used in Scripture. So
upon that of the Psalmist, I will Psalm. 63. 4.
LIFT UP MY HANDS in thy Name, he does not take it for the habit of praying,
but for a declaration of a work of a high elevation. So likewise upon such a
passage of another Psalm: Let my Psa. 140. 2.
prayer be set forth before thee as incense, and the LIFTING UP OF MY HANDS as
the evening Sacrifice. He shows that the Apostle where he S. Paul to Timoth.
exhorts them to LIFT UP pure Hands, he does not appoint a habit of praying,
but adds a rule of divine operation. So the noble Prophet, Isaiah.
when you SPREAD FORTH YOUR HANDS, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when
you make many prayers I will not hear: if you EXTEND YOUR HANDS, not if you
LIFT THEM UP; but if you EXTEND YOUR HANDS: because the habit of prayer is in
the SPREAD OUT HANDS; but the power of a perfect work is in the ELEVATION.
Therefore the LIFTING UP THE HANDS is an Evening Sacrifice. But this, for all I
can find, is but the peculiar fancy of this Father. For surely the ELEVATION
as well as the EXPANSION or STRETCHING OUT OF THE HANDS, are both significantly
natural in this sense. Indeed St. Hierome draws these two S. Hier^m. in Exodus
9 and Job 11.
gestures of prayer into Allegories, not much unlike, thus: TO SEND FORTH THE
HAND to God, as it were to seek out for relief, is to direct our actions to
him, and not to work for vain glory. He also SPREADS FORTH HIS HANDS to God,
who dilates in the evaporation of a vain mouth: and who against the grace of
the Giver, is proud of the virtue of his works.

Calvin in his Comment upon Timothy, (upon Calvin. comment. in 1 Timothy 2.
which place Cornelius a Lapide has also noted many things,) observing that
the Apostle has put the sign of prayer for the thing signified, says that
this expression of gesture is very agreeable to true piety; so the verity that
is figured thereby do answer the signification; to wit, that being by nature
admonished that God is to be sought for in heaven, that first we should put
off all terrene and carnal imaginations of Him, that nothing may hinder us in
the raising of our selves above the world. Idolaters and Hypocrites, in LIFTING
UP THEIR HANDS in prayer, are but Apes, who while they by the outward Symbol
profess to have their minds erected upwards, the first of them stick in the
wood and stone, as if God were enclosed there: the second sort entangled in
vain cares, or wicked cogitations, lie grovelling on the earth, and by a
contradiction of gesture, bear witness against themselves.

The Ancients are very copious in expressing these outward forms of devotion
in the Hands, for they say, the HANDS STRETCHED OUT, PUT FORTH, HOLDEN ABROAD,
EXPANSED and ERECTED, and all to imply the natural piety of the Hand in this
expression. With Tertullian the Hands thus affected are EX^ANS'D: with Virgil,
HOLDEN ABROAD: as Nonnius interprets the action, they are the OPEN AND
EXTENDED HANDS. And in this gesture many things are contained.

Maldonat conceives the meaning of this natural ELEVATION OF THE HANDS is to
teach us that Heaven is the throne, and as it were the Cathedral Temple of
God. Pintus thinks this gesture shows that God is on high, and that all
things are to be hoped for at His Hands.

Cresollius says, that this deportment of our Hands declares that we
affectionately fly unto the protection of God our heavenly Father. Even as
little children disabled by some fright with stretched out Hands run into the
lap of their parents: or as men in the midst of shipwreck stretch out their
Hands to some friendly Savior. For, since the force of this Organum organorum,
the Hand, the most excellent instrument of common life does chiefly consist in
three things, in Giving, Doing, and Repelling, who LIFTS UP HIS HANDS seems
wholly to deliver and commit himself and all that he is into the sacred power of
the Godhead, as if with David he had his soul in his Hand: from the Right Hand
of Charity, and the Psalm. 119. 109. ^ Sam. 19. 5. Judge. 9. 17 Job 13. 14.
Left Hand of Zeal, both joined together to make their intentions more
acceptable, as from the living censer or incense-pan of prayer, there ascends,
in a sweet kind of articulated silence, the speaking savor of these
significations.

O Parent of the World! God, the maker of all things! this soul, all that I
am, a thousand times due to thy majesty and gracious Goodness, I render and
refer to its Fountain and Original. What e're my Hands can do, or my tacit
understanding and industry endeavor, let it be Thine! Thee (seduced by ill
counsel) I have withstood, and like a wretch rejected thy Gifts, and by wicked
machinations repelled and thrown them from me. Behold my Hands! which it thou
please command to be bound, and me, an unworthy Traitor, (who have sinned with
a high hand) to be drawn to punishment; who had not lived, unless Thou had
lent me life; which I have abused, and rebelliously stretched out my Hand
against Thee, to my own destruction, and the reproach and dishonor of Thy
Name. All these significant expressions (as Cresoll. in Mystag. lib. 3.
Cresollius has happily observed) are contained in this Gesture.

S. Augustine very elegantly and sweetly gives us the retionality and religious
convenience of this manual expression. When men in prayer S. Aug. de cura pro
mort. lib. 5.
STRETCHED OUT THEIR HANDS, or use any visible expressions, they do that which
is agreeable to the case of a suppliant, although their invisible will and
intention of their heart be known to God; neither does he stand in need of
such declarations that the mind of man should be laid open before him: but by
this gesture man does more rouse up himself to pray and groan more humbly and
fervently: And I know not how, whereas these motions of the body cannot be
done, unless the inward motions of the mind precede, the same thing again
being made externally visible, that interior invisible which caused them is
increased, and by this the affection of the heart, which preceded as the cause
before the effect, for so much as they are done, does increase. And indeed this
outward addition or adjunct of Piety, the OPENING and LIFTING UP OF THE HANDS
is a natural manifestation of the uprightness and integrity of the heart, and
of the sincerity of the affections. For deceit naturally has no will, though
hypocrisy sometimes may affect to dilate and extend the Hand. And the sympathy
is so strong between the Heart and the Hand, that a holy thought can no sooner
enlarge the erected Heart, but it works upon the Hands which are RAISED to
this expression, and EXTENDED OUT TO THE UTTERMOST OF THEIR CAPACITIES. Upon
this natural motion or exposition of the mind, Saint Chrysostom sets a
moral gloss. This LIFTING UP OF OUR HANDS should put us in mind to take heed
S. Chrysostom. Moral.
of sin, lest we defile our Hands therewith. Since it is very absurd, that
those who are to be the Trouchmen and Interpretours of prayer and divine
administrations, should also be the instruments of wickedness: for if we say
it is not honest for a man to pray with dirty and unwashen Hands; how much more
naughtiness will that expression be tainted with, to LIFT UP HANDS not dirty,
but defiled with the pollutions of sin. And in this sense washing of Hands was
used by most Nations before prayer. This Manual of Prayer as a help at Hand,
the Christians in all ages have diversely used for the furthering their
devotion, as may be collected out of the Ecclesiastical records of Time.
Tertullian renders a Tertul. de ^rat.
reason thereof thus: Christians pray with SPREAD OUT HANDS, because our Hands
are harmless; bare-headed, because we are not ashamed; and without a monitor,
because we pray from the breast. For the most part they LIFTED THEM UP. Which
Tertullian would have modestly done, not as madmen who pray Hand over Head.
For this grave Father reporting and praising the modesty and humility of the
Primitive Christians, has left this caution for a rule in prayer: Adoring with
modesty and humility, we do more commend our prayers to God, not so much as
our Hands more loftily held up, but temperately and honestly erected. Sometimes
Christians did not indeed lift up their Hands on high, but did EXTEND THEM OUT
HERE AND THERE into the figure of Christ's suffering. Hence in a Medall of
Gordian the godly, there is Pierius in Hieroglyp.
an Image LIFTING UP THE SPREAD OUT HANDS TO HEAVEN, with this inscription
fitted to the device, Piet as Augusta. And Eusebius Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib.
4 c. 15.
has left a memorial, that Constantine was wont to be figured in Coins and
painted Tables with his HANDS HOLDEN ABROAD, and his eyes lift up to Heaven,
which he calls The habit and composition of Prayer. Doctor Done in reference
to the Symbolicall signification of the Gesture calls it Constantines
Catechisticall Coin.

The same Author in a Sermon upon Job 16. 17 Dr. Donn^ Sermon. 13.
etc. upon these words, Not for any injustice in my Hands: also my Prayer is
pure; according to his elegant way of descanting upon the emphaticall
expressions of holy Writ, has many notions about nocturnall and diurnall
cleanness and foulness of Hands; and observing that the holy Ghost has so
marshalled and disposed the qualifications of prayer in that place, as that
there is no pure prayer without clean Hands, which denote righteousness
toward man; coming to speak of the gesture, and observing that Moses prayer
had no effect longer then his HANDS WERE LIFTED u^: All this (says he)
perchance therefore especially, that this LIFTING UP OF THE HANDS brings them
into our sight, then we can see them, and see whether they be clean, or no;
and consider, that if we see impurity in our Hands, God sees impurity in our
prayer. Can we think to receive ease from God with that Hand that oppresses
another? mercy from God with that Hand that exercises cruelty upon another? or
bounty from God with that Hand that withholds right from another? And to add
by a little enlarging his own words in another place. How can we expect God
should open with his Hands of benediction, who shut up our Hands, and that
which is due to another, in them? How much more then, if we strike with those
Hands by oppression, or (as Esaiah) we lift up the bloody Hands of cruelty.

At this day the common habit of praying in the Church, is, as pertaining to
the Hands, TO IOYN THE HANDS, MODERATELY LIFT THEM up, or religiously cut them
by ten parts into the form of the letter X, holding them in that manner before
the breast: which manner of prayer Cresollius calls Manus decussatas. In the
Romish Church which does superabound in the external adjuncts of Devotion, and
where the Rubriques direct to varying forms of manual expressions at the word
Oremus, there is always annexed some emphaticall behavior of the Hand. Hence
in the Mass when the Priest says Oremus, he EXTENDS, and then IOYNS HIS
HANDS. By the extension of his Hands he gathers as it were the hearts of the
people: by the joining of his Hands together, he does amasse them into one;
which is the gloss of Huelamus upon this Huelamus de cerem. Missae.
Romish rite. The many gesticulations of the Hands and Fingers so ceremoniously
troublesome in the Mass, whose mysterious senses Bellarmine, Durandus in
ritibus Ecclesiae, and Gavantus in his large Comment upon their Rubriques, has
so copiously explained, was one thing that made the Mass so uneasy to be
said of old by the Hands of every Sir John, as requiring one very well trained
up in their School of divine complements.

This is the Manual of Prayer, and Practice of Picty, commended by Nature unto
us, as a faithful assistant to our private devotions; which expressed in one
of the most significant Dialects of the general language of the Body, is more
vocal and effectual, then the explications of the Tongue; and more
religiously true to the soul in case of extremity, which is manifest by their
use in ^his Christian exercise, when the voice cannot express or perform her
office: for, the Hand enabled by Nature to supply the defect of a vocal
Interpretour, has continued the act of prayer, and presented many visible
petitions to the eye of Compassion, which understands the groaning Gestures and
dumb ejaculations of the Hand. And this is often observed in religious men, in
extremity of sickness, whose Hands in the time of health having been used to
accompany and exhibit their requests to heaven, as the last service they can
do the soul and body, offer themselves in this Evening Sacrifice of life. To
pass by common instances, it is reported of that learned and reverend Doctor
of our Church, that B. Andrews.
he was totus in his sacrifi^^is, always employed in this reasonable service
God requires at our Hands; and toward the time of his dissolution, his Hands
were never empty of prayer; and when he could pray no longer voce, with his
voice, yet manibus and oculis, by LIFTING UP THE HANDS and eyes, he prayed
still: and when weakness and necessity of Nature had excluded these external
accidents of devotion, the Hands and voice failing in their function, with his
heart he prayed still, as was perceived in him by some outward tokens.

Ploro. Gest. III.
TO WRING THE HANDS is a natural expression of excessive grief, used by those
who condole, bewail, and lament. Of which Gesture that elegant Expositour of
Nature has Franc. L. Verulam Not. Hist.
assigned this reason. Sorrow which diminishes the body it affects, provokes
by wringing of the mind, tears, the sad expressions of the eyes; which are
produced and caused by the contraction of the spirits of the Brain, which
contraction does strain together the moisture of the Brain, constraining
thereby tears into the eyes; from which compression of the Brain proceeds the
HARD WRINGING OF THE HANDS, which is a Gesture of expression of moisture. This
COMPECTINATION or WEEPING CROSS of the Hand, is elegantly described by
Apulcius, in these words, Palmulis inter alternas digitorum vicissitudines
super genua connexis, Apulcius lib. 3. Miles.
sic grabatum cessim insidens ubertim flebam. Where, as Cresollins observes,
he has rightly conjoined this Gesture of the Hands with weeping and tears.
For it is the declaration of a mind languishing for grief, and almost spent, and
wearied with some vehement affliction. Which the brother of Basil the Great,
elegantly setting out to our eyes, says, Complodis manus, Gregor. Nyssen orat.
7. de beatitud.
digitos complicas, atque tuis cogitationibus [angeris.] So also Dio
Chrysostomus among the arguments and signs of mourning and lamentation, puts
down Dio Prusaeus orat. 16.
manum complicationes, humilemque sessionem. Indeed the FOLDING and WRINGING OF
THE HANDS in the natural equipage of sorrow, has ever passed for a note of
lamentation. History, the mistress of life, and right Hand of experience, which
is the mother of Prudence; holding up the Mirror to Nature, wherein she may
see her own actions represented in their true and lively colors, affords some
confirming reflection of this Gesture. We read that when Heliodorus that
Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 20.
hated favorite of the Emperor Valens was dead and his corpse carried forth to
be buried by the Beir-bearers, Valens commanded that many should attend on
foot bare-headed, yea, and some also with HAND IN HAND, and FINGERS CLUTCHED
ONE WITHIN ANOTHER, to go before the cursed coarse of that bloody villain. Who
(had not the Emperors command extorted this formality of sorrow from their
Hands) had missed of so solemn exequies and interment.

Admiror. Gest. IV.
TO THROWUP THE HANDS TO HEAVEN is an expression of admiration, amazement, and
astonishment, used also by those who flatter and wonderfully praise; and have
others in high regard, or extol another speech or action. The first time that
this expression appeared in the Hand of Man, was certainly upon occasion of
some new unexpected accident, for which they gave thanks to God, who had so
apparently manifested the act of his beneficence. And as it is a sign of
amazement. it is an appeal unto the Franc. Verul. not. Hist.
Deity from whose secret operation all those wonders proceed which so transcend
our reason, which while we cannot comprehend, we RAISE OUR HANDS TO HEAVEN,
thereby acknowledging the Hand and Finger of God. And that this is a natural,
and so by consequence an universal expression of the Hand, appears by the
general use of this Gesture with all Nations. That passage of Catullus is well
known. [Admirans] ait hac manusque tollens Dii boni! etc. To which intention of
gesture Horace alludes, Importunus amat [laudari] donec ohe jam
Horac. lib. 11. Sat. 5.
Ad coelum manibus sublatis! dixerit --
To this appertains that of Cicero. Hortensius aute^ vehementer [admirans]
quod quidem per petuo Lucullo loquente fecerat, ut etiam Cicero in Academ.
manus saepe tolleret! And that of his in another place. Idem lib. 7. epist. ad
Caesarem.
Sustulimus manus ego ut Balbus! ut illud nescio quid, non fortuitum sed
divinum videretur. And to this is referred that of Livie. Ad quam vocem cum
clamor ingenti alacritate sublatus esset ac nunc complexi inter se
gratulentesque nunc Live. lib. 24
manus ad coelum tollentes! etc.

Applaudo Gest. V.
TO CLAP THE RAISED HANDS ONE AGAINST ANOTHER, is an expression proper to them
who applaud, congratulate, rejoice, assent, approve, and are well pleased, used
by all Nations. For, applause as it is a vulgar note of encouragement, a sign
of rejoicing, and a token and sign of giving praise, and allowance, does
wholly consist in the Hands. Whence Cicero. Cicero ad A^^ic.
Populus Romanus manus suas non in defendenda liberate, sed in plaudendo
consumit. Which he spoke of theatricall applause exhibited by the Hand of old.
Xenophon expresses this affection Xenoph. Cyropaed. lib. 2.
of the mind in a very clear and eloquent kind of speech, in these words:
Primipulus qui nos proxime discumbebat, rem intuitus, manus invicem complosit,
ridensque laetabatur. And Histaspas in the Idem Cyr. lib. 8.
same Author speaks unto Cyrus in these words: Unum solum ignoro, quinam modo
ostensurus sim me gaudere bonis tuis: utrum manuum concussione utendum est, an
ridendum, an aliua faciendum? This public token has been of old, and is so
usual in the assembly of a multitude, when they cannot contain their joy in
silence, that there is nothing more common with them then by CLAPPING THEIR
HANDS, to signify their exceeding joy and gladness of heart, in so much as
all Histories both profane and sacred, abound with examples of this
expression: out of which infinite store I shall produce but one or two for
confirmation of this point. When Iehoiadah the Priest 2 Kings 11. 12.
caused Ioash the son of Ahazia to be crowned King, and had brought him out,
and given him the testimony, they made him King, and anointed him, and they
CLAPPED THEIR HANDS, and said, God save the King. Which gesture retains the
same signification in diverse other places So Nah. ult.
of Scripture. When Caius Valerius entered the City of Rome ovant the
affectionate favor of Psalm. 47. 1. 98. 8. Isa. 55. 12. Live. lib. 4.
the people that stood in the streets appeared by CLAPPING OF HANDS, and great
applause, striving a vie to exceed the songues chaunted by the Soldiers. When
the Senate had granted the Plutarch in the life of Camillus.
peoples desire that a Commoner should be chosen Consul with a Nobleman, and
the Dictator had published the Decree of the Senate, confirming their desire;
the common people were Plutarch in the life of Camil.
so joyful, that they brought Camillus home to his house with great shouts of
joy, and CLAPPING OF HANDS. When Alcibiades had one Idem in the life of
Alcibiad.
day in the market place given a largess to the people out of his own purse,
the people were so glad at it, that they fell to shouting and CLAPPING OF THEIR
HANDS for thankfulness. The fourth day after the battle fought by Perseus
King of Macedon, even as the Plays and Games were exhibited in the shew-place,
there Live. lib. 45
was heard suddenly at first a confused humming noise, which spread all over
the companies of the spectators, that a field was fought in Macedonie, and
Perseus vanquished: afterward arose a more clear and evident voice, which
grew at length to an open shout and CLAPPING HANDS, as if certain news had
been brought of the same victory. The Magistrates wondered thereat, and made
search after the author of so sudden a gladness, but none would be found: and
then verily it passed away as the momentany joy of some vain and uncertain
occurrence, howbeit a joyful presage of some good luck settled in men's hearts,
and remained behind, which was after confirmed by the true report of Fabius
Lentulus and Metellus sent from the Consul.

Indignor. Gest. VI.
TO SMITE SUDDENLY ON THE LEFT HAND WITH THE RIGHT, is a declaration of some
mistake, dolor, anger, or indignation: for so our learned Humanicians
understand this Gesture, usurping it often in this sense. Seneca attributes
this passion of the Hand to anger: for in his description of an angry man he
has, Parum explanatis vocibus, sermo praeruptus and Seneca de ira, lib. 1.
cap. 1.
compl^sae saepius manus. And in another place shadowing out anger in her
proper colors, he sets her out thus: Dentes comprimuntur, horrent ac
surriguntur capilli, spiritus coa^tus ac stridens, Idem li. 3.
articulorum ipsos torquentium sonns. And in another place. Adjice articulorum
crepitum cum seipsae manus frangunt. Idem cap. 4. de Ira.
Petronius that great Doctor of iniquity and pleasure, conspiring in the like
sense of the same expression, presents us with this gesture thus habited.
Petron. Satyr.
Manibus inter se usque ad articulorum strepitum contritis. And in another
place he thus gives us the garb of anger and grief, Petron. Satyr.
Infra^t is manibus ingemnit. Neither are examples wanting in Histories to
confirm the senses of this natural expression. Philo Judaeus of Caius the
Emperor boiling with anger, and grievously fretting with indignation,
[Excandescebat] legens, multam praese ferens [iracundiam] ubi vero desiit,
Philo Judaeus de lege ad Caium.
complosis manibus Euge! Petroni, inquit, non didicisti audire Imperatorem? To
confirm the natural practice here of by divine Authority and presidents taken
out of the most Sacred History. Thus Balack in token of anger smote his Hands
Number. 24. 10.
together when he was wroth with Balam that he would not curse the Israelites
as he desired. To which answers that of the Prophet Ezekiel. Thou Ezekiel. 21. 14.
therefore Son of Man prophecy and SMITE HAND TO HAND, etc. that is, strike
thy Hand as men in grief and anguish are wont to do. The same signification
of gesture has that of the Idem cap. 22. ver. 13.
same Prophet. Behold therefore says the Lord, I have smitten mine. Hands upon
thy covetousness that thou have used, and upon the blood that has been in
the midst of thee: that is, in token of my wrath and vengeance.

Explodo. Gest. VII.
TO CLAP THE RIGHT FIST OFTEN ON THE LEFT PALM, is a natural expression used
by those who mock, chide, brawle, and insult, reproach, rebuke, and explode,
or drive out with noise, commonly used by the vulgar in their bickerings, as
being the Scolds saunting dialect, and the loud natural Rhetorique of those
who declame at Billingsgate. Hence Ovid not unskilful Ovid met. lib. 5.
in this brawling property of the Haud; very ingeniously seignes the Plerides
as they were about to scould, and to CLAP THEIR HANDS with a disgraceful
noise, to have been turned into Pies, and made Sylvan Scoulds. This (which is
but the repetition of that stroke used in anger and indignation) is used in
this sense by the mirror of patience, Every man shall CLAP THEIR HAND'S at
him, and hiss at him out of their Job 27. 23
place. And the good man when his patience was tried beyond sufferance, fell
into this habit of contention with his miserable comforters, as appears by the
accusation of Elihu. He adds rebellion unto his sin, he CLAPPETH HIS HANDS
amongst us, and multiplieth his words against Job 34. 37
God: That is, as the gloss on our Bibles has it, he stands stubbornly in
maintenance of his cause. To this may be referred that of the Prophet
Jeremiah; All that pass by CLAP THEIR HANDS: they hiss and wag the head at
the Lam. 2. 15
daughter of Jerusalem. The same signification has that of the Prophet
Ezekiel, Because thou have CLAPPED THINE HAND, and stamped Ezekiel. 25. 6
with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the land of
Israel; Behold* therefore I will stretch out mine Hand upon thee.

Despero. Gestus VIII.
TO appear with FAINTING AND DEJECTED HANDS, is a posture of fear, abasement
of mind, an abject and vanquished courage, and of utter despair. The Prophet
Isaiah calls Esa. 13. 7. 35. 3.
this habit of de^ection or consternation, the faint Hand, or the HAND FALLEN
DOWN. The Prophet Ezekiel and I^remiah call this apparition of Ezekiel. 7. 17
Jer. 6. 24. Heb. 12 12
fear the feeble Hand. And the Author to the Hebrews most appositely, THE
HANDS THAT HANG DOWN. The old Annals of Time, and the Journalls and Diaries of
common life, which contain a narration and exposition of things done, give the
best patterns of the Hands expressions, as being the most natural Registers
thereof; in so much as there are no interpretours so proper or able to inform
us of the validity and use of this languishing carriage and behavior of the
Hand. An expression by gesture we find to have appeared in the Hands of
Prusias King of Bithynia, a man of a most faint heart and abject spirit, who
when he came to Italy to see the mansion place of the Empire of the world, when
he entered into the Senate, standing at the gate of the Court right over against
the Fathers, Demissis Polybius.
manibus limen salutavit: which are the words of Polybius rehearsing a thing
unworthy of Royal Majesty.

Otio indulgeo. Gest. IX.
TO FOLD THE HANDS, is a gesture of idleness, an expression often seen in the
Hands of lazy* Lubbers amused with ^loath, who keep their dull Hands so knit
together, to maintain a drowsy league with sleep: for being loath to forgo
the pleasure of ease, they by this gesture do as it were allure and play the
bawds to indulge and procure their lusts delight more sweetly to cease upon
their lyther bodies. Hence the Egyptian Priests when they would exhibit an
Pier. Hieroglyph.
express character of laziness, or of a sluggish fellow good for nothing, one
who would scarce entertain a busy thought, lest it should work some
disturbance in his breast, or rowze his Hands from the complacency of their
embosom'd rest; they use to decipher a dull Sloe-worme of this lowzy Tribe,
with his Hands thus enterlac'd as parallels in his bosom, as if they had there
taken up their habitation, or did lie skulking to avoid work, which is a Lion
in their way. This gesture of the Hands as it is the sluggards common guise,
who demands a little more FOLDING OF THE HANDS, and out of love to ease often
neglects what his mouth requires at his Hands, (contented so he have from Hand
to mouth, as if he hated the more provident extension of a thought) is
significantly brought in Sacred Writ, by a metaphor to upbraid and note out the
despicable state of fools and sluggards, time-spending loyterers of no
esteem, since the wisdom of man does much consist in his Hands. Solomon
unfolding the nature of a sloathfull person who Pro. 19. 24
FOLDETH UP HIS HANDS, (each Hand holding as it were the other from work) and
hides his Hand in his bosom, in this last posture, he excellently sets out
the nature, wickedness, and Dr. Jerm. paraph, med. upon the place.
punishment of floath. The nature of it, in noting the sweetness of it to a
sluggard; in that his Hand is in his bosom, hugging as it were his own
laziness. The wickedness of it, in that his Hand is hidden: sloathfulnesse
being so shameful a thing, that it needs to be concealed. The punishment of
it, in that the sloathfull man starveth himself. And in another place he is
said to Pro. 26. 15, 19. 24.
hide his Hand in his bosom, that none might find it, lest by taking him
thereby, he might raise him up: or else as if he feared some Cat^ Censorius,
who calling to see the Hands of men, refused those that had soft Hands, as
unworthy to be Citizens of Rome. Emphatically in one place of the Proverbs of
Solomon, the slack Hand Pro. 10. 4. by Beda.
of the sluggard is most directly translated, the Hand of deceit. Rightly does
the Original call it a Hand of deceit, because, for the most part, the lazy
Hand, being not able to sustain it self, betakes it self to cousenage and
deceit. The original word in the fore part of the verse, properly signifies
the bowing of the Hand: because deceit is hollow, and it is with the hollow of
the Hand that the sleights of deceit are practiced. In the latter part of the
verse the word signifies the whole hand, the strength of the Hand, for that it
is which diligence uses, and by that it makes rich.

The garb of such men who sit crowching in the world with their arms a-crosse,
their mouths gaping, and their feet in one shoe; leading rather a bestiall
then a humane life, a famous Lawyer does graphically describe out of Eccles.
thus:

En sedet ignavus Jacobus Lectius.
manibus per mutua nexis
Pigritiae donec merces accedat egestas,
Praestat enim palmis, inquit, palma una duabus
Unica cui requies gemina quibus anxia cura.
To this personal character Westmerus and other Commentators refer that
Anthropopeia of the Royal Prophet, Draw thy right Hand Westmer. in Psalm. 74.
11.
out of thy bosom.

Tristem animi recessum indico. Gest. X.
TO HOLD THE FINGERS INSERTED BETWEEN EACH OTHER A-CROSSE, is their sluggish
expression who are fallen into a melancholy muse. To the signification of this
Gesture accords the Oration of Sextus Tullius unto Sulpitius Dictator: You our
General deem Live. lib. 7.
us your Army to be Handlesse, heartlesse, and armourlesse, etc. for what else
may we think of it, that you an old experienced Captain, a most valiant
Warrior, should sit as they say with one Hand in another, doing nothing. Hence
Eras. Adag
manibus compressis sedere, in the Adage, is all one with [Nihil facere, otio
indulgere, aliis obesse.] For, this gesture is thought to have a tacit force
to damp the lively spirit of mirth and friendly communication. Hence it is in
vulgar practice to accuse such men whose Hands in company fall into this
posture, as Remora's unto the happy birth and wished for progress of conceit;
and for dull Schismatiques that deny themselves to those with whom they
converse: for, such whose thoughts stray out of season, minding not what others
do or say, by a mental sequestration withdraw their souls as 'twere from
their bodies, and while they over-prise their private thoughts, (expressed
oftentimes by this disrespect of the Hand,) they seem no other then to make a
Soloecisme in society. Hence this gesture by the superstitious Ancients was
held a note of impediment, and has passed time out of mind for a kind of
secret sorcery. Whereupon the Roman Senate gave out a solemn prohibition,
that in all consultations held by any Prince or Plin. not. h^st. lib. 28. cap.
6.
Pot^ntate, or any General of an Army, or any person that was present at any
mystical solemnity, none should presume to fit or stand crosselegged, or in
the foresaid manner HAND IN HAND. Supposing this gesture did hinder the
progress and event of any act in Hand: or any consult which by advice was to
be ripened for an expedition. They thought it also witchcraft but to sit by
one that had a practical design upon health by the receipt of any medicine,
either inwardly or outwardly applied. Nay, they thought this posture was of
force (alone) to hinder such who were in labor, and did then need Lucina's
Hand, and that such could not be delivered as long as any one present held the
Hands thus mutually inwrapped: which piece of forcery was the worser, in case
the party did hold them about one or both his knees. This was well seen by the
Lady Alcmena, when jealous Juno set one Ovid Mer. lib. 8.
CROSSE-HANDED and crosse-legged to hinder her delivery, as the story goes. But
the contrary gesture employed quick labor, or the felicity of being delivered.
Thus in a Medall of Julia the Pier Hieroglyph.
Godly, the happy fruitfulness of childbirth is employed, wherein Venus holds
a Javelin in her left hand, showing her right Hand stretched out and spread,
with this inscription, Venus genetrix. But this placing one Hand upon another
was ever held unluckie. Whence Hippocrates derides certain superstitious and
knavish Emperickes for quack-salving Cheats, who bid men against the Epilepsie,
Nec p^dem p^di H^ppo^^. de morbo sac^o.
n^^ manum manui superponere.

Innocentiam ostendo. Gest. XI.
TO IMITATE THE POSTURE OF WASHING THE HANDS BY RUBBING THE BACK OF ONE IN THE
HOLLOW OF THE OTHER WITH A KIND OF DETERSIVE MOTION, is a gesture sometimes
used by those who would profess their innocence, and declare they have no Hand
in that foul business, not so much as by their manual assent; as it were
assuring by that gesture, that they will keep their Hands undefiled, and would
wash their Hands of it: nor have any thing to do therein. A gesture very
significant, for the Hands naturally imply, as it were in Hieroglyphique, men's
acts and operations; and that cleansing motion denotes the cleanness of their
actions. As this expression is heightened by the addition of water, it is made by
the Egyptians the Hieroglyphique of innocence. Pier. Hieroglyph.
In token (also) of innocence this gesture was commanded the Elders of the
neighbor Deuteronomy. 21. 6
Cities in case of murder. And it was practiced by Pilate when he would have
transferred from himself unto the Jews the guilt of our Saviors blood; who
when he saw he could not prevail with the multitude for the delivery of
Christ, he called for water and washed his Hands, I am innocent, Mat. 27. 24.
says he, of the blood of this just man, look you to it. To this gesture
that of the Psalmist referres, I will wash my Hands in innocence. Psalm. 26. 6.
Eras. Adag
And from this gesture came the Adage concerning mutual good offices, Manus
manum, digiti interim digitos lavant.

Lucri apprehensionem plaudo. Gest. XII.
TO RUB THE PALMS OF THE HANDS TOGETHER, WITH A KIND OF APPLAUSE, MUCH AFTER
THE MANNER AS SOME ARE WONT TO DO WHO TAKE PAINS TO HEAT THEIR HANDS, is an
itching note of greedy haste, many times used by such who applaud some pleasing
thought of deceit, that they have in their heads. This (I confess) is somewhat
a subtle notion: yet noted in some men by Phisiognomers, Hill Phisiog.
and to be found by an observation and marking of nature, for every minute
thing if we wait and watch the time of relation, will appear an expression,
from whose remonstrance we may take arguments, for they issue out into notes,
and breaking the bar of silence, by token speak and inform the eye.

Libertate^ resigno. Gestus XIII.
TO HOLD FORTH THE HANDS TOGETHER, is their natural expression who yield,
submit, and resign up themselves with supplication into the power of another.
This with the Ancients was* manum dare. Hence Ovid,

Omnia te [metuent] ad te Ovid. l. 1. eleg. 2.
sua brachia tendent. To illustrate this by examples taken out of the ancient
Registers of time. Thus Vercingetorix Dion. lib. 40.
falling on his knees before Caesar, and HOLDING FORTH HIS HANDS, exhibited the
gesture of a suppliant. And thus Diridates King of Idem lib. 36. Nero.
Armenia exhibited the same obedience of gesture and submission to Nero. Thus
the Legates of Decebalus with JOINED HANDS after the manner Idem Trajano.
of captives presented themselves unto the Senate; upon which, peace concluded,
Trajan triumphed over the Dacians, and was surnamed Dacieus. The Romans that
were in the Galley that were carrying the cup of gold to Delphos Plutarch in
the life of Camil.
made of the jewels of the Roman Ladies, when hard by the Island of Aeolus they
were set upon by the Galleys of the Lipparians, they used this expression, for
they HELD UP THEIR HANDS and entreated, making no resistance. But for the
signification of this gesture in submission, Plutarch is very emphaticall, who
declaring the pride and power of Tigranes King of Armenia, says that he had
ever many Kings in his Court Plu^. in the life of Lucullus.
that waited on him: but amongst others he had four Kings that waited
continually on his person as footmen: for when he rode abroad any whither, they
ran by his stirrup in their shirts. And when he was set in his Chair of State
o give audience, they stood on their feet about his chair HOLDING THEIR HANDS
TOGETHER, which countenance showed the most manifest consession and token of
bondage that they could do unto him. As if they had showed thereby that they
resigned all their liberty, and offered their bodies unto their Lord and
Master, more ready to suffer, then any thing to do.

Protego. Gest. XIV
TO EXTEND OUT THE RIGHT HAND BY THE ARM FORERIGHT, is the natural habit
wherein we sometimes allure, invite, speak to, cry after, call, or warn to
come, bring into, exhort, give warning, admonish, protect, pacify, rebuke,
command, justify, abow, enquire, direct, instruct, order, show a generous
confidence, hardiness, and authority; give free liberty of speech, manifest a
readiness to answer, and make an apalogy for our selves, and appear to
undertake a business. All which acceptions of this gesture, though they more
easily fall in the compass of observation then they can be exemplified by
authentical authority: yet Histories have taken notice of most of the
expressions of this gesture of the Hand. That it is significant in the six
first senses, may be collected out of many ancient Writers. Thus Memnius
Regulus the Consul, in the Senate and presence of the Senators, called
Sejanus unto him. For thus Dion sets it down. [Inclamans] Dion Cass* in
Tiberio.
manu portenta, Sejane [ades hue.] And Cyrus when any of his friends were seen
crowding toward him, as Xenophon has recorded it, Xenoph: de Inst. Cyr. lib.
7. Esth. 5. 2.
protensa manu [eos accersebat.] The same gesture of invitation Ahasuerus used
to Esther, when he signified her coming was according to his will. Wisdom
also clothes Prove. 1. 24
her words in the language of this gesture. Because I have called, and ye
refused, I have STRETCHED OUT MY HAND, and none would regard. The Psalmist
acknowledges himself to have used this gesture. I have called upon Thee. I
have Psalm. 88. 9.
STRETCHED OUT MY HANDS UNTO THEE. This indicative gesture of the Hand our
Savior used to direct and instruct the Jews who were Mat. 12. 49.
his brethren, when STRETCHING OUT HIS HAND to his Disciples, he said, Behold
my mother, and my brethren. Flavius Flaccus made Plutarch in the life of
Tiberius and Caius.
use of this warning gesture of the Hand instead of speech; for when Mutius
began to call the Tribes of the people to give their voices for the
establishing of some new laws, propounded by Tiberius Gracchus, in favor of
the people, and he could not proceed according to accustomed order in the like
case, for the great noise the hindermost made, thrusting forward, and being
driven back, and one mingling with the other; in the mean time Flavius
Flaccus one of the Senators, got up into a place where all the people might
see him, and when he saw his voice could not be heard of Tiberius, he made a
sign with his Hand that he had some matter of great importance to tell him.
Tiberius [who soon understood this gesture of his Hand,] bade them make a lane
through the preasse. So with much ado Flavius came at length unto him, and
bewrayed a conspiracy against him. Valentinian Ammian. Marcellin lib. 20.
with good success used this gesture of pacification and rebuke, when he was
pronounced before the whole Army Sovereign Ruler of the Empire. For when he
addressed himself to make a premeditated speech, as he PUT FORTH HIS ARM that
he might speak more readily, there arose a great mumbling that out of Hand
there might a second Emperor be declared with him: Valentinian fearing to what
the Soldiers confident boldness might prove, HOLDING UP HAPPILY HIS RIGHT HAND,
as a most hardy and redoubted Prince, daring to rebuke some of them as
seditious and stubborn, delivered his mind without interruption of any. The
Emperor having ended his speech, which an unexpected authority had made more
confident, appeared them, and won them all to his mind; which was to choose
his companion: who took afterward unto him to be Colleague in the Empire, his
brother Valens. That this gesture is significant to protect appears by most
passages of holy Writ, intimating the powerful and gracious protection of God.
Where the expressions by an Anthropopeia are taken from this gesture. Thus God
having put Moses in the cleft of the rock, covered him with his Hand while he
passed by. And it is Noverinus Exodus 33. 23.
his observation, that with the Hebrews Noverin. in Elect. Sacr. Pagnin. in
Lexico.
Caph signifies both the Hand, or the hollownesse of the Hand, and a cloud.
Hence Pagninus turns protegam te manu mea, into operiam te nube mea: a good
coherens, says he, manus and nubis nexus. In this sense that of the Prophet
Isaiah is to be Isa. 49. 2.
taken, Under the shadow of his Hand has he hid me. That is, he has taken me
into his protection and defense. And the Metaphors of an OUTSTRETCHED ARM and
HIGH HAND are very frequent in Scripture to shadow out the powerful protection
of God in the two degrees of it, the ordinary and extraordinary. For in this
representation of power, there is the Hand, and the Arm, the mighty Hand, and
out STRETCHED ARM; two degrees of power, both great, but one greater: that of
the Hand is great, but ordinary; that of the Arm is greater, and comes forth
but upon extraordinary occasions, every thing we put not to the Arms end. And
their Hands are properly said to be shortened, that have lost the power to save
and protect; a phrase much used in holy Writ by the Prophets speaking in His
Name who made the Hand, the natural Hieroglyphique Isa. 50. 2. 59. 1. Number. 11.
23.
of power. This gesture does naturally import command. Hence Kings are said to
have LONG HANDS, as the Roman Poet, Qui^ nescit Ovid.
longas Regibus esse manus?
The Hand found under the Table as Vespasian was Sueton. Vespas.
at dinner, signified, as the Southsayers did then interpret, that command
should one day come to his Hand; and this was before he was Emperor. And
Crinagora^ a Greek Poet very learnedly praising Caesar, says, his Right Hand
was mighty to command, which by its majestique power and authority, did quell
the fierceness and presumptuous audacity of barbarous men. The second 1 Samuel
2. 22.
fall of Dagon the Idol before the Ark of God, by a flat acknowledgement
confirms this natural signification in the Hand. For his head falling off
from his body, and the Hands from the arms, showed that it had not power nor
understanding in the presence of God; since the head fell off, which is the
seat of Reason and knowledge, and the Hands (by which we ex^^^^ strength) were
sundred from the arms. In the sense of direction Jeroboam STRETCHED 1 King. 13
OUT HIS HAND from the Altar, saying, Lay hold on him; but his Hand he put
forth against the Prophet, dried up, and he could not pull it in again unto
him. Foelix the Governor Act. 24. 10
made this sign unto Paul, to give him leave to speak. And thus when Agrippa
said unto Act. 16. 1.
Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self: Paid STRETCHED OUT THE HAND
and an^wered for himself.

Triumpho Gest. XV.
TO PUT OUT THE RAISED HAND, AND TO SHAKE IT AS IT WERE INTO A SHOUT, is their
natural expression who exalt, brag, boast, triumph, and by exultant gesture
express the rap^ures of their joy; they also who would declare their high
applause, or would congratulate; and they who have drunk, do commonly use the
same gesture. In congratulatory exclamations either in the behalf of our
selves or others welfare, it is usual and natural. Examples whereof are yet
fresh in the life of Memory. For we read that when the Antiochians understood
that Ti^ns was coming to their City, they could not contain themselves within
their walls for ^^y, Joseph. of the wars of the Jews, l. 7.
but all went out to meet him, and not only men, but women and children,
expecting his coming 30. stounds off; and when he approached neer^ unto them,
they HOLDING UP THEIR HAND^ unto him ^ai^ted him with great joy and
acclamations. Hence Israel is said to have gone out of E^o. 14. 6.
Egypt with a HIGH HAND: that is, with great joy and boldness. And this
^ROTENSION AND EXALATION OF THE HAND in signification of mirth, jollity,
pleasure, and delight, is so grounded in Nature, that it is the common custom
of all Nations, when they are tickled with joy, that cannot be contained from
breaking out into gesture, OUT GOES THE HAND! So the Prince and Father of
Poets, [Deficiunt risu] Homer.
t^lluntque per era palmas.
For, the Hand anointed as it were with the same oil of gladness where with
the heart is replenished, signifies its sensibility of the enlargement of the
heart, by this amplification of gesture, and natural periphra^^s of joy.

Silentium postulo. Gest. XVI
THE BECKING WITH THE RAISED HAND has been ever with all Nations accounted a
sign of tra^ing and (...), and entreating a favorable silence. And how
considerable an expression this gesture of the Hand was ever accounted in this
business, may be collected out of the office of the common Crier, whom we
Xiphil* in Hadrian.
find in the monuments of the Ancients commanding silence by the Hand alone,
without the voice. Whence that of Dion may receive illustration. Prae^o cum
Dion Cas. in Hadr. lib. 69.
manum porre^^sset, esset que ob eam causam [silentium] consequutum, ut est
consuetudo, etc. Which gesture if it were used by the Cryers of Courts of
Justice, would be more proper and significant to procure silence, then by
making more noise, to engender peace, and their loud way of reclaiming one
auricular disturbance with another. The learned inventions of the Ancients do
ordinarily allude to this expression. Seneca that witty contriver of that
abusive Play L. An^^us Sen. de mor. Clan. C^s.
of the death of Claudius Caesar, which he called Apocolocynthosis, or
Immortality gotten by Mushromes, very elegantly brings in Claudian the Emperor
commanding silence with this ^^CKING OF THE HAND. Heliodorus in his Heliod.
Aethiop. Mist. li. 10.
History which he preferred before his Bishopric, in that passage where the
people (affected with joy and pity at the strange hap that Cariclia was
known to be Hydaspes daughter) would not hear the Crier that commanded
silence, makes Hydaspes himself to STRETCH OUT HIS HAND to appear them, and
did them be still. And Barclay brings in Euphormio when there Barclay in his
Euphormio.
was a noise that he could not be heard, with THIS GESTICULATION OF HIS HAND,
signifying that he had somewhat to say unto them. Profane Histories that
contain a relation of things really done, are not barren in this expression of
the Hand. For when Titus was returned to Rome, after the destruction of
Jerusalem, and his Father Vespasian and he triumphed in common; Joseph. in the
wars of the Jews, l. 7.
as soon as they were set in their ivory Tribunals, the Soldiers with loud
voice declared their valor and fortitude: Vespasian having received their
praises, they offering still to speak on in his commendations, he BECKNED WITH
HIS HAND, and made a sign unto them to be silent. When Commodus the Emperor
was set in his throne to behold those famous Actors which were to celebrate a
sacred Agon or Pageant in Herodian lib. 1.
honor of Jupiter Capitolinus, and the Theater full of spectatours; before any
thing was said or acted on the Stage, suddenly there starts out one in a
Philosophers habit, with a staff in his Hand, and a scrip on his shoulder
(half naked) who running to the midst of the Stage, stood still, and B^CKONING
WITH HIS HAND for silence, discovered the treason of Perennius to Commodus.
Thus Drusus being sent to appease the rebellion Tacit Annal. l. (...)
in Pannonia, standing up upon the Tribunal, BECKONED WITH HIS HAND for
silence to be made. And after Constantine the Emperor was baptized, having
caused a Throne to be erected in the Palace of Trajan: he declared with the
eloquence of a Monarch the reason which had moved him to alteration of
Religion. His Oration being heard of all the world with great applause, Caus^^^
Holy Court.
in such sort that for the space of two hours the cries of a great many were
heard which made acclamations: at length the Emperor rose up, and MAKING A
SIGN WITH HIS HAND, required silence, which instantly made all that great
multitude hold their peace. The most sacred History is not without examples of
holy men who have significantly made use of this expression of the Hand. For
we read that Peter Act. 12. 17.
BECKOND with his Hand unto them that were gathered together in Mary's house to
hold their peace. Thus Paul stood up and BECKOND with Act. 13. 16.
his Hand, and said, Men of Israel and ye that fear God, hearken, etc. And when
Claudius Lysi^^ the chief Captain had given Paul license to speak unto the
people, Paul stood upon the greices of the Castle into which they were leading
Act. 21. 40
him, and BECKOND unto the people, and when there was made a great silence, he
began his Apology in the Hebrew tongue. Alexander likewise Act. 19. 33
used this BECKING with the Hand, when he would have excused the matter unto
the people. In the Original Peter is said (...) Manu silentio postulato, as
one Translation: anxuere manu ut tacerent, as Beza: in the others the word
(...) is left out: for, the BECKING MOTION OF THE HAND upon such occasions
cannot well be understood otherwise then for a sign of reaving audience.

Juro. Gestus XVII.
TO LIFT UP THE RIGHT HAND TO HEAVEN, is the natural form and ceremony of an
oath, used by those who call God to witness, and would adjure, confirm, or
assure by the obligation of an oath. An expression first used by the Hands of
the ancient Patriarchs, and is thought to have flowed from God himself, who in
many places of holy Writ is brought in speaking of himself, to have used this
gesture for Thus Ex. 6. 8. Number. 14. 30. Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
confirmation of his gracious promises by the outward solemnity of an oath.
Hence it was that Abraham said unto the King of Sodom, I have LIFTED UP MY
HAND UNTO THE LORD, that is, I have sworn, that I will not take from a Genesis
14. 22.
thread, even to a shoe latchet, etc. Unto this natural expression the
Psalmist alludes, HE LIFTED UP HIS HAND, that is, he swore. And to the
signification of this gesture of the Hand, some Psalm. 106. 26.
refer that passage of the Psalmist: Whose Right Hand is a Right Hand of
falsehood: that is, they Psalm. 144. 8.
have forsworn and broke their vow. Hence by a form of speech taken from this
expression, TO LIFT UP THE HAND, in the Scripture phrase, is Ezekiel. 15. 23. 20.
5. 36. 7. 44. 12. 47. 14. Zach. 2. 9. Isai. 3. 7.
the same as to swear and take a solemn oath. With reference to the manifest
attestation and significant and obligatory force of the Hand in this business,
the late national Covenant was expressly ordered to be took with the Right
Hand held up on high. The Angels also when they swear do it not without this
manual asseveration: for the Angel in the Apocalypse that Apoc. 10. 5.
John saw standing upon the sea and upon the earth, when he swear that there
should be time no longer, lifted up his Hand to Heaven. This vowing expression
of the Hand, Marius used in Plutarch. in the life of Marius.
the battle of the Cymbres, when he promised and vowed a Hecatomb or solemn
sacrifice of an hundred Oxen. Thus also Catulus vowed to build a Temple to
Fortune for that day.

Asseveratione Deo attestor. Gestus XVIII.
TO EXTEND AND RAISE UP BOTH THE HANDS TO HEAVEN, is an expression of
establishment, and a most strong kind of asseveration, implying as it were a
double ^ath. There is a passage in the prophecy of the Prophet Daniel Dan. 12
2.
which does confirm and illustrate this expression. And I heard the man
clothed in linen which was upon the waters of the rivers, when he HELD UP HIS
RIGHT HAND AND HIS LEFT UNTO HEAVEN: which was a double oath, as our Gloss
has it. Lauretus upon this Lauretus i^ verbo Altitudo.
place says, that the lifting up of the right and the left Hand, signifies an
oath with a commination and a promise. Ovid well knowing this double form of
an oath, describing Philomela frighted at the coming of her sister Progne, as
she strove Ovid Metamorph. lib. 6.
to swear and call the gods to witness to the purity of her thoughts, and
that she was compelled to that dishonorable fact, very elegantly makes her
HOLD UP HER HANDS for speech. Such an asseveration of gesture I lately observed
in some at the public taking of the last National Covenant, who as I
conceived rather out of a zealous earnestness to engage themselves in the
Cause, then out of any affectation or privity to this double formality of a
Vow, took the Covenant with BOTH THEIR HANDS HELD UP. In the same posture of
expression we find Gadatas Xenop. de instit. Cyr lib. 5.
the Eunuch in Xenophon LIFTING UP HIS HANDS TO HEAVEN, taking an oath.

Suffragor Gest. XIX
TO HOLD UP THE HAND is a natural token of approbation, consent, election, and
of giving suffrage. An expression of the Hand so common, that Chirotonia which
properly is this gesture of the Hand, is usurped per metalepsin connexi pro
suffragio. To this declaration of the Hand that elegant metaphor of the Prophet
Zephanie is referred: The deepes made a noise, and LIFT UP THEIR HANDS ON HIGH,
that is, showed Zephan. 3. 10.
signs of their obedience and voluntary inclination, as by LIFTING UP THEIR
HANDS. And when Esaras blessed God, the people LIFTING UP THEIR HANDS, to their
audible, added a Esdras. 1. cap 9. 47.
kind of visible Amen, signed by this gesture of assent, which is as much in
the language of the Hand as So be it. Tully makes mention of this expression:
If those Decrees that are received Cicero pro Flacco
be rightly expressed, and singular excellent; not declared so by judgments
nor authorities, nor bound by an oath, but by HOLDING UP THE HAND, and with
great acclamation of the affected multitude. Hence both the phrase and practice
of this gesture of approbation so frequently occurres in Xenophons Orations,
who having made a proposition to the people, To whom Xenoph. de Cyr. minor.
exped. l. 3. and 4.
this seems good (says he) let him HOLD UP HIS HAND, and all of them HELD UP
THEIR HANDS. At the end of which Oration Chirisophus approving what Xenophon
had said, requires the same expression at the peoples Hands in the same phrase,
saying, He who approves of these things, let him signify his assent by HOLDING
UP HIS HAND. Then all of them HELD UP THEIR HANDS. And Xenophon arising again
to speak, concludes thus: Who assents to these things, let him HOLD UP HIS
HAND, which they did accordingly. And so in many other places of his Oration.
The signification of suffrage in this gesture may be further illustrated by the
practice of the Athenians in that passage of Thucidides lib. 3.
Thucidides, where when Cleon and Diotatus had both delivered their opinions,
the one most opposite unto the other, about the alteration of the cruel Decree
of the Athenians against the Myteleans, the Athenians were at contention which
they should decree; and at the holding up of hands they were both sides almost
equal. And one sort of the Athenian Magistrates were (...), Magistrates chosen
by this gesture. Aes^hin. contr. Ctesiph.
Which indeed, is a most significant expression of the Hand; so naturally does
the Hand imply the will and consent thereof; for, what we put our Hand unto we
are infallibly understood to will and intend, and with counsel and advice to
undertake, and promise our concurrence.

Respuo. Gestus XX.
THE FLIRTING OUT OF THE BACK PART OF THE HAND, OR PUT-BY OF THE TURNING PALM,
is their natural expression who would refuse, deny, prohibit, repudiate,
impute, or to lay to ones charge, reject or pretend to lay for an excuse, or
would ^wit and hit one in the teeth with a thing, and signify disdain. The
mind of man being moved by distaste, in some significant gesture to utter and
disclose her hatred and detestation: when she is displeased with any, she
usually gives intelligence of her dislike in a discharge employed by the
significant dismission of the Hand, and such like signs, representing by
gesture a willingness to rid her Hands of them. And this expression does arise
from the same cause that trembling and horror do; namely My Lord Bacons Not.
hist. Cent. 8.
from the retiring of the spirits, but in a less degree. For, the SHAKING OF
THE HAND, is but a slow and definite trembling. And is a gesture of slight
refusal and dislike, being used often by those who refuse a thing, or warn it
away. This was the entertainment Antipater found at the Hands of his Father.
For when he Joseph of the wars of the Jews.
boldly came near as though he would have saluted him, Herod STRETCHED OUT HIS
HAND, and shaking his head, gave him the repulse, taxing his presumption, for
daring to offer to embrace him, when he was guilty of so many treacheries
against him. As it is a gesture that naturally without speech forbids, it was
used by Augustus, when with his countenance and Hand he repressed those
unseemly flatteries which Suet. Aug. cap. 53.
were offered unto him. Caecina in his dream used the like expression to the
ghost of Quinctilius Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.
Varus stretching out his inviting Hands toward him, which he THRUST BACK,
refusing to follow. And to this gesture, as I conceive, may that passage of the
Prophet Zephanie Zeph. 2. ^5
concerning the destruction of Nineveh be referred, Every one that passes by
her shall hiss and WAG HIS HAND; that is, shall express his detestation.
Although Ribera and others give it Ribera in Isaiah.
the sense of astonishment and insultation.

Invito. Gestus XXI.
TO SHOW FORTH THE HAND, AND SO FORTHWITH TO CALL BACK AS IT WERE AND BRING IT
AGAIN UNTO US WITH A WAVING MOTION, is a natural Gesture, and a vulgar
compellation, which we significantly use in calling for men whom we bid to come
near and approach unto us, which alluring habit in this matter is very
natural, ready, and commodious to explain our mind and will, wherein there
is a certain kind of form or semblance of the thing signified. For we seem
by this gesture to draw them to us. To the signification of this gesture
appertains that of the Prophet Isaiah: SHAKE THE HAND, that they Isai. 13. 2.
may go into the gates of the Nobles. That is, make a sign unto them to come
by this inviting motion of the Hand. To this vocative, alluring and enticing
compellation of the Hand, Propertius seems to allude: Et me defixum vacua
patiatur in ora
Crudelem Propert. Eleg. lib. 1
infesta saepe [vocare] manu.
Iovianus Pontanus brings in Mercury and Perichalcas inflicting punishments
upon certain Usurers and profane Churchmen, where Mercury is enforced to
leave the execution of some of their punishments to Pyrichalcas, for Char^n as
he Jovian. Pontan. Charon.
perceived stayed for him in the Port, and had a long time beckoned to him with
his Hand, and he went to him to know wherefore he called. Caecina the General
in his expedition against the Germans, stirred up by Arminius, had one night a
heavy dream, which drove him into a fear. For he thought he had seen
Quinctilius Varus Tacitus Annal. l. 2.
rising out of the bogs, embrued all in blood, calling him by name, and
STRETCHING OUT HIS HAND TOWARD HIM, which he thrust back, refusing to follow.

Dimitto. Gestus XXII.
TO WAG AND WAVE THE HAND FROM US, is an expression by gesture significant to
prohibit, bid one be gone, keep off, forbid, dismiss, and bid farewell and
adieu: in which there is a certain form of the thing signified; for we seem
by this gesture to put from us. Nothing more ordinary in the occurrences of
common life then this gesture, practiced in these senses, a common custom to
bid one keep on his way, and proceed who is returning to us; to SHAKE OUR HAND
as far as ever we can see, to bid our friends farewell and adieu. Ovid
according the ingenious way of invention in Poets, to heighten their fictions,
and to set an artificial gloss of truth upon them, that they may seem more
probable, upon every occasion brings in the personages of his story using these
natural expressions of the Hand. Thus he brings in June Ovid Metamorph. lib.
11.
bidding Iris hasten on a message on which she was sending her, doing it by
SHAKING HER HAND into this natural expression. And bringing in Ceyx going to
sea, and taking leave of his wife Alcynoe, when he was gone aboard and lanched
Idem lib. eodem.
out, she raising up her humid eyes, espyeth him in the poope of the ship,
SHAKING HIS HAND, bidding her thereby adieu, which she answered by the same
motion, and loving pursuit of Gesture the usual consequence of expression with
those who have formerly showed themselves Ioath to depart. And bringing the
ghost of Idem lib. codem.
Ceyx appearing to his wife Alcynoe in a dream to be drowned, at the end of his
imaginary speech, he seems to add tears, and this departing gesture of his
Hand, bidding her for ever farewell. Burton in his symptoms of Burt.
Melanchol. par. 3. sect. 2.
Love Melancholy, makes this [longum vale] of the Hand, a peculiar property of
lovers. A lover loath to depart will take his leave again and again, and then
come back again, look after, SHAKE HIS HAND, and wave his hat a far off.

Minor. Gestus XXIII.
TO SHOW AND SHAKE THE BENDED FIST AT ONE, is their habit who are angry,
threaten, would strike terror, menace, revenge, show enmity, despite, contemn,
humble, challenge, defy, express hate, and offer injury, tell one what he must
look for at their Hands. When anger a fit of the invading appetite, has took
hold of our spirits, and that we are incensed by Franc. L. Ver. Not. Hist.
some affront we cannot brook, we use to threaten, to call the trespasser to
account by this gesture of the Hand, occasioned by the violent propensity of
the mind, and strong imagination of the act of revenge. Hence Phisiognomists
in reference ad morem apparentem, or according to their rule of appearance,
observing the fashion of men in this effect of passion in the Hand, conclude
such persons to be hasty, choleric, revengefull, and apt to take or give
offense, who customarily use to hold their Hand in this posture. If we should
go over the Chronicles of all ages, and trace this natural gesture of the
Hand through those records which bear witness of times and the manners of
men; we should meet with many examples of this angry expression of the Hand.
Some few copies of this original affection will serve to confirm and
illustrare the acception of this gesture, in this sense, and signification.
Thus Leo Armenus Emperor entering into the prison Zonaras.
by night, and seeing Michael Balbus, and the Warden of the prison with him,
and almost asleep, declared his anger by the AGITATION OF HIS HAND. Papias the
Warden fearing the anger of the Emperor, in conclusion conspired with the same
Michael, and on the very night of the nativity of our Savior slew the
Emperor. Thus the Soldiers of Vitellius Army BENT Tacit. hist. lib. 1.
THEIR FISTS against the Ambassadors of the Helvetians, who came to treat that
their City might not be razed, which the Soldiers (greedy of revenge) had
importunately called for to be razed, and Vitellius for his part spared no
threats. Thus the Senate BENT THEIR FISTS against Sarielenus Vocula, and ceased
not to offer violence until he had departed the house. Thus also Agrippina
Idem. Hist lib. 4.
mad and wilful after her favorite Pallas was displaced from the charge that
Claudius had given him, gave out threatening and thundering Idem Annal. lib. 18
speeches, yea not forbearing the Princes ears, and after her bitter threats,
BENT HER FIST toward Nero. Thus the Soldiers in Pannonia threatened with the
FISTS those they met Annal. lib. 1.
of the guard, or Caesar's friends and familiars, as desirous to pick quarrels
and raise sedition. Freemen, bondslaves, also were feared, threatening Idem
Annal. 3.
with words and FISTS, their Patrons and Masters. The Italian vulgar do most
resent the indignity of this minatory AGITATION OF THE HAND exhibited against
them.

Mendico. Gestus XXIV.
TO HOLD OUT THE HAND HOLLOW IN MANNER OF A DISH, is their habit who crave,
beg, covet, and show a greedy readiness to receive; and there is a certain
form or semblance of the thing implied, in this unusual capacity of the Hand.
From the natural signification of this posture, that biting adage had its
original which taxes the lucrativs greediness, of the Athenians;
Atheniensis, vel moriens, Eras. Adag.
cavat manum. This gesture of receipt to an ingenious and honest man has been
accounted a kind of reproach, as appears by the witty saying of Julian the
Emperor. For when by a certain solemn order or custom, there were certain
Messengers or Pursivants brought into the consistory, Ammian. Martel. lib. 16.
to receive gold; among others, one of the company took it, not as the manner
is, in the lappet of his mantle spread abroad, but with the hollow ball of both
Hands; and with that these Pursivants or Intelligencers (quoth the Emperor)
can skill to catch, and not to latch money. Hence it was that the Hand of
Ruffinus governor of the East under Honorius the Emperor, Hieron. Zosimus.
was carried about through new Rome, after his death, in mockery, fashioned
after this manner, which Claudian has elegantly expressed in his death:

Dextra quinetiam, ludo concessa vagatur.
[Aera petens] paenasque animi persolvit avari
Terribili lncro, Claud. in caed Ruffini.
vivosque imitata retentus,
Cogitur adductis digitos inflectere nervis.
Corippus very ingeniously shadows out the rapacity of a company of Plebeians
inferred from this Gesture of the Hands: -- Corip. Afric. de Iaud. Just. lib. 4.
Palmasque capaces
Tendere; quo veniens late pluat aureus imber.
And a little before he said, -- Corip. Afric. de Iaud. Just. lib. 4.
Exertas [admunera] tendere dextras.
This entertainment Marcus Antoninus, the Imperial Philosopher, received at
the Hands of the Dion lib. 71. in vit. Anton. Phil.
greedy multitude when he came to Rome. For when in an oration, he made to the
people, among other things, he had said, that he had been absent in his
travells many years; the multitude cried out, eight; and with STRETCHED OUT
HANDS, signified how they craved that they might receive so many Aurei, for a
congiary: at which the Emperor smiled, and said also, eight; and afterward
gave them eight Aurei a piece; so great a sum, as they never received That
is, 200. drachmes, as Dion. P^erius in Hieroglyp lib. 35.
at any Emperors Hands before. Pierius says he had seen the sign of Philemon
in Rome, holding a book shut, and tied very straight in his left Hand, and his
right Hand dish'd in this manner: so that he seemed to demand the price, which
unless they paid him down in his Hand, they should not have his book; for
they report him to have been a writer of Comedies, who was wont to sell his
labors at a very dear rate. And Aristophanes has a jest in one of his
Comedies, where Phidolus brings in the gods for Aristoph. in concionatricibus.
an example: To whom when we tender supplication for some good, they stand
HOLDING THEIR HAND UPWARDS; not as they would give, but as they would receive
somewhat. Barclay Barclay. Satyr.
who is every where very elegant in his allusions to natural gestures,
reflecting upon the similitudes between this gesture, and the posture of the
Hand in giving, brings in Euphormio describing the statue of a goddess, that
held her left Hand very open, but stretched out her right Hand with such a
womanish feigning and colorable pretense, that you could not tell whether she
had rather give or take. This is the beggars craving posture. Yet covetousness
has bowed the Hands even of Emperors to the significant practice thereof. For
Suetonius reports that Octavius Sueton in the life of Octa. Aug. Caes.
Augustus Caesar, by occasion of a vision by night, begged yearly upon a
certain day money of the people, and HELD OUT HIS HAND HOLLOW to those who
brought him brazen dodkins, or mites, called Asses. And the same Author has
observed as much in Vespasian, who was so Idem Vespasiano.
famous for raising profit out of his Subjects urine and his dulcis odor lucri
ex re qualibet. For when certain Ambassadors brought him word that there was
decreed for him at the common charges of the state a Giant-like image that he
would cost no mean sum of money, he commanded to raise the same immediately,
SHOWING therewith HIS HAND HOLLOW. Here is the basis, quoth he, and pedestall
for it ready.

Munero. Gestus XXV.
TO PUT FORTH THE RIGHT HAND SPREAD, is the habit of bunty, liberality, and a
free heart; thus we reward and friendly bestow our guists. Hence TO OPEN THE
HAND in the Hebrew phrase implies to be free-hearted, munif^cent, and liberal.
For, the Hebrews when they would express a profuse munificence, they say
Jadpethucha, that is, Manum apertam: Leunclavius Hist. Mussel. lib. 4.
Ecclesiast. 40. 14.
from whence perchance the Turks borrowing the conceit, are wont to set forth
Liberality by an OPEN HAND. The son of Sirach knowing that the exercise of
Bounty and Prodigality requires in a manner the like gesture and expression of
the Hand; speaking of the unjust spend-thrift wasting of his goods, says, That
while he OPENS HIS HAND he shall rejoice. And the Greeks in old time (says
Pliny) called the span, or space of the Hand from the thumb to the little
fingers Plin. Not. Hist.
end, Doron, which is the reason that gifts be in their language called Dora,
because they be presented with the Hand. Hence Phisiognomists say such who
customarily use to hold the
Hand extended out are of a liberal complexion of mind; arguing from this
liberal property of the Hand. And there is a tradition our Midwives have
concerning children borne OPEN HANDED, that such will prove of a bountiful
disposition, and franke-handed. Infants indeed for the most part come into the
world with their Hands closed; thereby notifying, as a Rabbi observes, Buxtorph.
that God has given them the riches of this world, and as it were shut them up
in their Hands: whereas on the contrary, dying men are wont to EXTEND AND
STRETCH OUT THEIR HANDS AND FINGERS, thereby willing to signify that they
relinquish the world, and have no longer to do with the things thereof. Which
is the only good action the close-handed Miser does, who when death opens and
unlockes his Hand, does by this necessary posture of bounty, give away and
bequeath, and as it were manumit what he could no longer withold from the
next possessor. Bellarmine relates a story of Stephen King Bellarm. in vit. S.
Stophani.
of Hungary, whose Hand was found whole and incorrupt after his death. And
casting in his mind what might be the reason why God was pleased miraculously
to preserve his Right Hand only, with the skin, bones, and nerves, when the
other members were resolved into their first elements, delivers his opinion,
thus: Truly I think that in this miracle God was willing to show the depth of
his divine council, that charity excells all other virtues. Deservedly
therefore did the Right Hand of this holy King remain incorrupt, which was
always flourishing with the blossoms of mercy, and which in relieving and
distributing gifts to the poor, was never empty or indisposed. God (indeed)
who OPENS' WITH HIS HAND, and fills every living thing with his blessings,
out of his infinite bounty deals out liberally his divine Alms to his
creatures with both his Hands. Whence Divines distinguish the gifts of God into
those of his Right Hand, and those of his Left, to wit, into spiritual and
temporal. Dextra Dei est unde grata proveniunt. Hence the Aramites by a Right
Hand understand the effuse ^enignity of God. Maldonat Maldonat. Comment in Mat.
6.
commenting upon the words of our Savior, Let not thy left Hand know what thy
right Hand does, gives a reason why in this place, contrary to the enstome of
Scripture, the Left Hand is named before the Right, and action attributed to
the Right Hand, and knowledge to the Left. For it is therefore done (says he)
because we are wont to reach out our alms (which our Savior there speaks
of) with our Right Hand, hence called Manus eleemosinaria, and not with our
left, and al other works that are done with the Hand, the Right Hand does them
the Left as a helper does assist; so that if it had eyes it could not be
ignorant what the Right Hand did: wherefore Christ would have us so to exercise
this Hand with works of charity, that our Left Hand (which is wont to be not
only conscious, but accessory to all the actions of the Right Hand,) should
not so much as know or take notice thereof. Cresollius judiciously scanning
these words of our Savior, Let not thy left Hand know what thy Cresol. Anthol.
Sacr.
right Hand does, tells us that it is a symbolicall expression very like to the
Hieroglyphiques of the Egyptians, and therefore the force and sense of this
admonition, is to be sought out of the nature and usual signification of both
the Hands. As for the Right Hand, it is altogether OPEN, free, and manifestly
put in action. Wherefore for its part it denotes an ingenuous candor and
virtue, whose glory is most perspicuously set out by action; but more
especially the Right Hand signifies liberality, and for that cause chosen to
be the hieroglyphique of a most beneficent and plentiful largess: whereas
the Left Hand has a contrary Genius, and is observed to be of a close and
retired nature: this Niggard out of a skulking disposition affecting secrecy,
and the subtle leisure of a thrifty vacation. So that this Symboll of our
Savior insinuates thus much: If thou art disposed to communicate thy goods to
relieve the wants of thy brother, and to show forth the liberality of thy
mind, take not counsel of thy Left Hand: mind not what the covetous desire
of goods, and the thirst of having, require at thy griping Hand; let the Right
Hand prevail with thee, the index of beneficence, and pledge of commiseration,
the accuser of covetousness. Let that muck-worme the Left Hand earth it self
in avarice, and keep silence by an uncharitable retention, which does not love
to scatter, but to snatch away; not to bestow, but a long time to retain. How
many Scaevola's or Left Handed Donatists in matter of bounty do our times
afford, within the frozen hold of whose sparing Hand Charity is quite starved
with cold? And how many who fearing the Moralists Bis dat qui cito dat, with
the old Courtiers gloss, that the sooner suitors are dispatched, the sooner
they will return again: by sinister delay hold them in suspense, while their
courtesies hang to their fingers ends like Bird-lime, and will not come away?
These the Heathen man would call viseata beneficia, we left handed Senec^.
favors. These men, as if they were restrained by some sumptuary Law, made
against the natural munificence of the Right Hand, refer all matters of
beneficence to the penurious discretion of the Left Hand. Nay, are there not
some, who as if they held ignorance to be the mother of thrift, to elude this
nesciat of the Gospel, have made their Hands strike a league together, and
agree never to know any such thing one by the other?

Auxilium fero. Gestus XXVI.
TO EXTEND AND OFFER OUT THE RIGHT HAND UNTO ANY, is an expression of pity, and
of an intention to afford comfort and relief: used also as a token of
assurance, peace, security and promised safety, and salvation. An expression
much desired by those who are in distress, and are not able to shift for
themselves, who use to call for the gift or auxiliary loan of this Hand; for
thus Palinurus calls to Aeneas, Da dextram misero and tecum me toll per undas.
Virgil. Aeneid

Hence Eras. Ada.
Dare manum alicui vel Eras. Ada.
manum admovere sign. [opem and auxilium far.] Symmachus calls this
[adjutricem] manum the helping Hand. Sym. l. 3. Epist. 67.
Cassiodorus Cas. l. 4.
Dextram [salutarem] the comfortable Hand; and with Isidor, it is the witness
of salvation. Epist 26.
Pierius makes this gesture the hieroglyphicke of fortitude and aid, in which
sense it is Pier. Hier. lib. 35.
very frequently used by the learned Romans. The same manner of expression has
prevailed also with the Greeks, and with the Hebrews likewise; Proverb. 11. 21.
for so says the Scripture, The wicked lend one another the Hand, but in
vain; for though HAND JOIN IN HAND, the wicked shall not escape unpunished.
The like expression of gesture is frequent in sacred Writ. The Prophet Psalm.
38. 7. 20. 6. 44. 3 139. 10. Isa. 16. 7.
Isaiah in reference to the signification of comfort, says, they shall not
STRETCH OUT THE HANDS for them in the morning to comfort them for the dead: And
Solomon speaking of the Proverb. 31. 20.
virtuous woman, says, She spreads out her Hands to the poor, and puts
forth her Hand to the needy. To this intent, Jesus immediately STRETCHED FORTH
HIS HAND, and caught Matt. 14. 31.
up sinking Peter crying out unto him to save him. And so significant and
demonstrative to succor and support is this gesture, that Uzza for putting
forth his Hand to stay the Ark of God, was smitten with death for that
speaking error 2 Samuel 6. 6
of his Hand. This gesture of succor and relief, has been observed in
ancient coins, stamped Pierius Hierogly. lib. 35.
with the image of the goddess Ops, by that posture, promising a willingness to
help all that invoke her name. This gesture is (also) a natural token of
assurance and promised safety. Pleth. Genist rerum Graec. l. 2.
Thus the King of Persia saved Mentors life by REACHING HIM HIS RIGHT HAND.
Ammianus Marcellinus says the same of one Nebridius, who was the only man that
refused to conspire with others against Constantins, and Ammian. Marcellin.
Hist. l. 21. cap. 4.
therefore to save himself from the fury of the Soldiers who had drawn their
swords upon him, flying with all speed he could make to Julian, besought him,
that for assurance he would vouchsafe to GIVE HIM HIS RIGHT HAND; whereunto
Julian made answer, what shall I keep especially for my friends, in case thou
touch my Hand? but go thy ways from hence whither thou will, in safety and
security.

Commisereor. Gestus XXVII.
TO LET DOWN THE HAND with intent to rear some languishing creature from off
the ground, is a greater expression of pity and commiseration, then to afford a
STRETCHED OUT HAND to one who rises of his own accord; for between these
expressions the Learned have made a distinction: To this expression I find
that of the Psalmist referred, Send down thy Psalm. 144. 7.
Hand from above.

Irascor. Gestus XXVIII.
TO STRIKE A TABLE OR SOME SUCH LIKE THING WITH THE HAND, is the gesture of one
angry or grieved in mind, and very impatient. To which gesture that of the
Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel. 6. 11
is referred, Thus says the Lord God, SMITE WITH THINE HAND, etc. By this
sign inciting the Prophet to signify the great wrath and destruction to come.
The natural reason of which gesture is, the mind fretted that it cannot meet
with a revenge, does out of Hand endeavor to My Lord Bacons Not. Hist.
quench her fervent heat some other way, to wit, by STROKES or noise, or some
other remedy, which somewhat ease the mind. To descend down into our own
History for an example of this patheticall motion of the Hand, a Royal Copy
whereof we have in a Prince, whose passions were, as himself, great, to wit,
Henry the Godwyns Annals of Hen. 8.
eight, who demanding of one of his Physicians whose patient Cardinal Woolsey
was, what distemper Woolsey had, who then was sick, the Doctor replied, what
disease soever he has, he will not live to the end of three days more. The
King STRIKING THE TABLE WITH HIS HAND, cried out, I had rather lose two
thousand pounds then he should dye, make haste therefore you and as many
Physicians as are about the Court, and by all means endeavor his recovery.
Another example of this expression I find in our Chronicles, before the times
of this Sir Rich. Baker Chron. of the K. of England.
Prince, and that is in the Duke of Gloucester, Protector to young King Edward
the fifth. For among other passionate gestures which accompanied his changed
countenance, when he accused the Queen Mother and her accomplices of plotting
his death, and my Lord Hastings had adventured to return some answer to his
fierce interrogatory, submissively saying, If the Queen have conspired, -- The
word was no sooner out of the Lord Hastings mouth, when the Protector CLAPPING
HIS HAND UPON THE BOARD, and frowningly looking upon him, said, Tellest thou me
of If and And, I tell thee, they, and none but they have done it, and thou thy
self art partaker of the villainy, etc.

Cohorto. Gestus XXIX.
TO HOLD UP THE HAND HOLLOW ABOVE THE SHOULDER POINTS, AND TO SHAKE IT IN ORB
BY THE TURN AND RETURN OF THE WREST, is their natural expression who
encourage, embolden, and exhort one to be of good cheer. Antonius in stead of
speech significantly Plutarch in the life of Antonius.
used this gesture. For it is written of him, that while he was setting his men
in order of battle at Actium, being resolved for a navall fight, to end the
controversy between Octavius Caesar and him for the Monarchy of the world;
there was a Captain and a valiant man that had served Antonius in many
battles and conflicts, and had all his body hacked and cut: who as Antonius
passed by him, cried out unto him, and said: O noble Emperor, how comes it
to pass that you trust in these vile brittle ships? what, do you mistrust
these wounds of mine, and this sword? Let the Egyptians and the Phoenicians
fight by Sea, and set us on the main land, where we use to conquer, and to be
slain on our feet. Antonius passed by him and said never a word, but only
BECKOND TO HIM WITH HIS HAND and Head, as though he willed him to be of good
courage, although indeed he had no great courage himself.

Praeclara aggedior. Gestus XXX.
TO EXALT OR LIFT UP THE STRETCHED OUT HAND, is the habit of one attempting to
do and take some famous exploit in Hand: and is a natural posture of an
exalted and victorious power. Hence he is said to have his RIGHT HAND EXALTED
who is made powerful and glorious. Hence the Prophet Micha: Thy Mich. 5. 9.
HAND SHALL BE LIFT UP upon thine adversaries: that is, Thou shall overcome and
be victorious. And to this gesture the Psalmist alludes, Thou have SET UP THE
RIGHT HAND of his adversaries. Psa. 89. 41 Deuteronomy. 32. 27.
We read in Deuteronomy, that the Lord would have scattered his people, but
he feared their enemies should wax proud, and say our HIGH HAND and not the
Lord has done all this. And that mirror of patience: The HIGH ARM of the
wicked shall be broken. The Psalmist ^ob 38. 15 Psa. 10. 12 Psa. 89. 13
using the expression and signification of this gesture in great attempts:
Arise O Lord, LIFT UP THINE HAND. And again, Thou have a mighty Arm, strong
is thy Hand, and HIGH IS THY RIGHT HAND. And the Scriptures generally under the
metaphor of this gesture shadow Exodus 6. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 34 7. 19. 9. 29 Jer. 32.
21. 1 King. 8. 42.
out the power of God manifested in the delivery of the children of Israel out
of Egypt, who under this phrase is significantly said to have brought them out
from thence openly, and by maine force. That it is significant in their Hands
who go about to set in Hand a business; to omit other confirmation, appears
in Pharaohs speech to Joseph, were he said unto him, I am Pharaoh, and without
thee shall no man LIFT UP HIS Genesis 41 44.
HAND in Egypt. Examples of this attempting gesture are not wanting in
profane Histories. For the day on which the battle of Pharsalia was
stricken, Caesar seeing Crastinus in the morning as he came out of his Tent,
asked him what Plutar. in the life of Caesar.
he thought of the success of the battle? Crastinus STRETCHING OUT HIS RIGHT
HAND unto him [which was a mute omen he should have the Better Hand of his
enemies that day] cried out aloud, O Caesar, thine is the victory; and this
day shall thou commend me alive or dead: and accordingly brake afterward out
of the ranks, and running amongst the midst of his enemies, with many that
followed him, made a great slaughter: at last one ran him into the mouth, that
the swords point came out at his neck, and so slew him.

Profero. Gestus XXXI.
TO PRESENT THE HAND, is their expression who profer or deliver a thing as
their act and deed. And the Verb profero which has the signification to
profer and present a thing, seems to imply the very gesture. This was the
first expression that ere appeared in the Hand, and was used by Eve in the
fatal profer of the forbidden fruit unto the first man. And it was required in
Genesis 3. 6. Mal. 2. 13.
the old Law at the Hand of the offerer, who was to present his offering with
his own Hand: for in religious duties there was never a proxy allowed, As it
is significant in delivery of writings as our act and deed, it is most
apparently seen in its signification at the delivery of Deeds (so called from
this gesture for this is that which gives force to all legal conveyances, and
without this expression Liverie and Seisin is of none effect. A semblance of
the same gesture we use when we would take or accept what is proffered and
delivered into our Hands. And that similitude of posture seems to imply a
correspondency and a favorable inclination to entertain their offer, as if
they there withal proffered thanks for the same. To the natural purpose and
meaning Ecclus. 15. 16.
of this gesture, the Son of Sirach: He has set fire and water before thee,
STRETCH FORTH THY HAND unto whether thou will: that is, take or accept of which
thou will: for by a metonymy of the adjunct the sign is put for the thing
signified. This was the second gesture of Genesis 3. 6.
any signification that is recorded to have appeared in the Hand, and the first
that showed it self in the Hand of the first man Adam, when he accepted of
that forbidden fruit, with which he took a curse that filled his Hand with
labor, and forced it often to advance to wipe his sweating brows. From this
unhappy gesture the Hand may be well called Manus a manando, because all evil
proceeded from this action. Two uses the Hand was chiefly ordained for, to
take, and do, as Galen well observes: but Man took Galen de usu part. lib. 2.
so ill with it at first, that he undid himself. The misguided Hand would be
reaching at the Tree of knowledge, but prohibited by an express caveat, was
prevented from putting forth it self Genesis 3. 22.
to the tree of life.

Effoeminate festino. Gestus XXXII.
TO WAG THE HAND IN A SWINGING GESTURE, is their natural expression who would
endea^our to hasten and assist themselves in progressive motion, and withal
denotes a kind of wantonness and effeminacy. Aristotle says, that Arist. de
g^ess. ani^^^^.
man could not walk unless he were assisted by the motion of his shoulders,
and that the SWINGING OF HIS ARMS does much help the bodies transportation in
leaping: which men by instinct knowing, do many times fall into this gesture
upon such occasion. Hence Phisiognomicall Philosephers who know that every man
has his peculiar genius, causing that native difference of habilities in men;
observing the operation of these spirits as they are matched and conjoined to
outward gestures, which by a kind of tacit character give out the manner of
their complexion; do easily discern the differences of spirits by arguing
syllogistically from the natural habit to the genuine or contracted, which
custom makes more personal; for as men's present passions and inclinations are
brought by nature into act; so men following the vogue of nature, are wrought
to a reiteration of that action, until the Hand has contracted a habit. The
result of these Phisiognomers falls thus into a grand axiom of their art, that
whosoever is (as by a personal propriety and actual condition) customarily
seen to use the gesture of any natural affection; he is by habitual
complexion very incident to that affection, exhibited by that gesture. Hence
Seneca, not unskilful in this art of Chiromanticall Phisiognomie, makes the
CUSTOMARY WAGGING OF THE HAND TO AND FRO, a personal character of effeminacie
and impudence. Impudicum and incessus ^stendit, and Sen. epist. Moral. l. 8.
manus mot^, and relatus ad caput digitus, and flexus oculorum: The gate, the
turning of the eye, the finger on the head, and the WAGGING OF THE HAND, show a
shameless wanton. And Marcus Cato was wont to say, Plut. in the life of Cato
Major.
he would not have him for a soldier, that WAGD HIS HAND AS HE GOES, removes
his feet as he fights, and routeth and snorteth louder in his sleep, then
when he cries out to charge upon his enemy.

Demo^stro non habere. Gestus XXXIII.
TO SHAKE OUT THE HAND, is their natural expression who would show that they
have not, nor desire to have a thing. This the Latins call* manus excutere.
The Prophet Isaiah in reference to the signification of this gesture, says,
The righteous SHAKES HIS HANDS from holding of bribes. Isaiah 33. 15.
And the son of Sirach alludes to the signification of this gesture, where he
says, The slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill: every man that
takes it up, will Ecclesast. 22. 2.
SHAKE HIS HAND.

Castigo. Gestus XXXIV.
TO SHAKE OR HOLD THE STRETCHED AND RAISED HAND OVER ANY, is their expression
who offer to chastise and thew a willingness to strike or take revenge. Hence
the prohibition of the Angel to Abraham about to sacrifice his son, after he
had STRETCHED OUT HIS HAND, to that intent, lay not thine Hand upon the child.
The Prophet Isaiah respective to this signification of gesture, says, That the
King of Isa. 10. 32.
Assyria should SHAKE HIS HAND against the mount of the daughter of Sion. And
because men are wont to use this expression by gesture to those they hold
worthy of rebuke and punishment, that being terrified thereby they might
reclaim them from vice. Hence by an Anthropopeia in many places of Scripture
this gesture implies the chastizing Hand of God. To this signification belongs
that of the Prophet Isaiah, In Isa. 19. 16.
that day shall Egypt be like unto women; and it shall be afraid and fear,
because of the SHAKING OF THE HAND of the Lord of Hosts, which he shakes over
it. To this also belongs that of the same Prophet, With his mighty wind Idem
cap 11. ver. 15.
shall he SHAKE HIS HAND over the river. And the Prophet Zechariah to the same
signification, Behold, I will SHAKE MINE HAND upon Zach. 2. 9.
them.

Pugno. Gestus XXXV.
TO STRIKE ONE WITH THE FIST, is their Gesture who would be avenged of those
that have offended them, and would right themselves by this wild vindictive
justice of their Hands. The Hand thus closely shut and the fingers all turned
in, is called in Latin, Pugnus, quoniam manus quae ante erat passa and mane
(unde manus) contracta clausis digitis, effecta est (...) id est Scaliger de
Subtle.
densae. The nether part of this Hand in this posture Chiromancers call the
pomell or percussion of the Hand, the Greeks Hypothen^r seu ferieus manus, and
(...), percutere. Gale^ Goraeus.
observes that the outside of the Hand was deprived Galen de us. part.
of flesh, that the FIST might be more confirmed to supply the place of a
weapon. And indeed they naturally and easily find this thick weapon who would
BUFFET or fight at fisticusses with others. This was the gesture of the Hand
that first begun the fray or skirmish in the world, before time had brought in
the use of other weapons. Hence the Latins say, Pugnam Erasin. Adag.
in manu esse, and pugna has its denomination from this posture of the Hand.
Lucretius alludes to this primitive expression of anger, Arma antiqu^ manus
ungues dentesque fuerunt.
And when we see men together by the ears, we know what they intend thereby.
The Prophet Isaiah condemning the injurious use of this smiting Isa. 58. 4.
expression of the Hand in (...) and debate, calls it the Fist of wickedness.

Reprchendo. Gestus XXXVI.
TO BOX OR SMITE ONE WITH THE PALM OF THE HAND, is their expression who would
rebuke or correct another for some saucie speech or action. Hence the Hand with
the fingers stretched out, which Isidor calls the palm, has its name in
Hippocrates from a word that signifies to strike. Agellius uses the word
depalmare for this smiting expression of the palm: The Greeks to the same
signification of gesture use the word (...). This contemptuous expression of
anger the officer of the high Priest Joh. 18. 22 Mark 14. 65. Mat. 26. 67
used to our blessed Savior; for the Text says, He struck him with the palm
of his Hand, taking upon him to rebuke Christ for answering the high Priest
irreverently as he cursedly supposed. To the natural signification of this
offensive gesture, may that of the Prophet Isaiah be referred, Isa. 5. ^5.
Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and He has
STRETCHED FORTH HIS HAND against them, and has smitten them, etc. for all
this, his anger is not turned away, but his HAND IS STRETCHED OUT still.

Apprehendo. Gestus XXXVII
TO LAY HAND UPON ONE is their expression who with authority apprehend and lay
hold of one as a delinquent to secure their person. This is one of the
properest expressions of the Hand; apprehension being the proper action of the
Hand, for Hand and Hold are conjugates, as they term them in the Schools;
from which gesture the Hand is called Organon antilepticon, Dr. Crook in his
Microcosm.
for it is the first use of the Hand to TAKE HOLD. With the Ancients this
gesture is manucaptio and manus injicere. This is a dangerous Habeas Corpus
Eras. Ada^
in officers who are the Hands of the Law, and without words obtains the force
of an arrest, and has a spice of their authority more strong then their
emblematicall Mace. These actions Mark 14. 46.
are frequently entered in the Counter of Time. Thus the officers of the high
Priest LAID HANDS on Christ, and took him.

Manumitto. Gestus XXXUIII
TO LET GO ONES HOLD AND TAKE OFF THE HAND FROM ANY ONE, is their gesture who
would signify a willingness to release one that was before in their
possession and power, as having some reason to grant them their liberty. This
with the Ancients is manumittere, and from the signification of this natural
gesture, the Ancients took their forms of manumission, used when they did
enfranchise their bondmen: of which the Civil Law takes much See Justin.
Institut.
notice, and the observation of Critiques are very large in that matter. There
is in this natural expression of the Hand a certain form of the thing
signified. Hence the Egyptian Priests who always had their eyes fixed upon the
Hand of nature, in their Hieroglyphique expressed liberty Pier. hieroglyph.
lib. 35.
by a HAND EXTENDED OUT AT LARGE, in which lively symbol of gesture, the
fingers seem to be made free of the Hand. The medall of Tiberius Claudius
Caesar, in which a little graven Idem ibid.
image has the LEFT HAND OPENED TO ITS UTTERMOST EXTENT, with this
inscription, Libertas Augusta, implies as much, since the left Hand the most
retentive appears freely to manumit; for as the Hand in this posture implies
the natural liberty of its own proper and individual body: so it most
properly expresses the gift of the same privilege to others by the same
freedom of gesture.

Incito. Gestus XXXIX.
TO CLAP ONE ON THE BACK OR SHOULDER WITH THE HAND, is their expression who
would hearten and encourage others; a gesture obvious in the Hand that takes
part with those that are in fight, and desires to set men or beasts together by
the ears. Significantly respective unto this, is that gesture among others,
used Sandys Travells. lib. 4.
in installing the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, whereby he that gives him
Knighthood, LAYING HIS HAND ON HIS SHOULDER does exhort him to be vigilant in
the Faith, and to aspire unto true honor by courageous and laudable actions.

Foveo. Gest. XL.
WE USE TO STROKE THEM GENTLY WITH OUR HAND whom we make much of, cherish,
humor, or affectionately love, an expression very obvious among the actions of
common life, being a kind of indulgent declaration of the mind, used to
pacify and please others, performed by drawing our Hand with a sweetning
motion over the head or face of the party to whom we intend this insinuation.
This the Ancients call mulcere caput alterius; a gesture often used by men in
sign of favor and encouragement to ingenious and towardly youths.

Admoneo Gest. XLI
TO TAKE HOLD GENTLY Of ANOTHER HAND, is a gesture used by those who admonish
and persuade, which he that shall set himself to observe the actions of men,
may upon such occasions find used to the same intents and purposes.
Mithropaustes used this gesture in admonishing Demaratus the Lacedemonian: who
Plutarch in the life of Themistocles.
being in the Court of Persia, the King willing him to ask what gift he would.
He besought the King to grant him this favor, to license him to go up and
down the City of Sardis with his royal Hat on his head, as the Kings of
Persia do. For, Mithropaustes the Kings cozen TAKING HIM BY THE HAND, said unto
him, Demaratus, the Kings Hat thou demandest, and if it were on thy head, it
would cover but little wit. Nay though Jupiter should give thee his Lightning
in thy Hand, yet that would not make thee Jupiter. And we find Timon, surnamed
Misanthropos (as Idem in the life of Alcibiades
who would say Loup-garou, or the man-hater) using this expression: who meeting
Alcibiades with a great train as he came one day from the Council and
Assembly of the City, not passing by him, nor giving him way (as he did to all
other men) but went straight to him, and TOOK HIM BY THE HAND, and said, O,
thou do well my son, I con thee thank, that thou go on and climbest up
still: for if ever thou be in authority, woe be unto those that follow thee,
for they are utterly undone. Such an intention of gesture, but with more
vehemence of expression the Angels used to Lot, while he lingered in Sodom,
Genesis 19. 16.
LAYING HOLD UPON HIS HAND, and UPON THE HAND of his wife, and UPON THE HAND of
his two daughters, to admonish and persuade them to a sudden departure from
that accursed City.

Confido. Gestus XLII.
TO LEAN UPON ANOTHER HAND, is their gesture who make a confiding use of the
staff of their age or affection, an expression importing that they much rely
upon their faith and friendship: and often seen in the Hand of great Princes,
when for greater state and ease they go supported in this wise. The
signification of which countenance of Majesty does in effect show that the
Nobleman on whose Hand the King leaned, was next and subordinate in authority
to himself, and that the weight of all the principal affairs of State did lie
on his Hands. Thus in the Book of the Kings of Judah we read of a Prince (the
2 Kin. 7. 3.
same that mocked at the words of Elisha when he foretold of the relief of
Samaria) on whose Hand Iohoram King of Israel leaned: that is, as the Gloss
upon our Bibles has it, a Prince to whom the King gave the charge and
oversight of things, as does more plainly appear by the 27. verse of the same
Chapter. And the speech of Naaman to Elisha after he had cured him of his
Leprosy, 2 King. 5.
makes it more apparent: Only herein let the Lord be merciful to thy servant,
that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship, and lean upon
my Hand, etc. Where Naaman craveth to be pardoned of zeal without knowledge,
as M. Junius says, it being no such Wilsons Christ. Dict.
thing as should trouble his conscience to bow himself in an officious sort
and civil duty to bend his body that his Lord might lean upon his Hand when
he went into the Temple of the Idol Rimmon to adore. Thus Libo Drusus sustained
by the Hand of his brother, entered into the Senate house to answer to that
enormity he was Tacitus.
accused of: who when he saw Tiberius a great way off, he held up his Hands,
imploring mercy with great humility. Which stateliness of gesture was much
used in Asia by great persons, and is at this day by your Italian Ladies.

Impedio. Gestus XLIII.
TO HOLD FAST ANOTHER HAND in the signification of hindrance and restraint, is
a gesture so obvious in the choleric perturbations of humane life, that it
needs no illustration by example, since we may every day meet with satisfaction
in the public streets: for in quarrels where there is any moderation or over
mastering power on one side, this restraint of the Hand is used both with
signification and advantage. To this gesture may be referred that of the
Prophet Zechariah, A great tumult from the Lord Zach. 14. 13. 14.
shall be among them, and they shall lay hold every one on the Hand of his
neighbor, and his Hand shall rise up against the Hand of his neighbor, and
Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem, etc.

Recordo. Gestus XLIV.
TO IOG ONE ON THE ELBOW, is the usual intimation of those who put others in
mind, and take upon them the part of a Remembrancer: a gesture very frequent
in the common passage of humane affairs: much practiced by the Hands of the
ancient Roman Nomenclators, as appears by the testimony of Horace: Mercemur
servum, qui dictet nomina, laevum Horac. l. 1. Epist. 6.

Qui fodiat latus --


Recommendo. Gestus. XLV
TO TAKE ONE BY THE HAND in courtesy, to recommend them unto another by way of
presentation, is an usual expression in the Hands of men, a gesture
significant and remarkable, having been took notice of by ancient
Chronologers: for, the Hand according to the primitive intention of Nature,
having by a necessary consent of Nations been ever chosen Chronologer of al
remarkable actions, has consequently proved its own Biographer. If therefore
we but cast an intuitive eye upon those memorials the Right Hand of Time has
left fairly noted in the Left Palm of Antiquity, even by the old autography of
the Hand, we may spell out the sense of this natural expression. For when
Valentinian had a full purpose to adorn his son Gratian, a pretty young
stripling, and Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 7.
well grown, with the Imperial Ensigns, when he had wrought the Soldiers to
accept thereof, he ascended up the Tribunal, and taking the youth by the
Right Hand, he brought him up before them, and in a public Oration
recommended him (as ordained Emperor) to the Army. Another Copy of this
natural gesture we find in the Hand of Pertinax, refusing in modesty the
Empire; pretending his age and mean descent: Herodian. lib. 2.
who taking Glabrio by the Hand, and pulling him forth, placed him in the
Imperial Throne, recommending him as more fit for the Empire. And Commodus in
a speech he made unto the Soldiers of his Army, puts them in mind Idem l. 1.
how his father Marcus when he was an infant, carried him in his arms, and
delivered him into their Hands, recommending him (as it were) to their tutelage
and fidelity. Thus also Tiberius (though with dissimulation) took Nero and
Drusus, Germanicus children, by the Hands, and recommended Tacitus Annal. l. 3.
them to the care of the Senate in a dissembling Oration he made. Thus Cyrus
taking Hystaspas by the Right Hand, gave her unto his Xenoph. de Cyr. inst.
lib. 8.
friend Gobrias, who having stretched out his Hand before, received her at his
Hands. And this expression Raguel used when he gave his daughter Sarah to wife
to young Tobias, an expression Tob. 7. 13
which delivered from Hand to Hand is one of the solemn rites of Matrimony to
be used by the father of the Bride.

Officiose duco. Gestus XLVI.
TO LEAD ONE BY THE HAND, is their expression who take care of the weakness
and inability of others in matters of progressive motion, used most commonly to
young children whom we would teach and assist to go with more ease and
safety: of which manuduction Holy Writ affords many examples. Thus Agar Genesis
21. 18.
by commandment of the Angel held her child by the Hand, which allegorically
signifies the works of the Law, that is, the Law commands works. Thus the
Tribune took the Nephew of Saint Paul by the Hand. And to this Act. 23. 19
Ezekiel. 45. 1
may be referred that of the Prophet Ezekiel, Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus,
whose Right Hand I have holden. And to the signification of this gesture
appertains that of the Prophet Isaiah, concerning Isa. 51. 18
the misery of Jerusalem, There is none to guide her among all the sons whom
she has brought forth: neither is there any that TAKES HER BY THE HAND, of
all the sons that she has brought up. This sense of gesture has that also
of the Author to the Hebrews: In the Heb. 8. 9.
day when I TOOK THEM BY THE HAND, to lead them out of the land of Egypt. The
like Isa 41. 13 42. 6. Psalm. 89. ^1
phrase of gesture occurres in diverse other places of Scripture. But when this
expression is used to a female, and one of riper years, it is significant to
present an officious and tender respect or serviceable affection. The aspiring
affectation of women raised by Choppines to an artificial elevation of
stature, has made this courtly garb of gesture more necessary and commodious
to great Ladies, and has preferred it to be one of the eight parts of speech
of a Gentleman-ushers Accidence. Hence Ovid, a man well versed in such Ovid.
met. lib. 2.
obsequious expressions, makes Jupiter at his arrival into Crete, LEAD EUROPA
BY THE HAND into the Cave of Dicte. This expression is sometimes used to the
blind; for the Hand as it speaks by signs unto the dumb, so in a more
necessary garb of speech it officiates the place of an eye, and speaking in
the conducting dialect of a friendly assistance, supplies the defect of an
ocular direction. Samson when the Philistines had Judge. 16. 26.
boared out his eyes, was beholden to the Lad that HELD HIM BY THE HAND, for
the last achievement of his fatal strength. And in this sense the blind man
and his leader are a kind of relatives.

Impatientia^ prodo. Gestus XLVII.
TO APPLY THE HAND PASSIONATELY UNTO THE HEAD, is a sign of anguish, sorrow,
grief, impatiencie, and lamentation, used also by those who accuse or justify
themselves. The recourse and offer of nature in this relieving expression of
the Hand, makes good the Adage, Ubi dolor, ibi digitus. The Prophet Jeremiah
prophesying Eras. Adag Jer. 2. 37.
against Judah, foretells that she should be brought to use this note or sign
of lamentation. And Tamar defloured by her brother 2 Samuel 13. 19.
Ammon, LAID HER HAND UPON HER HEAD, as it were accusing or justifying her
self, as Lorinus. Lorinus in his coment. upon Numbers. Plutarch in the life of
Solon.
And it is probable that the Shunamites child when he cried, My head, my head,
made use of this dolorous expression of the Hand. Thales by a pretty Pageant
put Solon into such a passion by making him believe his son was dead at
Athens, that like a mad man he straight began to beat his head, like one
impatient in affliction, and overcome with sorrow. The Head is the natural
hieroglyphique of health, and the Hand of relief and protection, as being the
Champion of the Head. Hence in the straits of imminent perils, or dolorous
calamity, they usually meet in a Committee of safety. Hence Tiberius Gracchus
engaged in extreme danger, as it were justifying himself, and recommending
his life and safety, which depended on his Head, to the people Florus.
of Rome, LAYING HIS HAND UPON HIS HEAD, went forward to the Capitol: which by
the sinister interpretation of his enemies turned to his prejudice, they
inferring that by this sign he craved the Diadem. Some such passage you shall
find in Aristophanes, where Dicaepolis to this effect: Et si non vera profatus
fuero Aristoph. Acharnan.
manu supra caput imposita, quaeque universus approbet populus.

Solicit cogito. Gestus XLVIII.
TORUE OR SCRATCH THE HEAD WITH THE HAND, is their natural gesture who are in
anguish or trouble of mind: for commonly when we are in doubt, and uncertain
what to do, we musing SCRATCH OUR HEAD. Hence by a proverbiall translation
from this gesture, Caput fricare, seu digito scalpere, is used pro cogitare.
Eras. Adag
But why we should in earnest meditation so naturally express our endeavor by
this recourse of the Hand to the head, to scratch where it does not itch; is,
may be, to rowze up our distracted intellect; or else the Hand, which is the
Engineere of invention, and wits true Palladium, having a natural procacity to
be acquainted with their fancy, officiously offers it self to facilitate
the dispatch of any affairs that perplex a faculty so near allied unto it, the
Hand in the collateral line of Nature, being cousen germane to the Fancy.

Pudeo. Gestus XLIX.
THE RECOURSE OF THE HAND TO THE FACE in shame, is a natural expression, as
Alexander Aphrodisaeus proves. Alex. Aphr. l. 1. Probl. 15.
For, shame being a passion that is loath to see or be seen, the blood is sent
up from the breast by nature, as a mask or veil to hide the laboring face,
and the applying of the Hands upon the face is done in imitation of the modest
act of Nature. Hence Licentius a Noble young man writing to Austin a learned
and sweet Poem, very cunningly alludes to this natural expression. Et mea
Calliope quamvis te cominus altum
Horreat, and Licentius.
vultus abscondat --
This declaration of shame by the Hand, we find Mark Antony to have used
after the battle of Actium fought between him and Octavius Caesar. Plutarch.
in the life of Anton.
For he flying with a doting speed after Cleopatra, who was fled before, having
overtaken her, and being plucked up into her Gally: at his first coming saw her
not, but being ashamed and cast down with his adverse fortune, went and sat
down alone in the prowe of the Ship, and said never a word, CLAPPING HIS HEAD
BETWEEN BOTH HIS HANDS. And this expression is not only used in respect of our
selves, but of others also, as daily experience and the actions of men do
declare. For when there were diverse Orators of Greece very fluent and elegant
speakers, sent Ambassadors unto Philip, and Demosthenes had not spoken
sufficiently for the honor of the Commonwealth, If there be any credit to be
given to Aeschines his enemy, putting it down in one of his Orations: Adjecit
ille etiam maxim ridenda, quarum collegas ita [pudebat] ut Aeschines pro
Tima^ch.
faciem obtegerent. The same Aeschines in another Oration, where he describes
the impudent audacity of a most notorious wicked man, who would speak openly
in a public assembly of the Citizens naked; Such, says he, was the
beastliness of that petulant and drunken man, that wise men put their Hands
before their eyes, blushing in the behalf of the Commonwealth which used such
Counselors.

Adoro. Gest. L.
TO KISS THE HAND, is their obsequious expression who would adore and give
respect by the courtly solemnity of a salutation or valediction. The graceful
carriage of the Hand in this officious obedience to the will, while it moves to
the chiefest orifice of the mind. Tertullian and others have acknowledged to
have the handsome sense of a civil complement. To whom Lucian consents. Qui
adorant (says St. Hierom) solent manum Lucian. in Demo^^h. Ene. Hierom. ad
Russ.
deosculari. And in the phrase of Plautus this is Adorare suaviter. There is no
expression of the Hand more frequent in the formalities of civil conversation,
and he is a novice in the Court of Nature, who does not understand a basier de
la main: and he a clown in Humanity, who does not speak to his betters in this
respectfull language of the Hand.

Distante^ amicum revereor. Gest. LI.
TO BRING THE HAND TO OUR MOUTH, AND HAVING KISSED IT, TO THROW IT FROM US, is
their expression who would present their service, love, and respect to any that
are distant from them. A gesture I have often observed to have been used by
many at public shows, to their friends, when their standings have been
remote from them. Tacitus calls this Tacit. hist. lib. 1.
Jacere oscula. Dion Dion. Othon.
Oscula per digitos mittere. Otho who omitted no servile crowching for an
Empire, after this manner threw his kisses abroad; and herein showed himself
his crafts master, for he had not often cast out this bait of courtesy, but
the people bit at it, and swallowed this popular libation of the Hand. And when
the Tide was once turned, the Senators contending and shouldering who should
get first, defaced Galbas Image, extolled the Soldiers judgment, kissing
Otho's Hand, and the less they meant it in heart, doing so much the more in
outward appearance.

Conscienter affirmo. Gest. LII.
TO LAY THE HAND OPEN TO OUR HEART, using a kind of bowing gesture, is a garb
wherein we affirm a thing, swear or call God to witness a truth, and so we
seem as if we would openly exhibit unto sense, the testimony of our conscience,
or take a tacit oath, putting in security, that no mental reservation does
basely divorce our words and meaning, but that all is truth that we now protest
unto. This expression has been most observed in the ancient Grecians, as
Chrysippus says, who from this natural expression of the Hand, concludes the
lodging of the soul to be about the heart. The Turks at this day are observed
most frequently to use this natural form of protesting, with whom the Hand
spread upon the breast, is accounted equivalent to the most solemn oath,
insomuch as whatsoever they speak or promise using this gesture, may be
believed as ingeniously spoken, and the accomplishment of that promise to be
presumed of. If we would see this form of sincere asseve^ation in practice,
our own Histories afford us many examples. For the form that has been and is
used at this day in judiciary trialls and arraignments of Noble men who are
tried by their Peers, is, that when the Lord Steward or Clarke of the Crown,
asks the Peers whether the Noble man there arraigned be guilty or not, every
one of them ceremoniously by his Hand to his breast, affirms upon his honor and
conscience he is, or is not guilty, according as they find him. The
particularizing of the examples I purposely omit, as unwilling to offend any
Noble Personages who love not to hear of the tainted blood of their Ancestors.

Poenitentia^ ostendo. Gest. LIII
TO BEAT AND KNOCK THE HAND UPON THE BREAST, is a natural expression of the
Hand, used in sorrow, contrition, repentance, shame, and in reprehending our
selves, or when any thing is irksome unto us, because the breast is the cabin
of the heart; and this natural procacity of the Hand to this gesture, does
manifest the heart to be the seat of affections. This natural ceremony is
exemplified in sacred Writ; for this was the penitential expression that the
Publican used who went up to the Temple to Luke 18. 13.
pray. Thus also the people who were witnesses of our Saviors sufferings, and
the wonders that followed thereupon, beholding the things that were done, SMOTE
THEIR BREASTS and returned. This habit of the Hand is much practiced Luke 23.
48.
by the zelots in the Roman superstition, as a penitentiary expression most
patheticall, who are wont also mysteriously to mince this natural expression,
and ceremoniously sometimes with two or three fingers only, lightly to strike
upon their breast and mouth, a thing usual with the ancient Ethniques of old.
And in ancient times in testifying grief and mourning, and at funerals, as a
solemn kind of behavior, they used Plutar. ad Apol.
this expression whom Plutarch calls (...). So in Cornelius Tacitus, Incendebat
haec fletum, Tacit. Hist.
pectus atque os manibus verberans. And the acute Epigrammatist describing the
corporal adjuncts of sorrow and mourning:

Quod front Selium nubila vides, Rufe,
Quod ambulator porticum terit serus;
Lugubre quiddam quod tacit piger vultus,
Quod pene terram tangit indecens nasus;
Et Martial. l. 2. Epig.
dextra pectus pulsat, and coma^ vellit;
Non ille amici fata [luget.]
Gregory Nyssen when he would paint out as it were in apt colors of expression
an unusual grief of mind, and as it were a certain heat of anger, he uses
the phrase of this habit, Nyssen in funere pulcheriae.
pectus manibus verberare. Touching the natural intentions of the fist in this
expression so customary and significant in sorrow and repentance, the Fathers
very elegantly and declaratively deliver their opinions thus: We strike our
breast with the Hand, as it were protesting against the Cyp. de orat. Dom Hier.
in vit. Hillar.
sins included in that mansion, as Cyprian: Or as if we would drive those evil
cogitations from our heart, as Hierome: Or to rouse up our heart. as
Theophylact: Or to appease the judge we take revenge upon our selves, as
Chrysostom: Or to Chrysostom. Hom. 41. Aug. in Psalm. 146.
chastise our flesh wherewith we have offended God, as Austin.

Dolorem noto. Gest. LIVE
TO HOLD THE HANDS UPON THE LOINS, SIDES OR HIP, is their expression who feel
some pain in those regions of the body, often seen in those which feel the
pains of travel, and in those who are troubled with Hipocondriacall
melancholy, and the Sciatica, or Hipgout. This demeanor of the Hand is very
declarative in the first sense, as appears in the Prophecy of the Prophet
Jeremiah, Demand, now Jer. 30. 6.
and behold, if man travel with child; wherefore do I behold every man with
HIS HANDS UPON HIS LOINS, as a woman with travel, and all faces turned into
palenesse: upon which place, they who are curious may consult with Ghislerius.

Indignatione timeo. Gest. LV.
THE SMITING OF THE HAND UPON THE THIGH, in the practice and conversation of
common life, was ever frequent, and is so deeply imprinted in the manners of
men, that you shall in vain persuade a man angry and enraged with grief, to
contain his Hand from this passion. Seneca the Philosopher attributes this
expression of Sen. l. 1. de Ira cap. ul.
the Hand to anger, where he says, Quid opus femur ferire? In grief it is
also significant, as they who are versed in Homer do well know when they meet
with those places wherein he describes his Heroes provoked to anger and dolor,
whom he calls (...). In the sacred oracles of the Prophets we have this
expression noted and described; for that holy Prophet speaking of Ephraim
lamenting, Surely after I was converted, I repented, and after that I was
instructed, Jer. 31. 19.
I SMOTE UPON MY THIGH, etc. which gesture in that Prophet has the
signification of repentance, with others of anger, dolor, and indignation. In
the same sense it appears in the Prophecy of the Prophet Ezechiel, Cry and
howl, son of man; terrors by reason of the Ezekiel. 21. ^2.
sword shall be upon my people; SMITE THEREFORE UPON THY THIGH. Tully indeed
ascribes Cicer. Tusc. 3.
it to mourning; Feminum and capitis percussiones. The registers of common
life, Histories, are full of examples of this habit of the Hand, bearing the
character of this sense. Thus Cyrus Xenoph. l. 7. de inst. Cyr.
in Xenophon hearing of the death of Abradatas, SMOTE HIS HAND UPON HIS THIGH.
And Flaccus President of Egypt and Syria, bannished by Caius the Emperor,
when he arrived Philo. Jud in Flac.
at the Island Andros most miserably howling in his calamity, SMOTE HIS HANDS
AND THIGHS. Fabius Dictator, when his General of the Cavaliere Minutius had
almost cast away himself and his Army, at the sight thereof is Plutarch in the
life of Fabius.
said to have uttered his anger and dolor this way. And when Pompey had
received letters from Rome advertising him what great matters the people had
passed in his behalf, some say that at the receipt of them (in the presence
Idem in the life of Pompey.
of his familiar friends and they that were about him and rejoiced with him for
congratulation) he knit his brows, and CLAPPED ON HIS THIGH, as though it
grieved him to have such great offices and charge laid upon him, one in the
neck of another; by this dissimulation cloaking his ambition. This gesture of
the Hand is significant also in fear, admiration and amazement. Hence Plutarch
relating the injuries that the Pirates Plutarch in the life of Pompey.
whom Pompey vanquished did the Romans, says, the greatest spite and mockery
they used to the Romans was this; That when they had taken any of them, and
that he cried he was a Citizen of Rome, and named his name, then they made as
though they had been amazed and afraid of that they had done; for they CLAPPED
THEIR HANDS ON THEIR THIGHS, and fell down on their knees before them, praying
him to forgive them.

Data fide promitto. Gest. LVI
TO STRIKE ANOTHER PALM, is the habit and expression of those who plight their
troth, give a pledge of faith and fidelity, promise, offer truce, confirm a
league, buy, sell, grant, covenant, bargain, give or take handsell, engage
themselves in suretiship, refer their controversies to an arbiter, put to
comprimise or choose an umpier, engage themselves to be true and trusty, warrant
and assure. That this gesture has the sense and signification of faith and a
solemn promise, is apparent by the frequent intimations of the Roman Poets,
who by this gesture do often imply faith. Thus the Prince of Virgil Aeneid.
Latin Poesy in this of Dido, -- En dextra [fidesque.]
And in that of Anchises, Idem.


Dat dextram, atque animu^ presonti pignore firmat. Ovid no way ignorant of any
matter of manual expression, brings in Pandion taking his leave of Tereus, and
his daughter Philomol demanding this pledge and pawn of faith. Ut [fidei
pignus] Ovid Metamorph.
dextras utraque popossit.
Inter seque datas junxit. --
And that lofty Tragedian brings in Licus suing for marriage with Megara,
saying, [Sociemus] animos, [fidei hoc pignus] Senec. in Here. sur.
cape continge dextram. --
Martial according to the acute way of Epigramatists, Martial Epigr.
taking a hint from the peculiar property of the right Hand in making promise,
brings in Caesar in the whiske of one of his Epigrams, answering two
petitioners at once, by promising with both his Hands: Dum peteret pars haec
myrinum pars illa triumphu^
[Promisit] pariter Caesar utraque manu.
Isidor says, this gesture is the witness of faith and trust. In faith, says
Pliny, we put forth our Pliny Not. Hist.
Right Hand, or when we make a faithful promise. The Cynique in his symbol
advising men Diogenes.
to add benignity to their courtship, covertly alludes to the propriety of
this free expression, Give not unto thy friend a clinched Hand.
And the symbol of Pythagor as, Do not to every man extend thy Hand;
wills us not promiscuously to prostitute this friendly token of expression. To
which that of Lypsius may be referred, Vis dextram [fidei] mei [testem?] habes
hic impressum, etsi coram Lyps. Epi. Matthew. O vand.
ipsam dare and jungere mihispes est cum aulam vestram videbo. When the
Hyrcanians of Cyrus Army expostulated with him in regard he seemed to distrust
them. Cyrus in Xenophon is said to have Xenoph. Cyr lib. 4.
answered him thus, Cogito nobis omnibus [fidem] esse in anim is nostris, atque
in [nostris manibus.] This expression of the Hand the Greeks very elegantly
note in the word (...). The Stoics say faith is derived of the word facere to
do, because all things that are faithfully promised, ought to be performed;
most aptly therefore implied by the Hand the symbol of action. And faith is
strengthened by this expression of REACHING OUT THE RIGHT HAND. How did Cicero
condole the violation of promise made by Tul. in Ant. Philip. 11.
this speaking paction of the Hand? Dextrae, qua [fidei testes] esse solebant,
perfidiae sunt and scelere violatae. Virgil for an expression of breach of
promise symbolically uses the prevarication of this gesture, -- Fallere
dextram. And in this sense some take that of the Prophet Isaiaeh, Is there not
a lie in my right Hand? And to this, that of the Isa. 44. 20.
Psalmist may be referred, whose Right Hand is a Right Hand of falsehood, that
is, as the gloss on Psalm. 144. 11.
our Bibles has it, Though they STRIKE HANDS yet they keep not promise. Caius
Ligarius used this expression of promising his aid, assistance and concurence
in any secret confederacy Plutar. in the life of Brutus.
with Brutus, who when Brutus came to see him being sick in his bed, and said
unto him, O Ligarius in what a time art thou sick? Ligarius rising up in his
bed, and taking him by the Right Hand, said unto him, Brutus, if thou have any
great enterprise in Hand, worthy of thy self, I am whole. Gobrias in Xenophon
praises the Right Xenoph. Cyr.
Hand of Cyrus for what it promised it performed. And the Danes, Swedes, and
Norwegeans in whom the honest impressions of nature flow from their Hands pure
and unmixt without any fucus of dissimulation or affectation of art, do most
faithfully retain the natural sincerity of this expression of faith, for of
those Northern Nations our learned Barclay gives this commendation. Barelay
Icon. animorum. cap. 8.
They break no promises when their HANDS ARE GIVEN. Such Religious observers
of their manual faith were the ancient Medes and Persians. Hence Plethon
Genistus Plethon Genist.
manus porrectio maxima inter Persas censetur fides. Wherefore Cyrus in
Xenophon in an Oration he made unto the Medes, says, Hyrcanis quibus and
[jusjurandum] and Rerum Graec. l. 2.
dextras dedi [fidem] servabo, and nunquam hoc deprechendar prodidisse. And
Xenophon relating an agreement between the Persian and the Grecian Armies for a
peaceable departure and safe conduct, having recited the Articles, says, Haec
utrinque [jurejurando] sancita sunt, Rerum Graec. l. 2.
dextra datae vicissim. A royal example of this declaration of the Hand we
have in Darius, who after he was wounded by Bessus and the other conspirators,
to the soldier of Alexander who found him sore wounded in his litter, but as
yet alive, recommending in a speech he made of his master, touching his love
and acknowledgement Justin. lib. 11. and Quintus Curt.
of courtesy, and that he dyed his debtor; in token whereof as a Kingly pledge
of his faith, he gave the soldier HIS RIGHT HAND to carry unto Alexander, and
these words being uttered, having STRETCRED OUT HIS HAND, he gave up the
ghost. Florus Josephus Florus Joseph. l. 18. c. 12.
proves this expression of the Hand to have been in very great force and virtue
among the Ancients. Artabanus (says he) King of the Parthians, STRETCHING OUT
HIS RIGHT HAND swore to Anilaeus the Jew, that his brother Asinaeus might have
safe access unto him, which with the Barbarians about to assemble, is a most
certain argument of trust. For after the RIGHT HAND GIVEN, with them it is
neither lawful to deceive or difficult, all suspicions and diffidence ceasing.
Wherefore when he was moved by the master of his Horse that he might kill
Asinaeus, he denied to permit that against a man who had committed himself to
his Faith con^^nied BY GIVING THE RIGHT HAND, with an oath. To this expression
that passage also of the Roman History may be referred, where Flavius comes
Livie l. (...)
to the Roman General Gracchus, enforming him that he had begun an
enterprise of great consequence, for the accomplishing and full perfecting
whereof he needed the helping Hand of Gracchus himself: namely, that he had
persuaded all the Fretors and Governors, who in that universal trouble of
Italy had revolted to Annibal, to return into the league and friendship of the
Romans; by many arguments I have used to them. Thus and thus were my words
unto them: and indeed but my words: Mary they had liever hear Gracchus
himself speak, and hear the same from his own mouth: they would more gladly
talk with him in person, and TAKE HOLDOF HIS RIGHT HAND, which as the assured
pawn of his faithful promise he carries always with him wheresoever he
goes, and they desire no more. This may be further illustrated by another
passage of Livic, where Syphax Livic l. 29
King of Numidia having contracted a new alliance with the Africans, by
marrying Sophonisva the daughter of Asdrubal, allured by the fair words of his
new Spouse, sent into Sicily to Scipio to advise him not to pass over into
Afric, nor rely upon any confidence of him, or build upon his former
promises. Scipio in his Letters which he dispatched by the same Ambassadors,
requested him earnestly to be advised, and bethink himself that he break not
the rights either of friendship or hospitable league with him: or the league
and society entered with the people of Rome: nor violate Justice and faithful
promise made BY GIVING RIGHT HANDS: nor yet beguile and abuse the gods, the
Witnesses and Judges of all covenants and agreements made. Isidore says, the
surety of Peace is given with the Hand. And indeed all leagues, truces, and
compacts are confirmed by this gesture of the Hand. Thus the league Trium-virat
between Antonius Lepidus and Caesar was established at Confluents, between
Perusia and Bononia, they JOIN HANDS, and their armies embrace. Dorlear^ upon
Tacit.
Which league they symbolically, expressed by three Right Hands embracing each
other, with this Motto, Salus generis humani: a strange Impresse to gull the
world with and to cloak their ambitious confederacy. The King of Persia
commanded Camer. hist. med.
his Ambassadors to make this expression in his name. And in the same manner
the ancient Emperors and Kings of Germany were wont to send their great men to
conclude a peace, and determine affairs, when they could not go themselves.
Apollophanes Cyzicenus, who had in former times been bound to Pharnabazus by
the laws of Hospitality, and was a guest at that Xenoph. Per. Graec. lib. 4.
time with Agesilaus, promised him to bring Pharnabazus to a parley for
confirmation of a Peace, which Agesilaus hearing of, consented; so he having
received, faithful promise of safe conduct, and THE RIGHT HAND BEING GIVEN,
brought Pharnabazus into the appointed place, where having saluted one another,
Pharnubazus first of all PUT FORTH HIS RIGHT HAND, to which Agesilaus also
JOINED HIS. Of this language of assurance expressed by the GIVEN HAND, there
called Dextra securitatis. The Books of the Macchabees are very pregnant. Thus
when the 3. thousand Soldiers that Jonathan had sent to Demetrius to Antiochia
at his 1 Macch.
request, (when the Citizens saw that the Jews had gotten the upper Hand, and
they were disappointed of their purpose of staying their King) made their
supplication unto the King, saying, GIVE US THE RIGHT HAND [or grant us peace.]
Thus they of Gaza made supplication unto Jonathan, and he GAVE THEM THE RIGHT 1
Macch. 11. 62. 1 Macch. 13. 45.
HAND [or made peace with them] When Simon had besieged Beth-sura, and fought
against it a long season, and shut it up; at last they desired RIGHT HANDS TO
BE GIVEN THEM, to whom GIVING THE RIGHT HAND, etc. [that is, they desired
peace, which he granted.] For so the Gloss of our Bibles expound these places.
1 Macch. 13. 50.
When Simon had besieged Gaza, the people of that City cried with a loud voice,
beseeching Simon TO GIVE THEM RIGHT HANDS, [that is, to grant them peace.] So
they in the Castle at Jerusalem besought Simon that he would JOIN RIGHT HANDS,
which he gave them [or make peace with them, which he did.] Thus Andronicus 2
Macch. 4. 34.
coming to Onias who had fled to the Sanctuary at Daphne, hard by Antiochia,
counseled him craftily, GIVING HIM HIS RIGHT HAND with an oath, by that fair
show of peace persuaded him to come out: whom incontinently without any regard
of righteousness, he slew according to Meuelaus instigation. So the Nomades 2
Maccab. 12. 11.
of Arabia being overcome, besought Judas A RIGHT HAND TO BE GIVEN THEM: which
Judas giving them, thereupon they SHOO^ HANDS, and so departed to their Tents.
And thus Antiochus Eupater communed with the men in 2 Maccab. 13. 22.
Beth-sura, and GAVE AND TOOK THE RIGHT HAND, [or took truce with them.] The
speech of Reuben to his father Jacob about Benjamins delivering into his Hands,
has reference to Genesis 42. 37.
this signification of trust. And that speech of Judah unto his Father about
the same business, I will be surety for him; of my Hand shall thou require Genesis
43. 9
him. In the sense of fidelity all the Princes and men of power, and all the
sons of David GAVE THE HAND unto King Solomon. And the Prophet 1 Chronicles. 29. 24
Ezekiel emphatically declaring the perjury and infidelity of the King of
Jerusalem, who had Ezekiel. 17. 18.
broken the oath made with the King of Babel, which he had confirmed BY GIVING
HIS HAND, denounces these punishments: That he should dye in the midst of
Babel, in the place of the King that had made him King, whose oath he had
despised, and whose covenant made with him he brake: Neither should Pharaoh
King of Egypt in whom he trusted deliver him. For he has despised the Oath,
and broken the Covenant, YET LO, HE HAD GIVEN HIS HAND! And verily all Nations
have ever had a natural respect unto the mystery of Faith, which has her
firm existence in the Hand, and have so esteemed the Right Hand, they thought
the touch thereof to be the most lively, significant and express pawn or
pledge of faithfulness: whence all compacts, leagues, Grants, combinations,
truces, proviso's, bargains, covenants, and entercourses whatsoever, are held
to be inviolably ratified, and to stand in full power, force, and virtue by the
TOUCH of the insuring Hand. For when we GIVE OUR HAND, we do seal^ as it were
an obligation or real contract, by which presents we deeply engage our selves
to a punctual accomplishment of that which our Hand had protested to; the Hand
being bound as a surety that our deeds shall be forth-comming, and be found
answerable to our words: for whosoever forfeits the Recognizance of his Hand,
he breaks the most sacred and strongest band of of Truth; and by falsifying his
manual faith proves a kind of Renegado to himself. Caelius Rhodiginus
thinks there is some Pythagoricall Cael. Rho. var. lect.
mystery in this authenticke guise of the Hand in warrantizing faithful
dealings, and that the gesture flows from a secret and religious reverence to
that comprehensive number Ten, for while each Hand does extend five fingers
which move to the comprehension of each other, they premit a resemblance of the
Decades mystery, since meeting in their formal close they seem to greet one
another in that number. Callymachus and Varro endeavor to render another
reason, Callymac. and Varro.
drawn from the natural authority and command that consists in the virtue of
the Right Hand. And verily Faith consists wholly in the Right Hand, and the
left has no obligatory force or virtue in it. For to give the left hand, or to
take another given Right Hand with the left, is not binding in point of
natural Faith. And therefore when Josippus Gorio the Jew, desired a Roman
Soldier to give him his Right Dorleans upon Tacitus.
Hand in sign of Faith, he gave him his left, and drawing his sword with his
Right Hand, slew him; and yet he cannot properly be said to have falsified his
promise, since he gave him but his left hand, whose touch has no assurance,
but was ever held deceitful and ominous. Therefore the oath of Faith in all
adjurations was taken and required by the Right Hand. Hence Plautus, Haec per
dextram tuam, dextrate retinente manu, Plautus captiv.
obsecro, infidelior mihi ne sis quam ego sum tibi. To which may be referred
that adjuration of Cicero, per dextram ipsam quam hospes hospiti porrexisti.
Cicero pro Dejetaro Gal. Reg.
For, the Ancients were wont by this gesture of faith, to put their last will
and commandment into the obliged Hand of their heirs, or executors. To which
intent Masinissa sent to Manilius Proconsull of Africa, requesting him to send
unto him, then at the point of death, Scipio Valor. Max. l. 5.
Aemilianus who then served under his command as a Soldier, supposing his
death to prove more happy, if he dyed embracing his Right Hand, and adjured him
thereby, to perform his last will and testament. Tarquinius Priscus sent for
Servius to this purpose. Thus the friends of Germanicus Live. De cad. 1.
touching his Right Hand swore to revenge his death. And Micipsa King of
Numidia after he Tacit. Ar. pal. 2.
had adopted Jugurth, upon his deathbed used these words unto him, I adjure
thee by this Right Hand [which he held] and by the allegigiance thou owe to
thy Country, that thou estrange Salust. de bello Jugurth.
not thy love and service from these thy kinsmen whom by favor and adoption I
have created thy brethren. To this, Virgil alluding to Virg. Aeneid. 7.
the general custom: Fata per Aeneae juro dextramque potentem.
Tibullus alludes to this gesture, Te teneam moriens deficiente manu. Tib. Eleg.

The wild Irish do ordinarily use to swear by this seat of faith and
minister of virtue, the Right Hand, who at every third word are wont to lash
out an oath, and among the rest, these, By my Cambden in Britan.
God fathers Hand, by my gossips Hand, or by thy Hand, and for the performance
of promise, and that a man may believe them, these are of greatest weight to
bind them: If one swear by the Hand of an Earl, or of his own Lord, or some
mighty person, for if he be forsworn and convict of perjury, the said mighty
man will wring from him perforce a great sum of money, and a number of cowes,
as if by that perjury the greatest abuse and injury that might be, were offered
to his name. And the Hebridian Scots Hect. Boet lib. 2 ex quo Zinguer. Theat.
hum. vit.
and Mountainiers in their contracts swear by the Hand of their Captain, an
ordinance observed among them ever since Evenus the first King that exacted the
oath of Faith at their Hands. But the indissoluble soder and inviolable bond of
society, which old sincerity instructed by reason in the tacit force thereof
thought the great oath and the strongest hold the Re-publick has to keep the
honor of her estate is Faith, then which there was never any thing held to be
of greater credit or antiquity. Hence Xenophon has (...), id est, publicam
fidem. And Numa by his dedication of the Hand to Faith, and commanding the
Flamins to execute Live. lib. 1. (...) Plut.
their functions with their Hands covered, and wrapped close to their fingers
ends, gave a notable testimony that he held Faith for holy and sacred after
touching of the Right Hand, that it ought be kept and preserved, and that her
seat was sacred and consecrated even upon the Right Hands, and therefore that
it ought by no means to be violated: wherefore in particular contracts among
the Romans there was not any oath more religious and holy then the oath of
Faith, a point of natural doctrine that Numa did but enforce with his rituall
additions. But the authority, reputation, consequence and dignity of the
Public Faith was had in such singular estimation, that men held their money
no Camer. Hist. med
where so safe as in the Hands of the Public State. Hence it is that we may
see many ancient coins with two Hands joined together, with this inscription
of Faith kept; Fides Romanorum, Pier. hier. lib. 35.
sometimes Fides legionum. And hence also it was that the Romans were wont to
contrive the statues of those Princes that had deserved well of the
Commonwealth, that by a Right Hand extended out they signified their Faith
unto the same. Tully had reference to this Stateoath, when he said, I gave
Public Faith upon the promise of the Senators, that is to say, he offered
forth his Right Hand, as a pledge thereof: and it is fit this natural ceremony
of an oath should be reverenced in the Hand, the chiefest seat of Fidelity,
since it is the honest foundation of all right and equity. Nothing so ordinary
in the common affairs of life as STRIKING HANDS, whether it be for
confirmation of our bargains, grants or covenants in the behalf of our
selves, or in undertaking by way of promise and suretiship for others wherein
the Hand as a surety is still engaged. And indeed the whole trade of the
universe is driven by this driving stroke of the Hand: he that shall (as I have
sometimes done) walk upon the Royal Exchange among Merchants, merely to
observe their ^i^ter courses of buying and selling, shall soon be saisfied in
the natural force of this expression. But he that would see the vigor of this
gesture in pur is naturalibus, must repair to the Hors^ Cirque, or Sheep Pe^s
in Smith-field, where those crafty Olympique Merchants who ^^ed the Hand of no
Broker to speed the course of their affairs, will take you for no chapman, un^
less you strike them good luck, and smite them earnest in the palm. And I
have sometimes in consort with my friend had good sport to set him to observe
the pure and natural efforts of these men in the heat of their dealings, and
have suffered my self to be a little smitten with the Hand of deceit, to
gain the curiosity of an experiment, a kind of solace, pleasing to
Philosophical complexions, and such who hunt after the subtleties of Nature:
wherein though I cannot brag of my bargain, yet I can afford my Reader a good
penniworth. Their cunning mannaging of the Hand in time and tone, I have
sometimes called the Horse-Rhetorique of Smithfield, which by calculation I
have found to differ from the Fish Dialect of Billingsgate, in the monochord of
motion, and peaceablenesse of accent. And he that shall undertake to out-write
Markham, and like Hocus Pacus to discover the subtleties of his own profession,
will not set forth the art of Hors-coursing well, if he omit the rule of buying
and selling by this insurance and policy of the Hand.

But as concerning that perilous striking of the Hand for others, Solomon who
was well versed in the subtle notions of manual utterance, acknowledging the
signification thereof in suretiship, discommends the inconvenient and
obligatory force of this expression: My son, if thou Prove. 6. 1.
be surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy Hand with a stranger, thou
art snared, etc. And in another place: Be not thou of those that strike Prove.
22. 6
Hands, or of them that are sureties for debts. And the Wiseman striking again
with the same Hand of reprehension: A man void of understanding strikes Hands
and becomes surety in the presence of his friend. Wherein he checkes the
indiscreet forwardness of some men in these kind of undertakings, who offer
themselves before the favor is required at their Hands, and at the very sight
of and presence of his friend, without consideration Dr. Jerm. mins paraphr.
observat. on the Prove.
or looking into the business, thrusts his Hands into the bond of suretiship.
And such a man is here described to be a man wanting a heart, and surely it
were well if such a one were without a Hand also: for since he has not
understanding in his heart to keep him from hurt, it were good he had no power
in his Hand to do himself hurt: especially if he be such a fool, as having
stricken another Hand, and made himself a surety, he strikes his own Hands
as applauding himself for it, which may be the sense of this place. Surely
such a fool may quickly wring his Hands together in sorrow, who before did
clap his Hands in joy, and may strike himself in anger with the same Hand
wherewith in the foolish kindness of suretiship he struck the Hand of
another. For he that has stricken his Hand to be surety for his friend, had
been better that his friend had struck him with a harder blow, when by
striking his Hand he has brought him, under the Hand of another, and behind
hand in the world. Salazar commenting upon these places of the Proverbs,
renders this expression of Salaz. comment. in Prove. Sal.
the Hand, according to Expositors. Variously, sometimes it is Manum desigere,
volam percutere, in fidei jubentibus pro debitis manum pepigere, in fidei
jussionibus stipulata manu side jubere. And he calls it sometimes Sonum
securitatis vel assecurationis, scil. eum sonum quem in stipulationis, and
fideijussionis, seu assecurationis pacto manus manui conserta, and illisa edore
solet. Job also, eloquent in affliction, Job 17. 3.
in his appeal from men to God, acknowledges the obligatory sense of this
expression of the Hand, Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he
that will STRIKE HANDS with me? By Tully this solemn bond or obligation of the
Hand is called Nexus: Attici, te Tul. ad Atticum lib. 7. Idem in paradox.
esse scribis mancipio, and nexu: meum autem usu and fructu. And in another
place: Non enim ita dicunt eos esse servos, ut sunt mancipia, quae sunt
Dominorum facta nexu aut aliquo jure civili. Hence in the Laws of the twelve
Tables we find these words, Ut quae res mancipii essent, qui eas venderet,
nexum faceret. To which may be annexed that which Valerius Maximus reports of
Titus Veturius, Valor. Max l 6.
who as his words are, Propter domesticam ruinam and grave as alienum C. Plotio
Nexum se dare admodum adolescentulus coactus esset. This expression by gesture,
by reason of the signification it has in Nature, was not only used in
Testaments, in which the Heir was taken by the Hand that he might pass into
the family of the Testator, and in the buying of servants, but also in all
obligatory bargains and pledges, as Hottoman informs us: and indeed in buying
and selling this Nexus was commonly used; a^ when Mottom. in leg. 12. Tab.
he that sold a commodity did undertake for the thing sold, and did oblige
himself to make goo^^ whatsoever there lacked of the weight or ta^^ of the
commodity bought, as the same Hottoman affirms, which is as much as to
undertake to be s^^e^y for the thing it self; for suretiship is a species of
bargaining. And according to Varro a free man when he had enthralled himself
to servitude for money borrowed, until he had paid it he was called Nexus, a
nector, vel nexum quasi neo Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 5.
s^^m. Clemens Alexandrinus calls this Law-expression Carpismum, because that
he who did oblige himself unto another, or offered his faith, gave his wrest,
to wit, the joint whereby the Hand is joined to the wrest, to be apprehended
and wrung, to signify that he was held obliged; custom having a little
changed the most natural form, without impeachment of signification.

That this gesture is significant to license, warrant, and assure, is not
difficult to prove. For thus Artaxerxes King of Persia by giving his Right Hand
to Mithridates the brother of Ariobarzane^, Probus in Datam.
promising to kill Datamen, gave him license, and an open warrant, with pardon
of punishment to do what he would in that business. And Saint Paul when he
would warrant and assure the Galatians, Corinthians, Colossians, and Thessal
onians, to whom he writ, that those Epistles were his, his salutations in the
close intimate that they Sclater on the Gal.
were witten with his own Hand. This gesture is also significantly used when
we choose an Umpire put to arbitration and comprimise. To which that of Job may
be referred. Neither i^ Job 9. 33.
there any dayes-man betwixt us that might lay his Hand upon us both. To which
expression of gesture, that also of the Apostle Saint Paul seems Galath. 3. 19.
to appertain. The Law was given by Angels in (...) Hand of a Mediator, as if
that Law of the Old Testament, about keeping whereof the people of Israel had
covenanted with God, had (as by Pintus de Chr. cru^^
giving the Hand) come to that people by mediation of Moses, and did prefigure
what was to be done by the Angel of the Testament or Mediator of a better
Testament; to wit, that a better Heb. 8. 6.
Law established between God and Man, the Mediator of the new Covenant
mediating between both the parties, and stretching out his arms in his
suffering, had LAID HIS HANDS UPON THEM TO CONFIRM a more holy league and
covenant.

Reconcilio. Gestus LVII.
TO SHAKE THE GIVEN HAND is an expression usual in friendship, peaceful love,
benevolence, salutation, entertainment, and bidding welcome; reconciliation,
congratulation, giving thanks, vnlediction, and wel-wishing. This loving
declaration of the Hand, the Greek express in the word (...). An expression
usual between those who desire to incorporate, com^^i^ or grow into one, and
make a perfect joint. The most happy point of amity, a natural form very rich
in signification, since they who thus profess communion of good^ while they
willingly EMBRACE EACH OTHERS HAND signify that they are both content that
their works shall be common; by this gesture speaking plainly, as if they in
effect should say, What damage happens unto thee, I shall esteem as my own
loss; and thy emolument and profit I shall entertain as mine own, and thou
shall find me ready pressed with a consonant and willing mind, both to yield to
thee a share of my welfare, and reciprocally to bear a part of thy calamity.
For, all this is the more significantly implied by this gesture, in regard,
that works are the words of love; and the Hand is the Tongue of hearty
goodwill. The mind of man naturally desirous by some symbol or sententious
gesture to utter and disclose herself in the affections of love, does
manifestly set forth her disposition by this courtly declaration of the Hand, a
natural complement where with she commonly sweetens her affectionate respects
to others. And this natural expression seems to result from the sympathy
between the will and the Hand: for, the will affectionately inclined and moved
to stretch forth her self, the Hand, that is moved by the same spirit, willing
to go out and set a gloss upon the inward motion, casts it self into a form
extending to a semblance of the inward appetite; neither is the Hand at any
time found too short for such an expression if the will be disposed to
cooperate with it. For, nature who has ingeniously thought on many
conveniences of expression for the use and benefit of common life, among
others, seems to have ordained the Hand to be the general instrument of the
mind, and endued it with a courteous appetite of closing with another.
Therefore when the mind would disclose the virtue, strength, and forcible
operation of her favor and good will, out of the abundance of her love she
puts forth the Hand, and in that as it were the heart it self, with
affectionate love; and receives them again by a natural bill of exchange in
the Hand of another, which verily is a sign of mutual agreement, and of a
perfect conjunction; for which cause Pindarus a Poet of an aspiring wit, placed
the heart Pindarus
and Hand as relatives under one and the same parallel. To the natural sense
of this gesture appertains diverse passages of Tacitus: The Lingones Tacit.
hist. lib. 1.
(says he) according to their accustomed manner had sent gifts to the Legions
right Hands in token of mutual love and hospitality. The Centurion Sisenna
carried in the name of the Syrian Army to the Soldiers of the guard right
Hands in token of concord. And Ambassadors came from Artabanus King of the
Parthians, calling to mind their friendship and alliance with the Romans, and
desiring to reni^e Right Hands. To bring this important gesture of the Hand in
friendship a little nearer to the authenticke light of sacred History. So John
to Jona^^^ 2 Kings 10. 15. Gal. 29.
when he asked him whether his heart were right, give me thine Hand. So James
and Cephas and John gave to Barnabas the Right Hand of fellowship, that is,
they gave him their Hands in token of agreement in matters of doctrine.

That this gesture is significant in salutation, bidding welcome and
entertainment, is apparent by many testimonies of the Ancients. Virgil in the
first place witnesses the same, complaining Virg. Aeneld. 8.
to his mother, thus, -- Cur dextrae jungere dextram
Non datur --
And in another place (...) speaking to Idem.
(...) concerning his affection to Anchises, -- Mil^i (...) j^venili (...) amare
[Camp^^^are] virum and (...) conjungert dextr^.
Horac^ also concerning himself, Horac. l. 1. Satyr. 9.
A^^^rrit (...) (...) mihi ^mine tantum,
(...) (...) quid a^i^ dulcissime rerum?
To this sign of salutation and entertainment appertains that medall, whose
inscription is, Tra^^^us Adrianus, wherein you may see the Pier. Hieroglyph.
lib. 35.
Emperor himself joining his Right Hand with the Hand of I^pi^er sitting,
with this inscription placed under the base, ADVENTUS AUG. We read of Richa^d
the second to have used this Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. in the life of Rich. 2.
expression of welcome to his Nobles when they appeared at Westminster.
M^^ichans delivered this gesture as a certain secret to his disciples, that
when they met one another, they should salute by joining Hands, by which sign
they declared that they were delivered out of darkness, as Epiph^^i^s
reports. And there is no Epiphan. l. 3. Tom. 2. Con. haer. Xenop. Cyr. l. 6.
expression of love more frequent in the entercourses of common life then this.
Thus Abrad^^u^ in Xenophon comes to Cyrus, and taking him by the Right Hand,
makes use of this grateful expression: and both Xenophon, and all other
Authors are full of such loving occurrences of the Hand, and mutual
declarations of hospitable love. Thus Pallas in Virgil entertaining Aeneas, and
bidding ^im welcome: -- Nostris succeed p^natibus hospes Virgil Aeneid. 8.
Tacit. l. 15

Accepitque manu dextraque amplexus inhaesi^.
Thus Tiridates King of Armenia coming to Corbulo, lighted first from his
horse, and Corbulo did the like immediately, and both of them on foot joined
Right Hands. And when Cicero had fled out of Rome for fear of Antonius, who
after Plutarch in the life of Cicero.
the death of Julius Caesar began to look aloft, and became fearful to all
men, as though he meant to make himself King: But afterward condemning his
dastardly fear, returned to Rome, there came such a number of people out to
meet him, that he could do nothing but take them by the Hands and embrace
them: who to honor him came to meet him at the gate of the City, as also by
the way to bring him to his house. This symbolicall expression of the Hand had
a practical signification among the Ancients, when the Hand given did assure
the inviolable observation of all the laws of hospitality, which may receive
some illustration from the noble practice of Pacuvius Calavius, who when Live.
l. 23.
he had invited Annibal to supper, and Perolla his only son after supper had
told his father that he had now an opportunity to reconcile himself unto the
Romans, to let him seal it with the blood of Annibal; His father dehorting
and conjuring him from the violation of the laws of hospitality and breach of
covenant: There are not many hours past since that we swear by all the gods
and holy hollowes in heaven, and by JOINING HAND IN HAND made faithful promise
and obliged our selves to communicate together with him, and so to eat at the
holy Table of sacred Viands, etc. And when King Syphax was brought into the
Praetorium or Generals pavilion, and Live. l. 3^.
there presented unto Scipio, Scipio was much moved in mind to consider the
state and fortune of the man, compared now to his present condition [which more
wrought upon him] when he remembered withal and called to mind, the hospitable
entertainment, the GIVING INTERCHANGEABLY OF THE RIGHT HAND, and the covenant
between them, made both in public and private. Our Ancestors also had this
expression of Hospitable love in a real respect, when they knew no greater
term of reproach, then to call a man unhospitable. This expression of the Hand
continues in force and estimation, and bears such sway among all Nations
(especially those that are Northward) that he seems to be disarmed of all
humanity, and to want the affability of expression, who does (when there is
occasion for it) omit this benevolent insinuation of the Hand. But concerning
this familiar and natural intimation of the Hand in point of salutation, the
ancient Sages and men of soundest judgment, have made a quaere whether the
familiar contact be so comely and laudable in the Hand of a prudent and
religious man. Among the wise Masters, those who were given to pleasure, as
Socrates, Plato, and others, willingly Cresollius Mystag. vol. 1.
admit of this embracing of the Hand, as an allurement to unclean desire. But
those that affected gravity, disallowed the promiscuous use thereof. Verily the
Pythagoreans did give the Right Hand to none but men of their own Sect, no not
so much as to any of the same family, unless to their Parents, as Iamblicus
notes. And it Iamblicus
appears by the most ancient observations of elder times, that holy men for the
most part used in their salutations only to put forth the Hand; since so, the
singular benevolence of a friendly mind may be expressed without any
impeachment to their virtue and gravity. Meletius of Antioch, a man endued with
an incredible easiness and sweetness of manners, and most dear to all good
men, is said only to have put forth his affable and gracious Right Hand in
salutations, to show the force of his love and affection toward others,
wherein he observed the laws of common humanity, and a courteous disposition,
without any detriment to religious modesty. And at this day religious men in
foreign parts most commonly abstain from embracing the Hands of others,
without incurring the censure of incivility, and want of grace in behavior, as
taking the shaking of Hands in this sense, to be too blunt an expression for a
Hand accustomed to matters of decorum, and the sacred tokens of divine
reverence. In sign of congratulation the Huntsmen at the fall of the Boore
slain by Meleager with cheerful shouts unfolding their joys shake his
victorious Hands, as Ovid elegantly feignes according to the natural property
of the Hand on such occasions. Nothing more ordinary then shaking of Hands in
valediction and taking leave of our friends, and bidding them farewell, of
which Poets and Historians are not silent. Ovid brings in Cadmus at his
transformation, speaking to his wife Hermione to Ovid Metam. 4.
use this loving gesture of valediction, and to shake Hands with him while he
yet had a Hand to shake. Thus Calanus the Indian Philosopher Plutarch in the
life of Alex. the Gre^^.
about to sacrifice himself alive at the tomb of Cyrus, before he went up
upon the funeral pile, he bad all the Macedonians that were there farewell,
and SHOOK THEM BY THE HANDS. And Telutias when Hierax Admiral of the
Lacedaemonians came in the interim that he was rescuing the Aeginetes besieged
by the Athenians, and took his ships from him; yet he went home very happy,
for when about to depart he Xenop. rerum Graec. l. 5.
took ship, there was not a soldier but SHOOK HIM BY THE HAND, and with other
kind expressions wishing all happiness unto him. That this gesture is
significant in reconciliation is most manifest by our common practice and use
thereof in the sense of that intention. Thus Minutius and Fabius Maximus
Dictator gave their Live. 22.
Hands one to another at the time of their reconciliation. And when Onatius
Aurelius, a Knight of Rome had told the people what a vision he had seen in his
dream, that Jupiter had appeared to him that night, and willed him to tell them
openly, that they should not put Pompey and Crassus out of their office, before
they were reconciled together; he had no sooner spoken the words, but the
people commanded them to be friends. Pompey sat still, and said never a word
unto it. But Crassus rose, and TOOK POMPEY Plutarch in the life of Crassus
BY THE HAND, and turning him to the people, told them aloud, My Lords of Rome,
I do nothing unworthy of my self to seek Pompeyes friendship and favor
first, since you your selves have called him the Great before he had any hair
upon his face, and that you gave him the honor of triumph, before he was a
Senator.

Injurias remitto. Gestus LVIII.
TO PRESS HARD AND WRING ANOTHER HAND, is a natural insinuation of love,
duty, reverence, supplication, peace, and of forgiveness of all injuries.
Hence Physicians the subtle and diligent observers of nature, think that
there is in the Hand a certain secret and hidden virtue, and a convenient
force or philtre to procure affection. Wherefore Themistius, he who coupled
eloquence with the gravity of Philosophy, where he disputes of reconciliation
Themist. Orat. 3.
and kniting together of hearts in the common bond of friendship, he would have
the Hands of others to be laid hold on, and wrung with the fingers; for that,
says he, the Hands put forth a sting or goad, and are many times a convenient
spur to future amity. Hereupon beauties pale vassalls led by the forcible
instinct of their passion, in preferring their amorous insinuations, do much
use this speaking touch of the Hand, a piece of covert courtship whereby they
seem to strive to imprint upon their mistrisses Hand a tacit hint of their
affection, suggested in this pressing flattery of the Hand; for lovers, I know
not by what amorous instinct, next to the face, direct their passionate
respects to the Hand of those they love; to this part they most usually
accommodate their significant expressions; this they devoutly wring and
embrace, and by the discoursing compressions thereof, intimate and suggest the
eagerness of desire, and their inexplicable apprehensions of joy and grief.
Hence the great Master in the Art of love, understanding the natural force of
this tacit conference Ovid. Metamor. l. 7.
and humble supplication, brings in Jason exhibiting his request to Medaea
softly wringing her fair Hand: Ut vero caepitque loqui dextramque prehendit,
Hospes, and auxilium submissa voce rogavit.
But this Chirothripsia, or griping another Hand, was never held a safe or
warrantable expression in the Hand of any man, taken for the most part for a
wanton essay or sly proof of a tractable disposition, and a lascivious
prologue and insinuation of lust. I willingly hear (says Cresollius) Gregory
Nyssen, whose voice and admonitions Cresol. in mystag. Greg. Nys. ora^ ^. d^
resurrect.
I prefer before all the learned Schoolmen in the world. Solent manus ipso
contactu validae animae robur effoeminare, a proof and experiment of whose
observation may be understood out of a certain short narration of
Philostratus. There were in the stately Seraglio of the King Philostratus in
vita Apollonii.
of Persia many of the Kings concubines of excellent beauty, who for their rare
perfection of parts, and outward endowments of nature might well have stood in
competition for the golden ball of Paris, upon one of which when a certain
Eunuch had more curiously cast his eyes, he began to be tickled with desire,
and so netled with the itch of concupiscence, that he placed all his felicity
in enjoying of her; wherefore he made frequent visits, carried himself very
obsequiously unto her, sprinkled his discourse with amorous and allu^ing words
(and which he thought would most of all avail to set forward his design, and
to stir up and quicken the flame of affection) he WRUNG HER HAND, which when
the over-seer of the Eunuchs perceived, he commanded him, especially, in no
wise to touch the neck or Hand of the woman: good counsel; which when he
refused to follow, he fell into that foul action, which proved fatal unto
him. This gesture as it is a token of duty and reverentiall love, Coriolanus
used toward his mother Plutarch in the life of Coriolanus.
Volumnia, when overcome by her earnest persuasions to withdraw his Army from
Rome, he cried out, Oh mother! what have you done to me? for HOLDING HER HARD
BY THE RIGHT HAND, Oh mother! said he, you have won a happy victory for your
Country, but mortal and unhappy for your son; for I see my self vanquished
by you alone. This WRINGING OF ANOTHER HAND, does sometimes naturally imply
peace, and a loving forgiveness of all injuries. And how faithful an
interpretor of the mind the Hand has continued, even when the tongue has
failed, and men have been deprived of all ways of delivering their minds but
by signs and tokens; and how intelligible this expression by gesture which we
have now in Hand, has been apprehended to be in the extremity of silence, may
sufficiently appear by preferring the examples of two great Princes lying both
speechless on James Meyer lib 16. of the Annals of France.
their deathbeds. The first example shall be in Philip Duke of Burgundy, the
father of Charles slain at the battle of Nancie; Charles having absented
himself from his father for some faults, and his father falling very sick in
the City of Bruges, so that his speech failed him; Charles hearing of it came
from Gant in post to Bruges, and falling on his knees before his father, did
with warm tears beg humble pardon for all the griefs he had put him to, and
besought him with lowly reverence, that he would vouchsafe him his fatherly
blessing; his Confessor having told him in his ear, that if he could not speak
he should at leastwise give his son some token and testimony of his good
will toward him: The good Prince opened his eyes, and TAKING HIS SON BY THE
RIGHT HAND, clasped it within his own so hard as he could, a sign of love and
forgivenes. To match this with another of our own History, to wit, of Henry the
eight, who falling sick, commanded the Archbishop (then at Croyden) Godwin in
his An. Hen. 8.
should be sent for in all haste, who using all possible speed came not until
the King was speechless: as soon as he came, the King TOOK HI^ BY THE HAND,
the Archbishop exhorting him to place all his hopes in Gods mercies through
Christ, and beseeching him that if he could not in words, he would by some
sign or other testify this his hope, who then WRINGED THE ARCHBISHOPS HAND AS
HARD AS HE COULD, a sign of faith, and hope of mercy and forgiveness, and
shortly after departed.

Suspicionem and odium noto Gest. LIX
TO DRAW BACK THE UNWILLING HAND INSTEAD OF REACHING IT OUT TO EMBRACE THE
HAND OF ANOTHER, is a sign of enmity likely to prove inveterate, used by those
who flatly refuse to agree, and reject that proffered amity which they have in
suspicion. The example of Caius Popilius may seem very Live. l. 45. V^^er. ^^x.
l. 6. cap. 4.
aptly to belong unto this gesture, who when he had met Antiochus four miles
distant from Alexandria, after greeting and salutation, at the first coming,
Antiochus PUT FORTH HIS RIGHT HAND to Popilius; but he delivered unto him a
scrole written, and wished him before he did any thing to read that script;
after he had read the writing through, he answered he would devise with his
friends, and consider what was best to be done. But Popilius according to his
ordinary blunt manner of speech which he had by nature, made a circle about the
King with the rod he had in his Hand, and withal, make me an answer (quoth he)
I advise you, such as I may report to the Senate, before you pass the compass
of this circle. The King astonished at this so rude and violent a commandment,
after he had stayed and paused a while; I will be content (quoth he) to do
whatsoever the Senate shall ordain; then and not before, Popilius GAVE THE
KING HIS HAND as a friend and ally. The stoutnesse of Sylla, and his resolution
to be reconciled upon no other terms then his own, Plutarch in the life of
Sylla.
discovered it self by the same neglectfull carriage of his Hand toward
Mithridates, who when he came to him, and OFFERED TO TAKE HIM BY THE HAND;
Sylla asked him first if he did accept of the peace, with the conditions
Archelaus had agreed unto; nor until Mithridates had made him answer that he
did, would he accept of his proffered and suspected amity; for then, and not
before, he resaluted, embraced and kissed him. Thus Frederick partner and
consort in the Kingdom with Uladisla^^ the second King of Bohemia, REFUSED TO
GIVE HIS RIGHT HAND to Sobieslaus whom his father received into favor after he
had attempted to raise garboyles in Moravia, pretending he had the gout in his
Hand. And so that lofty and stately Prelate Dunstan REFUSED TO Vincentius l.
24. c. 87.
GIVE KING EDGAR HIS RIGHT HAND, before he was excommunicated, because he had
defloured a Virgin, but rating him, Dare thou touch my Right Hand that have
ravished one devoted to God, I will not be a friend to him that is an enemy to
God, and enjoined him seven years penance, after which he was absolved, and the
child christened.

Chare diligo. Gest. LX.
WE PUT FORTH BOTH OUR HANDS TO EMBRACE those we love, as if we would bring
them home into our heart and bosom, as some dear and precious thing, as
Aristotle gives the reason of the gesture. To which expression Arist. in Probl.
Psalm. 119. 48.
I find that of the Psalmist referred, My Hands will I lift up unto thy
commandments which I have loved: A proverbiall speech taken from this
intention of the Hand, as Simon de Muis observes. Cornelius a Lapide notes the
natural Simon de Muis comment. in omnes Psalm. Cornel. a Lapid. in Cant. 2. 6.
disposition of the Hands in embracing, who commenting upon the second of
Canticles 6. His left Hand is under my head, and his Right Hand does embrace
me; for lovers and parents use to put their left hand under those they tenderly
affect, and then with their Right Hand to EMBRACE the whole body, and so bring
them to their bosom, comprehending them in the compass of their arms, as in
the most natural circle of affection.

Honoro. Gest. LXI
TO APPREHEND AND KISS THE BACK OF ANOTHER HAND, is their natural
expression who would give a token of their serviceable love, faith, loyalty,
honorable respect, thankful humility, reverence, supplication, and
subjection. From this natural gesture the Spaniards took their usual forms
of salutation and valediction, whose complement usually is Baso les vostres
man's, I kiss your Hand. The son of Sirac acknowledges the signification of
this Ecclesiast. 29. 5.
submissive gesture in that saying, Till he has received, he will kiss a man's
Hand. If we should look back up on the actions of affectionate lovers, whose
inflamed hearts have moved them to sacrifice kisses on this low altar of
friendship, and to offer their service; by this modest insinuation of gesture,
we might find many passages of historical antiquity to confirm and
illustrate the sense of this expression. How passionate was Cyrus when he came
to the place where his friend. Abradatas lay slain, seeing his Xenoph. de
instit. Cyr. lib. 7.
wife sitting upon the ground by the dead body of her Lord? for bursting forth
into this patheticall ejaculation, O thou good and faithful soul, art thou
gone and left us, and there withal TOOK HIM BY THE RIGHT HAND, and the Hand
of his dead friend followed (for it was cut off with the cymeter of an
Egyptian) which Cyrus beholding it, much aggravated his sorrow. But Abradatas
wife Panthea shriked out, and taking the Hand from Cyrus, KISSED IT, and fitted
it again to its place as well as she could. To match this president with
another most illustrious postscript of surviving affection, that bright mirror
of masculine constancy. T. Voluminous when he had long wept over the body of
his friend M. Lucullus, whom Mark Anthony had put to death, because he took
part with Brutus and Cassius, desired Anthony he Valor. Max. l. 4.
might be dispatched upon the body of his friend, whose loss he ought not to
survive; and having obtained his desire, being brought where he would be,
having GREEDILY KISSED THE RIGHT HAND of Lucullus, he took up his head that
lay there cut off, and applied it to his breast, and afterward submitted his
neck to the sword of the Conqueror. Valerius Maximus in the relation of this
Story runs high in setting Plutarch in the life of Cato-Utican.
out this hyperbole of friendship, and unmatchable pattern of Roman fidelity.
Allusius the Cel^iberian used this expression of thankful humility to Scipio
when he had received that unexpected favor at his Hand to have his captive
betrothed wife preserved by him, and freely delivered unto him; seeing it could
not be comprehended nor equalled by any recompense or Lewis de Mayern Turquet,
Genesis Hist. Spain.
thanks, he was held seized with joy and shame, and taking Scipio by the Right
Hand, prayed all the gods to requite the great favor he had done him, seeing
he found himself insufficient to make any satisfaction as he desired. As this
gesture is a sign of honor and obsequious reverence. Cato Utican had his HAND
KISSED by his Army in especial honor of him at his departure, Scipio the
conqueror of Africa received the like respect and reverence from certain
Pirates, who when they had entreated him they Tit. Livi. us l. 37.
might presume to approach into his presence, and to have a view of his person,
he let them in, and immediately they went, and worshipped the posts and pillars
of his gates, as if his house had been the harbor of some sacred deity, and
having laid their gifts and presents at his threshold, ran hastily to his HANDS
AND KISSED THEM; which done, overjoyed as it were with so great a happiness,
they returned home. Delapsa Coelo sidera hominibus si sese offerent
[venerationis] amplius non recipient, says Valerius. This token of love Valor.
Max. l. 2.
and honor may be further amplified out of Livie. For when T. Quintius had
vanquished King T. Livius lib. 33.
Philip, and proclaimed liberty by the Beadle to many of the parts of Griece,
as the Corinthians, Phocensions and others, there was such joy as men were not
able to comprehend, at last when their joy was once confirmed by making the
Beadle to cry it once again, they set up such a shout, and followed it so with
clapping of Hands, redoubling the same so often, as evidently it appeared, how
there is no earthly good in the world more pleasing to a multitude then liberty
is; and afterward running apace unto the Roman General in such sort, that his
person was in some danger of the multitude crouding so hard upon him alone to
TOUCH HIS RIGHT HAND. Thus Charicles a Physician departing from Tiberius Tacit.
Annal. l. 6
as it had been about some business of his own, under color of duty, TAKING
HIM BY THE HAND, felt the pulse of his veins. Thus also we find Gadatas and
Gobrias in Xenophon Xenoph. de inst. Cyr. l. 7.
worshipping the Right Hand of Cyrus. But the most unseasonable and servile use
of this expression the Senators made toward Nero; when even in the height of
their grief, the City filled Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
with funerals, the Capitol with sacrifices, one having his brother, another
his son put to death, or friend, or near kindred, gave thanks to the gods,
decked their house with bays, fell down at the Emperors knees, and WEARIED
HIS RIGHT HAND WITH KISSES. It was a strange mischance that happened to the
learned Oporin^s of the University of Basil, going about Causia of Passion.
to use this courtly expression, to whom it being given in charge to receive
the famous Erasmus by offering him presents of wine in the name of the City; he
was prepared for it with a brave and a long Oration, but being trained up to
the Schools (which has little curiosity and quaintness in complements) going
about to kiss Erasmus his Hand, full of the gout, he did it so roughly that he
hurt him, and made him to cry out with pain he had put him to by his kiss,
which made the good Professor lose himself, nor could he ever hit upon the
beginning of his discourse, until they plentifully had powered out some of the
presented wine for him to drink, so to awaken his memory. In supplication this
gesture is also significant; for it has been a custom with all Nations in
supplication to appeal unto the Hand of those from whom they expected aid,
pressing upon it as that part whose touch was an omen of success, tendering
their requests thereto, because the power of doing does most manifestly rest
therein: whereas to touch the left hand was ever accounted an ill presaging
osse. To this appertains that of Apuleus, Juvenem quempiam etc. in medium
producit, cujus diu Apul. l. 2. Asini aurei.
manus deosculatus etc. miserere, ait sacerdos. And the same Author in another
book presents us with this examplar confirmation, Pontianus ad pedes nostros
advolutus, [veniam and oblivionem praeteritorum omnium postulat] flens, and
Idem in Apologia.
manus nostras osculabundus. Of which kind of supplication exhibited with
reverence and outward worship, declaring the inward affection, the Roman
Annals are full of examples. Thus Sophonisba the wife of Syphax taken prisoner
by Masanissa, desiring that it might be lawful for her to open her mouth, and
make an humble T. Livius l. 30.
speech unto him her Lord, in whose only Hands lies her life and death; If I
may be so bold (says she) as to touch your knees, and that victorious Right
Hand of yours, etc. to whom when as now she HELD HIM FAST BY THE HAND, and
requested his protection, he GAVE HIS RIGHT HAND for assurance to perform her
request. And when Mithridates cast himself at the knees of Eunones; Eunones
moved Tacit. l. 12
with the nobility of the man, and the change of his fortunes, at his prayer
which argued no base mind, lifted up the suppliant, and commended him that he
had chosen the Adorsian nation, and his RIGHT HAND for obtaining pardon.
Archelaus Plutarch (...) in the life of Sylla.
when he besought Sylla with tears in his eyes, to be contented with what the
Ambassadors of Mithridates his master had excepted against his demands, TAKING
HIM BY THE HAND, by entreaty at the end obtained of Sylla to send him unto
Mithridates, promising that he would either bring him to agree to all the
articles and conditions of peace that he demanded, or if he could not he would
kill himself with his own Hands. Thus also Nicias coming to Plutarch in the
life of Marcel.
Marcellus with tears in his eyes, and embracing his knees, and KISSING HIS
HANDS, besought him to take pity of his poor Citizens. The Tacit. Annal. l. 1
Soldiers of Germanicus, who upon pretense of this expression in their
complaints, lamentations and supplications unto him, took him by the Hand as
it were to kiss it, thrust his fingers into their mouths, that he might feel
they were toothlesse. Hecuba coming as a suppliant to Euripides
Ulisses to entreat for Iphigenia, as she addressed herself to TOUCH HIS RIGHT
HAND he HID IT, thereby cutting off all hope of pardon. To Plutarch in the life
of Cato Utican.
this appertains the speech of Lucius Caesar the kinsman of Julius Caesar the
Conqueror, where he prays Cato to help him to make his oration which he
should say unto Caesar in behalf of the three hundred Merchants in Utica. And
as for thee (Cato) says he, I will KISS HIS HANDS, and fall down on my knees
before him to entreat him for thee. For the exemplifying this expression in the
sense of faith, loyalty and subjection. Martin Flumee affords us an Historical
Martin Flumee in his Hungarian History.
and pregnant proof in King John of Hungary when with a great company of the
Hungarian Nobility which he brought with him, he came to KISS SOLYMANS HAND,
and to acknowledge himself to him as his subject, and tributarie; who found
him sitting under a canopie where he made no great countenance to move himself
at the reverences he made, but showing a great majesty, he GAVE HIM HIS RIGHT
HAND in sign of amity which he KISSED. There is a pleasant Story agreeable to
this purpose of Amalasuinta Queen of the Longobards, how when she after the
death of the King her Luitpran.
husband, being childlesse, had with great prudence and gravity governed the
Kingdom, and was much magnified of her subjects, at the last her Nobles
offered her a free power of choosing them a King out of the Nobility, whom she
might make her husband, who having sent for one of her Nobles whom she
preferred in her choice to the rest, and he supposing he had been sent for
about some affairs of State, as soon as he saw the Queen, who was come out to
meet him, he leapt from his horse and bowed himself to KISS HER HAND; to whom
she smiling, not my Hand, but my face, meaning that he was now no longer to be
a subject, but her husband and King. Aurelianus sent by Clodovaeus to Clotilda,
of whose virtue he was enamoured, to find means of access unto her, resolved
to beg alms of her, for which cause he stood at the gate of a Church among a
great rabble of beggars expecting the Causin Lady.
Princess to come forth; she failed not to perform acts of charity to all the
poor according to her custom, and perceiving this man who seemed of a
generous aspect in these miserable rags, felt her heart seized with
extraordinary pity, beholding one of so good carriage reduced to such misery,
and without any further enquiry, she gave him a piece of gold. Aurelianus
seeing this Royal Hand to charitably stretched out to succor a counterfeited
want, whether he were transported with joy, or whether he was desirous to make
himself observed by some act, he lifted up the sleeve of the Princess, which
according to the fashion of Robes then worn, covered all even unto her Hands,
and having bared her Right Hand KISSED it with much reverence; She blushing,
yet passing on and showing no resentment, afterward sending for him, which was
the scope of his desire, who coming to the place assigned him, Clotilda
beholding him, soundly chid him for his boldness, in lifting up the sleeve of
her garment, and KISSING HER HAND: He who was a most quaint courtier found out
this evasion, and said, The custom of his Country permitted to kiss the lips
of Ladies at salutation; but the unhappiness of his condition abased him so
low he could not aspire to the face; behold the cause why he contented
himself with the Hand, it being a thing very reasonable to kiss a Hand, which
is the sourse of so many charities.

Reservatione saluto Gestus LXII.
TO OFFER THE BACK OF THE RIGHT HAND TO BE KISSED by others, which Pliny
calls a religious ceremony used by all Nations, Pliny Not Hist. lib. 11.
is an expression of state used by proud and scornful persons, who affect the
garb of great ones, and are willing to afford a slight respect to one they
think unworthy of a higher touch. Martial very acutely jeers at the condition
of such overweening magnifico's; Martial lib. 2. Ep. 22.
Basia das aliis, aliis das posthume dextram,
Dicis, utrum mavis elige, malo manum.
Many such apes of sovereignty our times afford who arrogate to themselves more
honor then either their birth or fortunes can challenge, such may see a copy of
their improper expression in Marcellinus who describing the corrupt state of
Ammian. Marcel. l. 8
Rome in the days of Valentinian and Valens, shows how the Nobility some of
them, when they began to be saluted, or greeted breast to breast, turned their
heads awry when they should have been kissed, and bridling it like unto cursed
and fierce bulls, offered unto their flattering favorites their knees or Hands
to kiss, supposing that favor sufficient for them to live happily, and be
made for ever. Indeed the favorites of fortune, and great Commanders of the
world, with a little more reason have thought them much to wrong their majesty
who in kissing presumed above their Hands. Examples of which imperious
expression we have in Caligula, who as Dion reports of him was very sparing
Dion Cass. l. 59. Caligula.
of his Hand, except it were to Senators, and to whom he offered this favor,
they gave him public thanks in the Senate for it, whereas all men saw him
daily allowing this favor to dancers and tumblers. And Domitian to Caenis
Sueton Domit. cap. 12.
his fathers concubine newly returned out of Istria, and offering to kiss his
lips, he PUT FORTH HIS HAND. And the younger Maximin is noted to have used
the said stately expression Seldens Titles of Honors.
in his demeanor toward them that came to salute him, and not to have
admitted any above his Hand. A piece of state that has been as improperly
usurped by the proud Prelates of the Church, who have expected the same symbol
of subjection from the humble mouths of their adorers. A reserved carriage
which begat envy in the people to the greatest Emperors. Wherefore Plinius in
Panaegyr. ad Trajanum.
Pliny comending Trajan the Emperor in forbearing this expression of state, and
condemning it in those that used it, says, I am quo assensu senatus quo gaudio
exceptus es, cum canditatis ut quemque nomina veras? osculo occurres? devexus
in planum, and quasi unus ex gratulantibus, te miror magis, an improbem illos,
qui efficerunt ut illud magnum videretur, cum velut affixi curulibus suis manum
tantum, and hanc cunctanter and pigre, and [imputantibus] similes promerent?
Yet in Princes whose tempers did enrich them with their peoples love, this
demonstration of the Hand was held to be a note of Royal plausibility. Of this
kind of benign and courteous Princes was Marcus Aurelius, as Herodian notes,
who was of so sweet a temper, and debonaire behavior toward all men, that he
would GIVE HIS HAND [(...)] Herodian Imper. Hist. lib. 1.
to every man that came to him, commanding his guard to keep back none that
came unto him. The same Author speaking of the Idem l. 3.
Emperor Severus his entrance into Rome with his Army, and noting his
plausibility the next day when he came to the Senate, where he made a smooth
and plausible speech, and then (says he) he GAVE HIS HAND to all the company,
where he uses the same Greek word as before. Absolon used this popular action
of his Hand, as 2 Samuel 15. 5.
a bait to entice and steal away the hearts of the people from his father
David: for, the text says it was so, that when any man came nigh him to do
him obeisance, he put forth his Hand, and took him, and kissed him. Otho was
of the same courtly complexion, and (as Tacitus Cornel. T^ci^us Hist. lib. 1.
observes) was well skilled in the facit force of this popular insinuation,
very ready to STRETCH FORTH HIS HAND, and to bow himself to every mean
person, neither did he reject any, though coming single. The humanity of
Alexander the Great, King of Macedon, a Prince of an invincible spirit, and
noble temper, Quintus Curtius lib. 10.
is most renowned in Histories; who although he was weakened with the violence
of a disease (a thing most incredible to be spoken or heard) raising himself
upon his couch, PUT FORTH HIS DYING HAND to all his soldiers that would, to
touch it, and holding it in that posture until all his Army had kissed, not
until then taking in his wearied arm: Upon which unimitable act of Alexander,
Valerius Maximus breaks forth into a most patheticall interrogatory, Quis
V^ler. M^x. lib. 5.
autem manum osculari non curreret, quae jam fato oppressa maximi exercitus
complexui, [humanitate] quam spiritu vividiore suffecit? Nor was the affability
of Cyrus King of Persia much less remarkable, Xenoph. (...). Cyr. l^b. 8.
who declaring upon his deathbed, how they should dispose of his body after
his a, to wit, to bury it presently in the earth, and not to enclose it in any
gold or silver urne; wherefore (says he) if there be any of you, that would
either touch my Right Hand, or behold my eye while I am yet alive, let them
come near; but when mine eyes are once closed, I crave of you my sons, that
my body may be seen of no man, nor of you your selves; and having spoken these
and other things, when he had given them all his Hand, he closed his eyes, and
so dyed. Great Princes at this day expose not their Right Hand to be kissed,
but to such whom they would welcome with some especial grace. For when great
Potentates intend to admit a friend into protection, or in their Royal
goodness are pleased to re-admit some exile from their love, and would
dispense with greater majesty a pardon royal for some passed offense, they use
openly to offer and PRESENT THE BACK OF THEIR RIGHT HAND, permitting them by
that favor to reverence their power and high command; or the signification of
that touch and honorable favor is as much as a firm sign of reconciliation
and a gracious league obtained at their Hand.

Furacitatem noto. Gestus. LXIII.
TO PUT FORTH THE LEFT HAND AS IT WERE BY STEALTH, is their significant
endeavor who have an intent unseene to purloine and convey away something.
From which fellonious action the Adage is derived, Utitur Erasm. Adag.
manu sinistra, which translated, in the proverbiall sense is took up against
cheates, and pilfering fellows, who by a theevish sleight of Hand, and sly
way of robbery, can bereave one of a thing unperceived; for such Mercurialists
who address themselves to filch, and lurching closely assay Underhand to
steal a thing Hand-smooth away, do in the cursed Handicraft of theft, out of
a kind of cunning choice employ the left hand, which is the hand that lies
more out of sight, and is far less observed then the Right Hand is. A Hand
which if it once grow dexterious by habitual theeving, will not be left; for
if it once affect to keep it self in ure, it turns to an incurable felon. And
it may be worth our inquiry why the Law does so expressly order theft to be
punished in this Hand, for that the Sea the Statut.
brawn of the left thumb is branded in malefactors, a kind of penal pardon
for the first transgression. And if it may be lawful to divine of the legality
of this law-checke, I should think that there lies some concealed symboll in
the device, and that the estates assembled had regard to the fellonious
procacity and craft of this guilefull Hand, which is prone by a sly
insinuation with more subtle secrecy to present it self to any sinister
intention, and does no sooner move to such actions, but every finger proves a
limetwig; which the ancient Egyptians implied in their way of Hieroglyphique
when they figured furacity Pier. in Hierogl. lib. 35.
or theft by a light fingured left hand put forth as it were by stealth. To
open and unfold the subtle and occult conceptions of antiquity about the
nature and disposition of the left hand, and to collect what has been noted
touching the sinister inclinations of this hand, whereby its natural
properties have propagated themselves, and by action insensibly spread into the
manners and customs of men. First, it is the noted property of the left hand
to be coverd, and to keep as it were a recluse in the bosom, or to be carried
wrapped up in a cloak, lurking closely and lying as it were in ambuscado to
entrap, and by a crafty fetch imperceptibely to make a prize of all that comes
to Hand. Whence the Greeks from whom the facetiousnesse of manners and
elegancie of learning (as some think) were first derived, signify as much,
who will therefore have the left hand named (...) Hesychius
lavam manum, because for the most part (...), tegi and occultari soleat,
whereupon this hand being more idle, for idleness is a maine cause of theft,
it is consequently more prone to this manual transgression. This lightfingered
hand being called by Isidor, Laeva quod Isidor.
aptior sit ad levandum, to wit, to beguile, elude, lessen and diminish
another goods. And Theocritus Theocritus in charitibus.
following herein the opinion of antiquity, having noted the particular quality
and behavior of this hand, and the private vice to which it is propense,
concludes from the pitchy temper thereof, that the left hand signifies the
captivity of unlawful desire and rapacity; so that it has for this cause been
consecrated to Laverna the goddess of thieves, as being by reason of its wily
genius more fit and convenient for cousenage and clandestine theevery; for
being commonly hid and involved in the bosom of a gown or cloak and waiting
in obscurity, it comes to pass for the most part (men suspecting no such
thing) that doing nothing and devoted to rest, yet being at liberty and ready
to handle, it will be doing, and somewhat of other men's suffers for it, while
this purloining hand thinks it self the proprietary of another goods. Hence
that elegant recorder of the ancient fictions, with a Poetical touch of his
pen, sets a gloss upon this business thus, -- Nataeque ad furta sinistrae.
And that quaint Comoedian long before him Ovid. l. 13 Metamor. Plautus.
pointing out as it were with his finger the genuine deceitfulness of this
hand, called it, Furtificam laevam, the close and cunning pilferer: And
Euphormio alluding to the same properties of this hand, says, Turgentes
occulos furtiva manu Euphor. Satyr. 1.
exfrico. And (indeed) laeva or sinistra according to the ancient manner of
speaking used with the Ancients, notes one to be a thief. Hadrian Card. de
Sermon. Latino.
That subtle knave Asinius who was experienced in the crafty handling of
things, and drawing them to his own private advantage, used this hand as least
suspected, when he had watched an opportunity at a feast to steal away some of
the linen; against whom Catullus in his stinging Catullus Epigr. 12.
style slings these words out of his crisped pen: Maruccine Asini manu sinistra,
Non belle uteris, sed in ioco atque vino
Tollis lintea negligentiorum.
Hence also when Sophiclodisca the baud in Plautus, Plautus Persa Act. 2. Sc. 2.
upon suspicion of felony demanded to see the Hand of Paeginum, and the lad
like a crafty wag had put forth his Right Hand; she replied to him, ubi illa
altera furtisica laeva, where is that other close and cunning pilferer the left
hand. Autolicus was expert in the sly feats of this hand, of whom Martial,
Martial Epigr.
Non erat Autolici tam piceata manus.
And we read in Catullus of Porcius and Socratio, Catullus.
duae sinistrae Pisonis the two left hands of Piso, that is instruments of his
by whose private conveyance he received bribes; for although in regard, of
their employments under him, they might be said to be his Right Hands, yet in
this sense of bribery, and close conveyance they were properly called his left
hands. The Egyptians in Hieroglyphique Pier. Hieroglyph. lib. 35.
painted justice by an open left hand, as the colder, weaker and slower hand,
and therefore less prone or able to apply it self to offer or do any injury.
But it is better for the Commonwealth that Judges should be without Hands, as
the Theban Statues of Judges were, Idem.
then in this sense to have a left hand.

Benedico. Gestua LXIV.
THE IMPOSITION OF THE HAND, is a natural gesture significantly used in
condemnation, absolution, pardon and forgiveness, benediction, adoption,
initiation, confirmation, consecration, ordination, sanation, and in gracing
our meals. That this gesture is of importance in condemnation is apparent by
the commands of the old Law in case of temptation to Ethnicisme Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
17. 7.
and practical Idolatry. So when the son of Shelomith the daughter of Dibri
of the tribe of Dan which she had by an Egyptian) had blasphemed, the Lord by
the hand of Moses Levit. 24. 14.
commanded him to be brought forth without the camp, and all that heard him
were to LAY HIS HAND ON HIS HEAD. And the laying of the Hand on the sacrifices
head that was condemned Levit. 1. 4. 8. 22. 2 Chronicles. 29. 23.
in the offerers stead, so often commanded in the Leviticall Law, points to the
signification of this gesture. In absolution, pardon and forgiveness,
notwithstanding the identity of gesture, there is a proper contrariety of
expression, and this seems to be a natural and paraphrasticall gesture, very
suitable to that petition in the Lords prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, AS we
forgive them their trespasses against us. For, AS Nature teaches us to raise
our Hands to beg pardon and forgiveness at the Hand of God; so she likewise
moves us to the same expression of gesture, as most proper and significant to
seal our pardons to others; implying, that who forgives shall be forgiven; and
neither Nature nor Grace does move us to ask pardon on any other terms. The
phrase of this gesture is significantly took into the forms of the Civil
Law; and has been practiced in Ecclesiastical absolution. Parisiensis for
this reason would have it a sacrament, because Ulpian Pand. l. 42 ^it. de re
judic. Guliel. Paris de Sac. Po^n.
it has a sacring and sanctifying sign, to wit, a sign having a natural
resemblance with inward sanctification it self, which is the Hand. To this
gesture as it is cunningly made an Appenage to the Papal policy of auricular
confession, I have nothing to say, only I find that the ancient form of
absolution was to hold both the Hands conjoined Francis-Coriol. de Sacr. poen.
over the parties head which was to be absolved; which may be also exhibited by
one Hand laid in sequence of the other; or both conjoined and held above the
head, so appearing in the air without any residence at all upon the head. The
manner of performance at this day (it seems) is, to lay on both the extended
Hands upon the head, so that they touch the crown, and rest and settle down
thereon. As this gesture is significant in benediction, it was used by Isaac
upon his deathbed when he blessed his son Jacob who supplanted Esau of his
blessing Genesis 27. 4
by counterfeiting the rough Hands of his elder brother: And thus Jacob about
to dye blessed his twelve sons, every one of them with a several Genesis 40. 28.
blessing. Our Blessed Savior who with the sacred gestures of his Hand, has
sanctified the expressions of ours, and made them a holy language, was often
seen to use this expression of the Hand: whence the Church commenting upon his
action, says, He by his outward gesture Matthew. 10. 13.
and deed declared his good will to little children, in that He embraced them
in His Arms. LAID HIS HANDS UPON THEM and blessed them. And the very last
expression that flowed from His sacred Hand was blessing: for at the time of
His ascension He LIFTED UP HIS HANDS and blessed His Apostles, and while Luke
24. ^0.
they beheld Him in this posture blessing them, He departed bodily from them
ascending up into Heaven. Hence in all tacit posies of His ascension, this
figure of the sacred property of His Hand is most emphatically significant.
That in conferring the blessings of primogeniture and adoption, this gesture of
the Right Hand is more peculiarly significant, is excellently illustrated by
the adoption of Ephraim unto the birthright of Manasseth by Jacob when he
blessed Joseph sons: Genesis 48. 8.
For, Joseph bringing his sons to be blessed of his father, took Ephraim in
his Right Hand toward Isreal's left hand; and Manasses in his left hand,
toward Isreal's Right Hand, so he brought them unto him: But Israel STRETCHED
OUT HIS RIGHT HAND, and laid it on Ephraims head which was the younger, and his
left hand upon Manasses head (directing his Hands on purpose) for Manasses was
the elder. But when Joseph saw that his father laid his Right Hand on the head
of Ephraim, it displeased him, and he staid his fathers Hand to remove it from
Ephraims head to Manasses head. And Joseph said unto his father, not so my
father, for this is the eldest, put thy Right Hand upon his head: But his
father refused and said, I know well my son, I know well; he shall be also a
people, and shall be great likewise: But his younger brother shall be greater
then he, and his seed shall be full of Nations: So he blessed them that day,
and said, In thee Israel shall bless and say, God make thee as Ephraim and
Manasseth: And he set Ephraim before Manasseth. For the Historical Tiraquel.
de jure primog. Dr. F. of the Chapter l. 5. cap. 2. Pererius in Genesis
sense of this expression, see Tiraquel and Dr. Field. Pererius, Rupertus, and
Isidorus affirm, that in a mystical sense this cancelling or crossing of the
Patriarchs Hands in exhibiting his blessing and transferring the right of
primogeniture to the younger, was representatively done to prefigure a mystery
of the calling of the Gentiles, and the preferring of them before the Jews:
and that this was the first type or prefiguration of the manner of the promised
Messiahs passion in the decreed way of redemption. The same gesture we use in
gracing our meals, an expression very proper and significant: For, the Hands
reverently erected, without any other form of speech annexed, seem naturally
to pronounce this Grace.

O Thou supreme Power, the giver of all good things, who openest with thy
Hand, and fillest every living thing with thy blessings, vouchsafe, O Lord,
benedicendo, benedicere, to let thy Right Hand bless, sanctify, and confirm
unto us the blessings of thy left. And it is a brand of profane unmannerlines
in the rough Hand of Esau that he was readier to strike Hand with a chapman to
sell Gods blessing for his meat, then with his Hand to invite it to his meat.
Whereas our Blessed Savior thought blessing (bid by this reverend invitation
of the Hand) a considerable guest at a feast, who to show that man lives not
by bread only, upon all such occasions used the signification of this gesture.
Thus He blessed the five loaves and Mark. 6. 41.
two fishes wherewith he wrought his feeding miracle. And from this Chireulogia
or act of blessing and giving thanks the Sacrament used at His last supper, is
called the Eucharist. And in the terms and style of Schoolmen or natural
Divines to speak to the fundamental point of this gesture now in Hand. The
Hands and Blessing seem to be conjugates in the School both of Nature and
Grace. Benediction being a natural rite near allied unto the Hand, and of
spiritual affinity with prayer. For, Religion and Grace disa^^^^ not the
powers of natural expressions, but advance them to a full and purer
perfection, improving the corporeal sense of those manifestations to a more
spiritual and sanctified signification. That inexhaustible fountain
(therefore) of Blessing, our Blessed Savior having ordained himself a Hand,
and having taken upon Him the corporeal nature of man was constantly pleased
to honor the nature He had so taken, and to enforce by the precept and
authority of His own example, the significant convenience, religious use and
decent importance of this property of blessing annexed to the Hand. In
consecration this gesture has the like congruity of signification; for there
was never any thing by the express command of any legislator to be hallowed by
a dedication, but the Hand was called to, and enjoined to attend as a proper
addition to confirm and sanctify all other rites; not that there is any
inherent holiness in the Hand, or solemn form of expression, but an adherent
only. The very heathens have acknowledged a significant virtue in this
expression of the Hand; for we read that Numa was Plutarch in the life of Numa.
consecrated upon mount Tarpeian by the chief of the southsayers, called
Augures, laying his Right Hand upon his head; a piece of superstitious
apishnesse they learned from the grand spiritual Impostor. Moses a man
skillful in all the learning of the Egyptians, among which some secrets of our
Chirosophie were judiciously veyled; by inspiration commanded the Right Hand of
the high Priest, to wit, the thumb thereof, or vice-hand to be hallowed with
the oil in his left palm, from thence called the Holy Finger, Godwyn Jewish
Antiq.
(a form also observed in the Inauguration of Kings.) And the finger was used
in all dippings and sprinklings of the Leviticall Law. The ground and
foundation of this typical expression Levit. 4. 6. 17. 25. 30. 34. 16. 14. 9.
9.
seems to be laid in nature; for, the Hand is conceived to be as it were a
shadow or image of the Trinity; for the arm that proceeds from the body, does
represent the second Person who proceeds from the Eternal Father, who is as it
were the body and spring of the Trinity, and the fingers which flow both from
the body and the arm, do represent the Holy Ghost, who proceeds both from the
Father and the Son. Hence Hierom upon the passage of Isaiah, To whom is the
Arm of the Lord revealed, says that the Arm of the Lord is mystically the
Son Hier. in Isaiah. 53. 1.
proceeding from the Father: To which some refer that of the Psalmist, He made
strong his Arm. And the arm shadows out the second Person in the Trinity in
these respects; in coessentiality Stump. Alleg. post part. vernal.
with the body coevallity, Ability, Utility, Agility and Flexibility. The
fingers give an umbrage of the Holy Spirit in regard of their procession
proceeding from the Arm and Hand, operation, the body working by the Hand and
fingers, conjunction, taction, ostention, aspertion, Idem part Citata
distinction of joints, equal numeration, etc. Hence the Finger of God in
Scripture signifies the Holy Spirit, If in the Finger of God I cast out
devils; but then the word Finger must be Gouschel. lib. 3. eloc. sacr. Scrip.
in the singular number, for in the plural it has other senses. It is also
their gesture who would solemnly confer some spiritual or temporal honor
upon some person. This in the sacred language of Scripture is Chirothesia, and
is a matriculating gesture, and the formal preposition proper to those who are
to be openly installed or inaugurate in some new place of duty or of command;
all creations relying on the honorarie touch of the giving Hand, as the enduing
ensign that by evidence ensures the privileges of investiture. And this
manual expression is so naturally important, that it proves in honorarie
initiations, a fitter vestment to cloth the intention in, then the airy
texture of words; for it has ever had a sacred efficacy to move the
understanding by the sense, and to facilitate the overture of sacred affairs,
as being of good note and consequence conducing and inviting to the knowledge
of things abstruce, there being no other part of man that can so lively and
emphatically present by gesture the solemn images of ^is intention, since by
the motion of the Hand there is wrought in the mind of the beholder something
that is, ex congru^, significant unto a thought, as that which suggests more
unto the mind, then what is expressed unto the outer sense; for it has more
sollidity and weight then appears in the bare (...) relation: And all gestures
of the Hand being known to be of their very nature signs of imitation; the
mystique property and close intention of this gesture is not alone to represent
it self, but to conduct and insinuate something else into the thought, which
being (as it must ever be) an intelligible notion, as it is a sign or token it
falls short and abates of the perfection of the thing that is implied by its
outward signification: wherefore a Hand is but improperly said to be the shadow
of its counterfeit, which is wrought by a pencill in imitation of the life,
although upon sight thereof we know and conclude it to have the semblance of a
Hand, and to be a draught or copy of the original: so this gesture is but a
manual vision of the mind most conformable to express divine notions, which
else would lose much of their luster, and remain invisible to the conceit of
man. This form of expression in ordination as it is agreeable to the canon of
Nature, so it has received confirmation by the Hand of God since it first
appeared in the Hand of the Patriarchs, the first dispensers of personal
benediction, who used it to betoken the restrained intention of their votes
unto them on whom they conferred their blessings: For we find Moses by command
Numb. 27. 18.
PUTTING HIS HAND UPON Joshua the son of Nun to appoint him governor, who is
said to be full of the Spirit, for Moses had LAID Deuteronomy. 34. 9
HIS HANDS UPON him. And when Moses and Joshua had prayed, and LAID THEIR HANDS
ON the seventy Elders, the Holy Spirit came upon them. In choosing of Deacons
this gesture Acts 6. 6.
was used by the Apostles. And in the separation of Barnabas and Saul to be the
Apostles of the Gentiles, this gesture is again used. And Timothy is put in
mind by St. Paul of the gift Act. 13. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 6 1 Timothy 4. 14.
he received by this IMPOSITION OF HANDS: for not only the office but the
ability were together conferred upon many by this gesture, of which acquist we
must not conceive the solemn gesture to be a natural, but a moral cause, as
being the true manner and form of impetration, God assenting, and by success
crowning the prayers of religious Hands; and showed that what they did was by
prayer and blessing in his name, they being, indeed, Gods Hands by which he
reaches Counsel and Religion, which as through their Hands are conveyed unto
men, Christ having promised to open and shut them, to stretch them out and draw
them in, as the Hand of man is guided by the spirit that is in man. This
Chirothesia vel Chirotonia (for both occur in the new Testament) is used as an
Ecclesiastical gesture at this day in token of elevation or ordination,
election, and separation. And (...) est quasi (...), id est Bellarm. de contr.
l. Tom. 2.
manus tendo seu attollo in signum [suffragii.] To which appertains that
cautionary symboll of St. Paul, Lay the Hand suddenly on no man; which
Interpreters expound of the care that is to be used that none should be
admitted into rooms of divine calling, but such who are called and are fit,
Tam doctrina quam moribus: For no man can lay the Hand upon himself and be as
Basil terms it, (...), his own ordeiner; for that is parallel unto the crime
of Jeroboam who filled his own Hand; that is, 1 King. 13
ordained himself. To the signification and external effects of IMPOSITION OF
HANDS in confirmation, Tertullian elegantly, Caro * manus impositione
adumbratur, ut and anima spiritu illuminetur. In sanation or conferring a
corporal benefit on any, IMPOSITION OF HANDS is very natural, significant and
agreeable to the mysterious intention; for, the Hand is the general salve that
is applied, and applies all remedies; for naturally ubi dolor, ibi digitus, and
necessarily in point of topicall application, whose very approach does most
sensibly import relief and ease. Our Blessed Savior the great Physician of
soul and body, who did most of his miracles for restoration of bodily health,
though he were the truth and substance, who gave an end to all legal shadows,
yet he most commonly used the shadow of this natural gesture to the more
visible and significant application of his miraculous cures. He gave sight to
the blind, yet not without touching the eye: Hearing to the deaf, not without
thrusting his Finger into the ear; and speech to the dumb, yet not without
wetting the tongue, most with this gesture of IMPOSITION. Thus by TOUCHING
Simons Ma. 8. 15
wifes mothers Hand He cured her of her fever. Thus by PUTTING FORTH HIS HAND,
AND TOUCHING the leper, He healed him of his leprosy. Thus by LAYING HANDS on
the woman Mark 1. 4^.
that was troubled with a spirit of infirmity, he loosed her from her dise^se,
and made straight Luke 131 13.
her bowed body. And it is said of Him that he could do no great works in his
own Country by reason of their unbeleefe, save that HE LAID HIS HANDS UPON a
few sick folks, and healed them. And (indeed) their suits that Mark 6. 5^
came unto him for help, were commonly tendered and expressed in such forms
of speech as showed that he much used this significant expression of gesture.
For, although as Fonseca truly Fonseca.
observes, the flesh of our Savior, for that it was the flesh of God, gave
life and health to all that touched it, for a certain virtue went out from all
parts of Him, and cured all men, (as the woman that had the issue of blood
experimentally found) yet He was pleased (so to honor the Hand) to use his Hand
in the conveyance and application of that curative virtue, as that which in
nature is the most important and significant member of the body: he could have
said the word only and it had been done, but he would speak relief with his
Hand. Thus Jairus besought him to come and LAY Luke 8. 41
THE HANDS UPON his sick daughter that she might be healed and live: And they
who brought the deaf and stammering man unto Him, besought Mark 7. 30. ver.
33 Luke 8. 54. See Hook, in Eccles. polit.
Him to PUT HIS HAND UPON him, whose requests were graciously answered in this
desired and his accustomed formeof expression with his healing Hand. And
Expositors agree that they required no expression of pity from our Saviors
Hands then what they had observed him to use, thereby attributing unto him the
honor and right of the chief Prophet: For it was an expression used by the
ancient Prophets as a holy charm against bodily infirmities: And of the
practice of this gesture attended with a visible success, the Heathens were
not ignorant, apparent by the speech of Naaman who was half wroth with Elisha
for 1 Kings 5. 21.
omitting this expression or pledge of health, for the thought with himself
that the Prophet would have come out and stood, and called upon the name of the
Lord his God, and PUT HIS HAND UPON the place and heal the leprosy. After the
ascension of our Savior, his promise Mark 16. 17.
was fulfilled, that they should LAY THEIR HANDS ON the sick, and they should
be cured. Thus Paul received his sight by the LAYING Act. 9. 17.
ON OF Ananias Hands. And thus Paul healed the father of Publius Governor of
the Islle of Acts 28.
Melita, now Malta. Thus Peter TAKING the Cripple that sat at the gate of the
Temple called Beautiful BY THE RIGHT HAND, recovered Act. 3. 7.
him of his lamenesse. But of all the curetorie miracles wrought by the virtue
of this expression of the Apostles, the casting out of Devils, and freeing the
possessed, most astonished the people, especially after those sons of one Sceva
(a Jewish exorcist) had took in Hand to counterfeit that Acts 19. 13.
powerful gift by an unwarrantable imitation, and were soundly beaten for
their apish and vain attempt: After the Apostles times, the exorcists (an order
in the Primitive Church) used this curatorie Dr. Field of the Church l. 5.
adjunct in commending those to God who were disquieted with Devils. The
curative adjunct with a tangit te Rex sana te Deus is used in the conveyance of
that Charisme or miraculous See Dr. Tookers Charisma, seu Donu^ sanationis
gift of healing, which derived from the infancy of the Church the inaugured
Monarchs of this Land so happily enjoy: In which expression of their sanative
virtue they not only surpass the fabulous cures of Pyrrhus or Vespasian, of
which Pliny and others make mention, but the pretended Pliny Not. Hist.
virtues of other Christian Monarchs. And indeed it is a maxim Ecclesiasticke,
that no miracle is wrought out of the Church. And this miraculous imposition of
the Hand in curing the disease called the Struma, which from the constant
effect of that Sovereigne Salve, is called the Kings Evil. His sacred Majesty
that now is has practiced with as good success as any of His Royal
Progenitors.

An Index of reference to the following Table, or Alphabet of natural
expressions.Which Gestures, besides their typical significations, are so
ordered to serve for privy ciphers for any secret intimation.
A Figures out the I Gesture. B Figures out the II Gest. C Figures out the III
Gest. D Figures out the IV Gest. E Figures out the V Gest. F Figures out the VI
Gest. G Figures out the VII Gest. H Figures out the VIII Gest. I Figures out
the IX Gest. K Figures out the X Gest. L Figures out the XI Gest. M Figures out
the XII Gest. N Figures out the XIII Gest. O Figures out the XIV Gest. P
Figures out the XV Gest. Q Figures out the XVI Gest. R Figures out the XVII
Gest. S Figures out the XVIII Gest. T Figures out the XIX Gest. V Figures out
the XX Gest. W Figures out the XXI Gest. X Figures out the XXII Gest. Y Figures
out the XXIII Gest. Z Figures out the XXIV Gest.
The necessary defect of these Chirograms in point of motion and percussion,
which Art cannot express, must be supplied with imagination, and a topicall
reference to the order and number of their Gestures.

A Supplico.


B Oro.


C Ploro.


D Admiror.


E Applaudo.


F Indignor.


G Explodo.


H Despero.


I Otio indulgeo.


K Tristitia^ animi signo.


L Innocentia^ ostendo.


M Lucri apprehensione^ plaudo.


N Libertatem resigno.


O Protego.


P Triumpho.


Q Silentium postulo.


R Iuro.


S Assevero.


T Suffrago.


V Respuo.


W Invitoo.


X Dimittoo.


Y Minor.


Z Mendico.




An Index to the following Alphabet of natural Gestures of the HAND. Which
Gestures, besides their typical significations, are so ordered to serve for
privy ciphers for any secret intimation.
A Figures out the XXV Gesture. B Figures out the XXVI Gest. C Figures out the
XXVIII Gest. D Figures out the XXXIII Gest. E Figures out the XXXIV Gest. F
Figures out the XXXV Gest. G Figures out the XLII Gest. H Figures out the XLIII
Gest. I Figures out the XLV Gest. K Figures out the XLVI Gest. L Figures out
the XLVII Gest. M Figures out the XLVIII Gest. N Figures out the XLIX Gest. O
Figures out the L Gest. P Figures out the LII Gest. Q Figures out the LIII
Gest. R Figures out the LV Gest. S Figures out the LVI Gest. T Figures out the
LVII Gest. V Figures out the LIX Gest. W Figures out the LX Gest. X Figures out
the LXI Gest. Y Figures out the LXII Gest. Z Figures out the LXIII Gest.
A. Munero.


B. Auxilium fero.


C. Irascor.


D. Demonstro non habere.


E. Castigo.


F. Pugno.


G. Confido.


H. Impedio.


I. Recommendo.


K. Officiose duco.


L. Impatientia^ prodo.


M. Solicit cogito


N. Pudet.


O. Adoro.


P. Conscienter affirmo.


Q. Penitentia^ ostendo.


R. Indignatione timeo.


S. Data fide promitto.


T. Reconcileo.


U. Suspicione^ et odiu^ noto.


W. Honoro.


X. Reservatione saluto.


Y. Furacitatem noto.


Z. Benedico.




DACTYLOGIA, OR THE DIALECTS OF THE FINGERS.
THe Hand the great Artificer and active Contriver of most corporal conceits,
receiving good intelligence of the patheticall motions of the mind, proves a
Summarie or Index, wherein the speaking habits thereof significantly appear,
representing in their appearance the present posture of the fancy. And as we
can translate a thought into discoursing signs; so the conceptions of our
mind are seen to abound in several Dialects while the articulated Fingers
supply the office of a voice.

A COROLLARIE OF THE Discoursing gesture of the Fingers. WITH AN Historical
Manifesto, exemplifying their natural significations.
Inventione laboro. Gestus I.
THE FINGER IN THE MOUTH GNAWN AND SUCKED, is a gesture of serious and deep
meditation, repentance, envy, anger, and threatened revenge. The signification
of inventive meditation, Poets the most accurate observers of Nature, have
elegantly acknowledged. Thus Propertius in the emendation of a verse: Et saepe
Propert. l. 2. eleg.
immeritos corrumpas dentibus ungues.
Thus Persius of an ill verse: Nec Pluteum caedit nec Pers. Sat. 5.
demorsos sapit ungues.
And Horace of the sweating and sollicitous Poet. Saepe caput scaberet, Satyr.
10.
vivos and roderet ungues:
who in another place describing the earnest posture of Canidia, brings her in
gnawing her long Idem Epod. 5.
nails: Hic inresectum saeva dente livido
Canidia rodens pollicem.
Inresectum aiunt, valde sectum, aut non resectum, id enim venificae magis
convenit, longos curvosque gestare ungues quos incantationes suas [meditando]
Torrentius in Hor.
arrodant, quod [summam animi attentionem] demonstrat: As Torrentius upon the
place. And to this signification belongs that of the same Poet: De tener^
[meditetur] ungui.
And therefore in the Areopagetique School and Councel-house, they painted
among others, Cleanthes for the signification of his earnest study in
Arithmeticke and Geometry, with HIS FINGERS GNAWN about, as Sydonius
Apollinaris reports. Syndon. Apol. l. 9. epist. 9.
Goropius very witily fetches the reason of this gesture from the Etimologie
of the word Finger thus: Digiti manus significant inveniendi desiderium, nam in
prima lingua dicuntur Vinger, qua vox denotat [invenire desidero] nam omis
inveniendi facultas numeratione absolvitur, and ad numerandi artem digiti
maxim sunt comparati, numeros enim omnes digitis indicamus; quo fit ut merito
nomen habent ab inveniendi desiderio. Goropius in Hierog.
To the signification of repentance, Propertius alludes: Propert. l. 3. eleg.
Ungue meam morso saepe querere fidem.
To the intention of envy, that of Martial is referred: Ecce iterum Martial. l.
4. epig. 27
nigros corrodit [lividus] ungues.
Id est pro [invidia anxius] * corrodit ungues nigros: As Ramirez upon the
place. This gesture is also a wild expression of fierce anger and cruel
revenge, as Aristotle advertiseth us, who when he had reckoned up those actions
which are Arist. l. 7. Ethic. c. 6.
done by reason of some disease or evil custom, he puts down this arrosion
of the nails, which the Interpreters of that place declare to be the As
Zui^ger in Eth. Arist.
property of men enraged with choler, and silently threatening revenge. And the
Italians, a revengefull Nation, do most usually declare by this gesture their
greedy coveting to be at Hand with revenge; and therefore that awful Satyrist
of the angry Potet: -- Crudum chaerestratus unguem Perseus Satyr. 5.

Abrodens ait haec --
So they report of Orestes raging and transported with the furious appetite of
revenge to have BITTEN HIS FINGER in Arcadia, where a Pausanias
monument representing that expression of anger was built, as Pausanias has
left it recorded to posterity. And the masters of the Hieroglyphiques Pierius
in Hieroglyp l. 37.
pourtray out this gesture to the same significations: And if we see one BITE
HIS THUMB at us we soon infer he means us no good.

Fleo. Gest. II.
TO PUT FINGER IN THE EYE, is their expression who cry, and would by that
endeavor of nature ease themselves and give vent to their conceived
heaviness. The reason of PUTTING FINGER IN THE EYE IN WEEPING, is, because
tears falling from the EYE, with their saltness procures a kind of itching
about the carnell of tears, which requires aid of the Finger to be expressed
at their first fall: afterward the parts affected with that quality, and one
tear drawing on another, such expression is not so necessary. Besides this
cause of rubbing the WEEPING EYE, a strange matter therein requires wiping,
which also moves the Finger to haste to the EYE watered with tears; but this
is after a while, the other almost before any tear fall, as though they were
expressed with rubbing. Thus Moagetes the Tyrant of Cibyra, when he was greatly
affrighted at the minatory words of the Roman Consul, Cn. Livie l. 38
Manlius, imposing the sum of five hundred talents in ready money to be laid
down upon the nail, counterfeiting and pretending his needinesse, after much
base huckling, and rising by little and little, one while hasting and
wrankling, another while praying and entreating (and that with whining and
PUTTING FINGER IN THE EYE) he was fetched over at length, and came off to pay a
good 100. talents of silver, and deliver ten medimnes of corn besides.

Approbo. Gest. III.
TO HOLD UP THE THUMB, is the gesture of one giving his voice or suffrage, of
one that helps with his word at the time of election, and of one showing his
assent or approbation as Flavius Vopiscus writes. The putting forth of Flavius
Vopiscus.
the Finger also signifies an allowance of opinion, advice and judgment of
others wisely uttered in our presence.

Extollo. Gest. IV.
TO HOLD UP BOTH THE THUMBS, is an expression importing a transcendency of
praise. Hence Horace Horace Sermon.
Utroque pollice, dixit, pro [summo favore.] Fautor Horace Sermon.
utroque tuam [laudabit] pollice ludum:
Of which proverbiall speech, Porphyrius conceit runs thus: Utroque pollice, id
est, utraque manu, synechdoche a part ad totum. An qui [vehementius laudat] *
manus jungens, Erasm, Adage.
jungit pollicem cum proximo? Acron another way Erasm, Adage.
Utroque pollice, synechdoche, manu utraque sublataque pariter, ac saepius
mota, hic enim gestus valde laudantis est: Sane utraque sicut ex iis concijci
licet, proverbij origofuit, inquit Erasmus.

Collateraliter monstro. Gestus V.
TO POINT WITH THE TURNED OUT THUMB is a note of demonstration; for as by
diverse gestures of the Thumb we fignifie the various motions of our mind, so
by the same we are wont to point out, and show those we love, and such who
deserve our commendations by PUTTING FORTH THIS FINGER, making it many times to
usurp the office of the Index, as may be collected out of Claudian: Claud. de
6. Hon. Consulat.
-- Gaudet metuens and pollice [monstrat.]


Indico. Gest. VI.
THE FOREFINGER PUT FORTH, THE REST CONTRACTED TO A FIST, is an express of
command and direction; a gesture of the Hand most demonstrative. This Finger
being Beckman de orig. lat. ling.
called Index ab indicando, Deicticos by the Greeks, id est Demonstrator. Hinc
[indigitare] verbum pro re satis idoneum, hoc est digito ostendere, vel digitum
intendere: And hence some of the Heathen gods were called Dii indigiti, because
it was unlawful to name them, or point them out as it Festus.
were with this Finger. The force of this Finger in pointing out men of note
and quality, Poets and Historians the accurate observers of the natural
expressions of the Fingers, do every where acknowledge in their writings,
alluding thereunto. Thus the sinewie Epigrammatist: Rumpitur invidia quod turba
semper ab omni
[Monstramur] Martial Epigram.
digito --
Thus Horace: Quod [monstror] * digito praeteriuntium.
Thus the Schoole-Amorist: Saepe aliquis Ovid Amor. l. 3.
digito vatem [designat] euntem
Atque ait, hic hic est quem ferus urit amor.
Thus that obscure Satyrist: At pulchrum est Perseus Satyr. 1.
digito [monstrari] dicier hic est:
Where the Satyrist (as Lubentius comments upon the place) taking an argument
from the adjunct, seems to have respect unto the History of Demosthenes which
Cicero touches at, who was Cicero ^u^c. 5.
much affected with the mute encomium of this Finger, directed toward him by
certain women that were drawing water, and saying this is Demosthenes; yet
this is the same man Diogenes the Cinique pointed out in way of derision, not
with the Index, but the middle Finger. To parallel Laert. l. 6.
this with another example drawn out of Historical antiquity. The first time
that Themistocles Plutarch in the life of Them^stocles.
came to the Olympique games, after the victory obtained over Xerxes navy at
Sea, he was no sooner come into the shew-place, but the people looked no more
at them that fought, but all cast their eyes on him, showing him unto the
strangers that knew him not, with their Fingers, and by clapping of their
Hands, did witness how much they esteemed him; who being a man ambitious by
nature, and covetous of honor, was so much tickled with this public
demonstration of their loves, that he confessed to his familiar friends, he
then did begin to reap the fruit and benefit of his sundry and painful
services he had taken for the preservation of Greece. The natural validity of
this indigitation of persons, and pronominall virtue of this Finger, when
accentively put forth, appeared in the malipert demonstration of Diphilus the
Tragedian, when he acted Cicero ad Attic. l. 2. Epist. 19.
in the Plays dedicated to the praise of Apollo, who when he came to that
verse in his part, Miseria nostra Magnus est, directing his Hand and pointing
to Pompey surnamed the Great, he gave it a remarkable pronunciation; and being
constrained by the people who with their Hands loud applause encouraged him) to
repeat the same diverse times; continuing in that demonstrat^ve gesture, he
drove out him that was guilty of too great and intolerable a power. But
Pylades for such Suetonius Augusto.
a speaking pranke of his Finger, came not off so well; for, Octavius Augustus
Caesar banished him out of the City of Rome and Italy, because he had POINTED
WITH HIS FINGER at a spectatour who hissed him of the Stage, and so made him to
be known. The valiant Boucicaut instead of speech used such a POINT OF
DECLARATION with his Finger, and as it is likely showing some other of his
Fingers afterward to signify that he was a kin to him he pointed at, as the
Fingers of his Hand which are brethren. For in that furious battle that
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor waged against the King of Hungary, Causin Soldier.
where there were many Frenchmen, and the Count of Nevers, the Count of Ewe
and March, and the valiant Marshall Boucicaut, who the next day being brought
before Bajazet sitting under a pavilion spread for him in the field; Bajazet
having heard by his Interpretour that the Count Nevers, Ewe and March, were
near kinsmen to the King of France, caused them to be reserved, commanding
they should sit on the ground at his feet, where they were enforced to behold
the lamentable but cherie of their Nobility. The valiant Marshall Boucicaut in
his turn was produced; he who was wise, and particularly inspired by God in
this extremity, made a sign with his Finger before Bajazet, who understood not
his language, as if he would declare himself the kinsman of the Count of
Nevers, who beheld him with an eye so pitiful, that it was of power to rent
rocky hearts: Bajaz^t being persuaded by this sign that he was of the blood
Royal, caused him to be set apart to remain a prisoner, where he after wards
by his great prudence endeavored the liberty of those noble Gentlemen and his
own. Sometimes this Fingers [ibi] stands for an Aduerbe of place. And it was
the custom of the Romans in the meetings of diverse ways to erect a statue of
Mercury with the Forefinger pointing out the maine road, in imitation
whereof, in this Kingdom we have in such places notes of direction; such is
the Hand of St. Albans. And the demonstrative force of this Finger is such,
that we use to forewarne and rebuke children for pointing at the Palaces of
Princes as a kind of petty treason. The Roman Histories afford us a notable
example of the practice Plutarch in the life of Camillus.
of this moving Adverbe of place in Marcus Manlius Capitolinus; for when he was
accused for moving sedition, and his matter came to pleading, the sight of the
Capitol troubled his accusers much, for the very place it self where Manlius
had repulsed the Gauls by night, and defended the Capitol, was easily seen
from the Marketplace where the matter was a hearing; and he himself POINTING
WITH HIS HAND showed the place unto the gods, and weeping tenderly, he laid
before them the remembrance of the hazard of his life in fighting for their
safety: This did move the Judges hearts to pity, so as they knew not what to
do, neither could they use the severity of the Law upon him, because the place
of his notable good service was ever still before their eyes; wherefore
Camillus finding the cause of delay of Justice, did make the place of judgment
to be removed without the City into a place called the Wood Petelian, from
whence he could not show them the Capitol, and having deprived him of this
advantage, he was condemned. As it is a gesture of command and direction,
imperious masters with a stately kind of arrogancy often use it to their
meniall servants who stand ready expecting but the signal of their commands,
when they call them, not without a taunt, to execute the tacit pleasure of
their lordly will; an expression flowing into their Hand from the hautinesse of
spirit, and an insolent humor of domineering: And the sign of pride is the
greater when men aff^ct to have their minds thus discried, and ^u others to
gueste at their meaning by what their talking Fingers exhibit, as if their high
raised spirits disdained to descend so low as to explain their mind in words,
but thought it more then enough to sign out their intent with their Fingers.

Terrorem incutio. Gest. VII.
THE HOLDING UP OF THE FOREFINGER, is a gesture of threatening and uphraiding.
Hence this Finger is called [minax] or [minitans] by the Latins, quod eo
[minas inserimus] and in [exprobrando] utimur. The force of this Finger in
denouncing threatenings when it is brandished in way of terror, Seneca
acknowledges, where he says that of old in children, Solebat ciere lachrymas
Seneca de Constant,
digitorum motus. Hence also Plutarch borrowed his (...), de eo qui [alteri
terrorem denunciat.] To this may be referred the relation of a worthy and right
elegant Countryman of ours in his Sir. Hen. Blunt in his voyage to the Levant.
voyage into the Levant, who being in the Isle Rhodes, and one morning prying
up and down, a Turk met him, and threatening him for an English man and a spy,
with a kind of malicions posture, laying his Forefinger under his eye, he
seemed to have the look of a design.

Veneratione saluto Gestus VIII.
THE FOREFINGER KISSED in the natural greetings of the Hand, has been ever
took for a complementall salutation, and is used by those who adore, worship,
give honor, hanks, or a fair resuect. Hence called, Digitus [salutaris] vel
[salutatorius] because this Finger as designed by nature to that office of
respect, has been thought most convenient to perform the ceremony of a
salutation. And [Adoro] (says Seldom Tid. of Honor.
learned Seldom) has its derivation from this gesture, quod ad ora sive os
digitum [salutarem.] And the Hebrews use the phrase of this gesture for
veneration. As concerning the signification of thanks implied by this gesture,
Sir Francis Fran. Verulam in his new Atlantis.
Bacon covertly acknowledges where he feignes a most proper and significant
expression of the people of Bensalem, who lift their Right Hand toward heaven,
and draw it softly to their mouth, which is the gesture they use when they
thank God.

Silentium indico. Gest. IX.
THE LAYING OF THE FOREFINGER UPON THE MOUTH, is their habit who would
express their silence, conviction, shame, ignorance, reverence, servile fear,
modesty, a revolving meditation, admiration and amazement. After which manner
also we crave and promise secrecy. To the signification of silence appertains
the proverbiall phrase taken from this gesture, * Digitum ori imponere pro
[silere.] Whence the Poet, -- Digito compesce labellum.
Hence the five spies of Dan unto the Priest of Micha, Hold thy peace, LAY
THINE HAND UPON THY MOUTH. Judges 18 19.
Hence also the coyners of the Hieroglyphiques introduce this gesture to note
taciturnite. Pierius Hierogly. l. 37.
To the signification of conviction or a modest ignorance, belongs that of the
son of Syrach, If thou have understanding Ecclesiasticus 5. 12
answer thy neighbor, if not, LAY THINE HAND ON THY MOUTH. To the
signification of admiration and amazement appertains that of Job, Mark me,
and be astonished, and Job 21. 5.
LAY YOUR HAND UPON YOUR MOUTH. And to this note of admiration that of Apuleius
may be refe^red, A^ille Apul. Metam. l. 1.
digitum a pollice proximum ori suo admovens, and [in stuporem attonitus] Tace,
Tace inquit. This gesture of the Index is likewise important in craving
silence. For after this sort was the effigies of Harpocrates, framed among the
Egyptians, as a Monument of silence. And the Ancients were wont to wear in
their rings the seal of Harpocrates, for this cause (says Pliny) that they
might declare silence and secrecte Pliny in his Not. Hist.
of the business in Hand. Hinc read Harpocratem id est [tace.] Hence Alciat
took his Emblem. Cum tacit haud quicquam differt sapientibus amens, stultitiae
est index linguaque voxque suae.

Ergo Alciat Embl. 11.
premet labias, digitoque [silentia suadet,] and sese Pharium vertit in
Harpocratem.

In this posture the image of Titus Livius of Padua Pieriu: Hierogl. l. 36.
was placed over the door of the Praetorium of that City, for that he had
comprised so much in his writings that he seemed to have denounced silence to
all other Writers. Hence Martianus Capella, Verum quidem redemitus puer ad
Martian. Capel. l. 1.
os compresso digito salutari [silentium commonebat.] And in allusion to t^^s
gesture, Ovid: Quique premet vocem Ovid Metam. l. 9.
digitoque [silentia suadet.]
The Egyptian Priests, Indian Brachmans, the Persian Magi and the French
Druides, and all the old Philosophers and wise men, very politickly caused to
mould and pourtrait their gods with their Fingers upon their lips, to teach men
(their adorers) not to be too curious enquirers after their nature, or rashly
fable forth what ever they imagine of them, lest that being discovered, they
should have been found in the end to have been but men, either worthy in their
time for war or peace, and after their death deified. Heraiscus is reported
to have come out of his mothers womb with this Finger, the index of silence
Suid^.
fixed upon his lips, in the same manner as the Egyptians feign Orus to have
been borne, and before him Sol; whereupon because this Finger clave to his
mouth, it was feign to be removed by incision, and the sear remained always in
his lip, a conspicuous sign of his close and mystical nativity. As concerning
the use of this gesture to intimate we know somewhat, which nevertheless we
will not utter: or this way of promising secrecy when we are required, they
are expressions that many times occur in the actions of common life.

Redarguo Gestus X.
THE BOWING DOWN OF THE FOREFINGER FOR A check of silence, and to redargue,
is an action often found in the Hands of men. This gesture if objected with a
more frequent motitation, obtaines the force of an ironicall expression; and
with the Ancients it was called Ciconia or the Storke, from the form of a
Storks bill pecking, which it seems to imitate. That dark Satyrist the
obscure richness of whose style does much depend upon such adjuncts of
expression, alluding to this gesture: O Jane, a tergo quem nulla Perseus Satyr.
1.
Ciconia pinsit.
And St. Hierom whose works are very curiously garnished with such critical
observations, very elegantly alludes to the same expression, Qui siscirent
Holdam viris tacentibus prophetasse, nunquam post tergum meum Hierom in praef.
ad Sophoniam.
manum incurvarent in Ciconiam. The Greeks in this matter call it the Crow, as
Causabon gathers out of Hesiod, thus interpreted, Causabon upon Pers. Satyr. 1.
Cave inquit domum linquas imperfectam ne caput tibi tundat garrula Cornix.

Compello Gest. XI.
THE LIFTING UP AND BOWING OF THE INDEX TOWARD THE FACE, is a usual gesture
of invitation as naturally significant to that intent, as the inward waving of
the whole Hand; and is a natural Synechdoche of gesture, whereby we use a part
for the whole Hand: he that shall set himself to observe the manners and
discoursing gestures of men shall soon find this observation to be true and
valid.

Veto. Gest. XII.
THE RAISING UP AND BOWING THE FOREFINGER FROM US, is a gesture natural to
those who becken a retreat or forbid, and is a Synechdoche of gesture whereby
we significantly use the Index for the whole Hand Though I annex no example of
this gesture, yet the validity thereof is not much the less; and when all is
done, somewhat must be left to observation; and if it be matter of oversight in
the cursory reading over of some Histories, then my Reader has an opportunity
to oblige me by a more happy invention and application; yet prudent omissions
have their places, and an universal forestalment of a Readers fancy or
memory, is one of the four and twenty properties of a moyling Pedant.

Diffidentiam noto. Gestus XIII.
TO FEEL WITH THE FINGERS ENDS, is their scepticall expression who endeavor to
satisfy themselves by information of the Tact, in the qualities of a thing. A
gesture that proceeds from the instinct of nature, whereby we know our Hand to
be the judge and discerner of the touch, for although this touching virtue or
tactive quality be diffused through the whole body within and without, as being
the foundation of the animal being, which may be called Animalitas, yet the
first and second qualities which strike the sense, we do more curiously Dr.
Crook in his Anatomy.
and exquisitely feel in the Hand, then in the other parts, and more exactly
where the Epidermis or immediate organ of the outer touch is thinnest, but most
subtily in the grape of the Index, which being the only part of the body that
has temperamentum ad pondus, is by good right chief Touch-warden to the King
of the five senses. The satisfaction the Hand gives the mind by this gesture,
made Alciat (taking his hint from Plautus, who seems to me to have called
Alciat Embl. 16. ex Plauto sumpt.
this expression manum occulatam) to represent in Emblem the certainty of
things by an eye in a Hand. Hence manus oculata the Adage; and verily we may
well believe this occular test or Erasm. Adage.
feeling eye of the Hand. Thomas Dydimus as diffident as he was, received a
palpable satisfaction John 20. 27.
by this way of silent information.

Mollicie^ prodo. Gestus XIV.
TO SCRATCH THE HEAD WITH ONE FING^R, is a kind of nice and effeminate
gesture, bewraying a close inclination to vice; observed in many by cunning
Motists who have found the way to pry into the manners of men. A gesture so
remarkable that it grew into an Adage, Plutarch in the life of Pompey.
Digito uno caput scalpere, by a metonymie of the adjunct signifying impudence
and effeminacy, taken by Critiques out of Juvenal, who has given a satyricall
lash at this gesture. Pompey was publicly upbraided to his face with this note
of effeminacy by Clodius the Tribune, asking aloud these questions; who is the
licenciousest Captain in all the City? what man is he that seeks for a man?
what is he that SCRATCHETH HIS HEAD WITH ONE FINGER? some that he had brought
into the marketplace for that purpose, like a company of dancers or singers,
when he spoke and clapped his Hands on his gown, answered him strait aloud to
every question, that it was Pompey. As concerning the phrase of seeking for a
man, that Prince of the Senate of Critiques, says that he has read in an old
manuscript of an Interpreter of Lucan never published, this distich: Magnus
quem metuunt homines, Joseph Scal.
digito caput uno scalpit, quid credas hunc sibi velle? virum.

Molles enim solent virum quaerere. Cicero also observed in Caesar Plutarch in
the life of Caesar.
the same genuine fashion of his Hand, as appears by the opinion he once had
of Caesar: when (says he) I consider how fairly he combeth his fine bush of
hair, and how smooth it lies, and that I see him SCRATCH HIS HEAD WITH ONE
FINGER ONLY, my mind gives me that such a kind of man, should not have so
wicked a thought in his Head, as to overthrow the state of the Commonwealth.
By the way, I cannot but note, that two of the greatest Commanders Rome could
ever boast of, concurrents intime, and competitors for the Empire of the World,
should be both branded with one and the selfsame note of effeminacie.

Convicium facio. Gest. XV.
THE PUTTING FORTH OF THE MIDDLE-FINGER, THE REST DRAWN INTO A FIST on each
side, which is then called (...) by the Greeks, Pateus in electis.
vulgarly Higa, in the ancient Tongue, pugner a (...), is a natural expression
of scorn and contempt. This gesture is called Catapygon by the Athenians, id
est, Cinaedus and Caelius.
scortum, quia pronus ad obscoenitatem and quod [infamiam concuteret] and
[convicium faceret] which is well noted by that elegant Epigrammatist: Rideto
multum qui te Sextile Cinaedum
Dixerit, and Martial Epigram.
digitum porrigito medium.
Id est, si te Sextile Cynaedum vocaveret, tu eandem contumeliam ei objice, and
repende, As Ramirez upon the place.
sublato medio digito, quae nota Cynaedi est, non solumenim ad [irrisionem] sed
etiam ad [infamiam and molliciem alicujus denotandum valet. [To which that of
Plautus may be referred: In hunc Plaut. in Pseudol.
intend digitum hic leno est.
Hence also Martial calls this Finger, Digitum [impudicum.] Martial Epigram.
Ostendit digitum sed [impudicum.]
Derides quoque fur and [impudicum.]
Martial Epigram.
Ostendis digitum mihi minanti?
Perseus calls it [infamum.] Infami digito -- Perseus Satyr. 2.

With Acron and Porphyrius it is [famosus.] Euphormio calls it [improbum.] Et
hic quidem Euphor. Satyr. 1.
intendebat improbum reclusae digitum dextrae; describing the posture of
exprobration in some images. In another place the Epethite is flagitiosus,
Callion [flagitioso] digito superiorem explicans barbam. Idem lib. eodem.
With Plantus it is [manus pullaria] a palpandis tentandisque pullis, etc. (as
Turnebus thinks.) [Petulans] and [lascivus] by others. Hence with the
Athenians, (...), id est scimalissare est praetentare digito ubi quemquam
[flocci facere] ostendunt; nam et si proprie Graecis sit cum digito pertentamus
ecquid gallinam ova conceperit, tamen verbo eodem utantur cum protensum
[contumeliose] Caelius.
ostendunt medium digitum, concerning which expression Juvenal: -- Cum fortuna
ipse minaci
Mandaret laqueum Juvenal Satyr.
mediumque ostenderet unguem, nam * medio digito aliquid monstrare per
[ignominiam] siebat, ob ejus [infamiam] as Lubinus upon the place. This
pointing out with the Finger in way of mockery, Tertullian calls digito
destinare. Tertul. de Pallio c. 4.
That the scoffing motion of this Finger moves an apprehension of what we
intend, may plainly be gathered out of the Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah,
where he says, If thou take away Isaiah 58. 9.
from the midst of thee the yoke, the PUTTING FORTH OF THE FINGER, and evil
speaking, which by the most of Expositors is conceived to be meant of this very
gesture, See Flaccius in clavi script. Solomon Prove. 6. 13
although Divines have variously descanted upon the place. In this sense also
that of the Wise man may be understood, The wicked man speaks with his
Finger, that is, his Finger by gestures and signs speaks scoffs. As Doctor
Jermin in his paraphrasticall comment upon the place. Lampridius speaking of
the notorious effeminacie, and luxurious impudency of that sottish Emperor
Heliogabalus among other expressions of his corrupted mind reports him to have
used this, Nec enim unquam verbis pepercit infamibus, cum and Lampridius in
Heliogabalo.
digitis [impudicitiam] ostentaret, nec ullus in conventu, and audiente populo
esset pudor. Thus Caligula was wont to flout and frump Cassius Chaerea Sueton
in Caligula.
Tribune of the Praetorian cohort in most opprobrious terms as a wanton and
effeminate person. And one while when he came unto him for a watchword to give
him Priapus or Venus; another while if upon any occasion he rendered thanks,
to reach out unto him his Hand, not only fashioned, but wagging also after an
obscene and filthy manner. Q. Cassius a right valiant man, and one that
distasted the corrupted manners of those times, took this reproach of
effeminacie so ill at Calligula's Hand, that he bore him a particular grudge
for this very cause, and was the man that conspiring with Cornelius Sabinus his
fellow Tribune, deprived him of life and Empire. Thus Diogenes when certain
strangers in a great assembly were very inquisitive to know which was
Demosthenes, Diogenes in derision PUTTING Laert. in Diogen.
FORTH THIS FINGER instead of the Index, pointed him out and showed him unto
them, covertly thereby noting the impudent nature and effeminacie of the man.
And it may be the envy and despite of Joseph's brethren toward him Genesis 37. 19.
showed it self in the contumelious gesture of this Finger, which pointed out
unto him their contempt of him when he was afar off, and waking toward them,
when they said one unto another, Behold this dreamer comes!

Contemno. Gestus XVI.
TO COMPRESSE THE MIDDLE-FINGER WITH THE THUMB BY THEIR COMPLOSION PRODUCING A
SOUND AND SO CASTING OUT OUR HAND, is a gesture we use to signify our contempt
of unprofitable things, and to show by gesture how we slight, contemn,
insult, and undervalue any thing. This KNACKING with the Fingers was called by
the ancient Romans * Crepitus, or Percussio digitorum. Hence that illustrious
Poet expounding the sense of this expression makes mention of the Thumb, which
he therefore calls argutum, id est, resonantem, whose verses very clear for
this business run thus: Cum poteret seram media jam nocte matellam
Martial Epigram.
Arguto madidus pollice Pa^aretus.
Arguto pollice, that is, as he has i^ in another place Martial Epigram.
crepitu digitorum. And Propertius to the same purpose, -- At illi
Pr^pert us (...). 7.
Pollicibus fragiles increpuere manus.
The posture of the same expression prepared to create a sound; The statue of
stone at Tharsis which Plutarch speaks of to have been made for Plutarch in
moral.
Sardanapalus after his death, and set over his grave, did significantly
retain, which statue was formed dancing after the Barbarian fashion, and
^NACKING as it were with his Fingers over his head like an Anticke: the
inscription was, Sardanapalus Arrian l. (...) de exped. Alex.
the son of Anacynderaxa built Anchialus and Tarsus in one day, but thou my
friend, Eat, drink the wanton Leacher play,
For nothing else is ought I say:
signifying the undervaluing sound produced by such a KNACKING of the Fingers,
ede, bibe etc. nam caetera omnia sunt illius sonitus quem efficere manus solet,
as Athaeneus has it.

Ironiam infligo. Gestus XVII.
TO BEND THE MIDDLE-FINGER WHILE ITSTIFLY RESTS UPON THE THUMB, AND SO IN IE
STING-WISE TO LET IT OFF, is a trivial expression whereby we with a FILLIP
inflict a trifling punishment, or a scoff. This FILLIP with the Finger or
nail, some think is so called a sono fictitio, qui cum Talitrum alicui
impingitur, datur; and Talitrum a talione, est enim ludi genus inter pueros quo
par pari refertur, Jun.
vel recurvi digiti impressio, unde forte melior denominatio Latinae vocis a
talo, convolutio digitorum quem emulatur, (...) Graecis. That this gesture was
called Talitrum by the ancient Latins appears by Suetonius, who speaking of
Tiberius, and the native vigor of his left Hand, Articulis Suero^ Tib. c. 6. 8.
ita firmis fuit, ut caput pueri vel etiam adolescentis Talitro vulneraret.
Sometimes they were said Caelius.
scimalissare who in mockery used this gesture. A kind of punishment we
usually inflict upon unhappy wags. Hence that of Petronius, Ego durante Petron
Arb. Satyr
adhuc iracundia, non continui manum, sed caput miserantis stricto acutoque
articulo percussi. Percussit (...) pueri Gitonis caput. This slighting
expression of the Fingers gives such a slur of disgrace if used to men, that it
has been thought such a disparagement as wounded a tender reputation. Sir
Francis Bacon in his charge in the Sir Francis Bacon in his charge against
duells.
Star Chamber touching Duells, being then His Majesty's Attorney General,
informs against the hot spirited Gallants of those times, who pretended a
defect in our Law that it has provided no remedy for FILLIPS. A strange thing
that every touch or light blow of the person, (though they are not in
themselves considerable save that they have got upon them the stamp of a
disgrace,) should make these light things pass for such great matters. The Law
of England, and all Laws hold these degrees of injury to the person, slander,
battery, maime, and death; but for the apprehension of disgrace, that a FILLIP
to the person should be a mortal wound to the reputation, he says it were
good that men would hearken to the saying of Gonsalvo the great and famous
Commander, that was wont to say, a Gentleman's honor should be de t^la crassiore
of a good strong warpe or web that every little thing should not catch in it,
when as now it seems they are but of copweb-lawne, or such light stuff, which
certainly is weakness and not true greatness of mind, but like a sick man's
body, that is so tender that it feels every thing.

Contemptuose provoco. Gestus. XVIII.
TO BECKEN WITH THE EARE-FINGER, is their usual concise expression, who are
advanced by confidence to rely upon the strength of their ability, and would
by a provoking signal dare, challenge, defy, and bid one prepare for an
encounter, implying a strong presumption of the victory, as if they esteemed
him as nothing in their Hand. To this expression Horace alludes, Crispinus
Horac^ l. 1. Sermon. (...)
minimo me [provocat] accipe si vis
Accipe jam tabulas --


Avaritiam prodo. Gestus XIX.
TO GRIPE THE LEFT HAND THE THUMB CLUTCHED IN WITH ALL, is the hold-fast
gesture of tenacious avarice, and significant to discover the miserable and
penurious condition of a close-fisted niggard, a parcel of the character of an
old pinch-penny. This catching and restrained gesture, is an expression often
seen in the Hands of penny-fathers, and men of a terene complexion, and is
parallel to the Thumb under the girdle. The Egyptian Mythologists who Pieriu^
Hierogl. l. 35.
were very quaint in their occult devices, used to paint out Avarice by this
posture of the left hand: And they who allegorically interpret Artemidorus de
Somn. interp.
dreams make this hand the symboll of lucre, profit, gain and increase, as
the hand more fitting to retain: for though it want the diligence and
insinuating labor peculiar to the Right Hand, and has not the faculty to
scrape and get by such dexterious endeavors, notwithstanding being more dull
and sluggish, the retentive appetite thereof is thereby increased, and it is
the Misers maxim, and as it were the signet on his wretched hand: Non minor
est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.
This hand by the grave testimony of Solinus, Solinus cap. 5. Camerarius in
Hor. Suc. Judges 5.
which Camerarius also affirms, to do any thing is less agile; but to bear
burdens, and to comprehend any thing strongly is more fit; for Jael took the
hammer in her Right Hand, but the nail in her left, which she smote through
the temples of Sisera: and the three hundred Soldiers of Gedeon held their
lamps in their left hands, and Judges 7.
the trumpets in their Right Hand, which Marius has drawn into an allegory
of other significations. Marius in Bibl.


Offensiunculam resentio. Gest. XX.
TO GIVE ONE A RAP WITH THE FINGERS HALF BENT, OR KNUCKLES, is their expression
who would vent their slight anger or dislike upon others; or would softly and
modestly knock at some door. This posture of the Hand was called by the
Ancients Condylus, Scilicet digiti articulus, aut nodus in curvitura quae
digitis flectitur. The stroke inflicted with the Hand thus composed, has from
antiquity retained the name of Condyl; this the Greeks call Caelius Rhod. var.
lect.
(...). We read of a boy who attended at the banquet of Aeneas slain by
Hercules with a stroke of his Condyl, called Archias as Hellenicus writes,
other Eunomius, the son of Architeles, but in Phoronidos 2. he is named
Cherias, who dyed of that blow in Calydon, although Hercules intended not his
death, but chastisement. The Greeks also write that Thersites was slain by the
Condyles of Achilles, because he had stricken out the eye of Penthisilea slain
by him with his spear. This gesture is sometimes used by those who would
signify their desire of being let in at a door, and in this sense it was
modestly used by Bagoas the Eunuch at the tent door of Holofernes his master,
whom he supposed to have slept with Judith. Dorleans upon Tacitus says, Judith
14.
he did plausum facere manibus to awaken his master, but it is most likely he
used the sound of this gesture as a mannerly watchword to intimate his
attendance without, and a desire to come in and speak with him; an expression
that has been ever used by such who came to salute or speak See Dorleans upon
Tacit.
with great persons in a morning, to intimate their modest and obsequious
attendance, which they seemed by that low knock to desire their patrons to take
notice of.

Iram impotentem prodo. Gestus XXI.
TO PUT THE FINGERS INTO A GRIPE OR CLAW-LIKE ASPECT, and to SCRATCH or CLAW
another therewith, is the impotent expression of a cursed heart that eagerly
desires to set a mark of its displeasure upon those that have provoked it to a
splenitique use of its pounces. But this is no manly expression of the Hand, as
more properly appertaining to children and vixens, who are prone upon any
provocation to wreak their despite upon others with the talons of their
indignation. Fury that has furnished all men with weapons, left the tongue and
the nail to the impotent part of humanity, two venomous weapons, and apt to
wranckle where they fasten. And if we see this naile-rubricke in the face of
any, we are apt to infer that it is the mark of some such impotent creature.

Stultitiae notam infigo. Gestus XXII.
TO PRESENT THE INDEX AND EARE-FINGER WAGGING, WITH THE THUMB APLIED UNTO THE
TEMPLES, is their expression who would scornfully reprove any for failing in
any exercise of wit, or for some absurd stumble of a tripping and inconsiderate
lip, or for some error in manners and behavior: For, this most ridiculous
affront implies such men to be Asses. The reason is, for that man only by
natures provident donation has received cares fixed and immovable, whereas
that which appears most moveable and stirring in that dull animal is his
ears; and the WAGGING OF THE FINGERS goes for the WAGGING OF THE EARS, which
cannot be done otherwise by reason of this natural prohibition. Perseus
alludes to this ironicall signification of the Fingers, Nec manus auriculas
imitata est mobilis albas.
Hence Manum addere the Adage, a metaphor taken Perseus Satyr. 4. Erasm. Adag.
from this gesture. The same gesture if you take away the motion, is used in
our nimblefingered times to call one Cuckold, and to present the badge of
Cuckoldry, that mental and imaginary horn; seeming to cry, O man of happy
note, whom fortune meaning highly to promote, has stuck on thy forehead the
earnest-penny of succeeding good luck; all which upbraiding terms many
understand by this gesture only of the Fingers; for in this sense the common
use has made it the known signal of disparagement, so naturally apt are the
Fingers to speak scoffs: For, lacivious disdain masked by scorn under the
disguise of a facetious wit, out of an itching disposition has been ever very
prone to devise and happen upon ways to vent her conceited bitterness, it
being the guise, of overweening wit to despise and undervalue others: Hence
comes your scornful frumpe and dry scoff, keen jeers that wit has turned up
trump, wherein the dealer rubbeth with a gibe, making another his laughing
stock; which cunning game is received into Rhetoric, and called an Ironie, a
Trope, which gives a man leave closely to carpe at the manners of men, wherein
what which is expressed by words, the contrary is shown by the gesture: nay we
may make a wity board without the help and concurrence of an unhappy word, and
your broad verbal jest is nothing near so piquant as these foul habits of
reproach by gesture, which broch men as it were with a spit, and having once
entered into the quick like shafts with barbed heads a long time gaul with a
sticking mischief: and to this feat of mockery the Fingers have been proclive
to fashion out contempt, provoked forward by a natural dicacity.

Improbitatem objicio. Gestus XXIII.
TO LOCK THE THUMB BETWEEN THE NEXT TWO FINGERS, is an ironicall vulgarisme
of the Hand used by Plebeians when they are contumeliously provoked thereunto,
and see that they cannot prevail by vieing words, their spleen appealing to
their Fingers for aid, who thus armed for a dumb retort, by this taunting
gesture seem to say avaunt. This position of the Fingers with the Ancients was
called Higa, and the modern Spaniards by objecting the Hand formed to this
reproachful expression, imply as Ramirez upon Mart
much as if they should say paedicavi te, with us it is usually their garb who
mock little children.

Parce do. Gest. XXIV.
TO GIVE WITH TWO FINGERS, is a parcimonious expression of the Hand often seen
in clutch-fists niggards, and pinch-pennies, from whose gesture the Adage came,
Dare contracta manu, id est [parce and frigide aliquid dare.] Hence the
Spaniards in the propriety of their Tongue, express covetousness by a short
Hand, and bounty by a long and large Hand. These phrases do often occur in
Guzman, which I take for a subtle contexture of the proverbiall riches and
gravity of the Spanish Tongue. Solomon dislikes this gesture, where he says,
Let not thy Hand be open to take, and closed when thou should give. And
Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes, who was Plutarch Apotheg.
surnamed Long Hand, because he had one Hand longer then another, was wont to
say, that as a Prince (who was Gods image upon earth) he had a Hand to give, to
wit, a right Hand very long; the other to withold and take away, to wit, a
left Hand, contracted and very short; adding that it was a more Princely and
Royal property, to give, then to take away.

Numero Gestus XXV.
TO BEGIN WITH THE FIRST FINGER OF THE LEFT HAND, AND TO TELL ON TO THE LAST
FINGER OF THE RIGHT, is the natural and simple way of numbering and
computation: for, all men use to count forwards till they come to that number
of their Fingers, and being come to that number, prompted as it were by nature
to return at this bound or But of numericall immensity, (about which all
numbers are reflected and driven round,) they repeat again the same numbers
returning unto unity from whence their account began, which we must not account
as an accident, but a thing propagated from the fountain of nature, since it
is ever done and that by all Nations. For the Fingers by an ordinance of
nature, and the unrepealable statute of the great Arithmetician, were appointed
to serve for casting counters, as quick and native digits, always ready at
Hand to assist us in our computations. Hence some have called man a natural
Arithmetician, and the only creature that could reckon and understand the
mistique laws of numbers, because he alone has reason, which is the spring of
arithmeticall account; nay that divine Philosopher does draw the line of man's
understanding from this computing Plato.
faculty of his soul, affirming that therefore he excells all creatures in
wisdom, because he can account: and indeed not the least of the more subtle
part of reason does depend upon this Arithmeticall infused quality. Hence we
account such for idiots and halfe-sould men who cannot tell to the native
number of their Fingers. And if we count the dole of nature, and those numbers
that were borne with us and cast up in our Hand from our mothers womb, by Him
who made all things in number, weight and measure, we shall find that there
are five Fingers ranged upon either Hand, which quinary construction of the
Fingers, as being of a mystical perfection is much canvased by the Pythagoran
Philosophers, Plutarch Moral.
and called marriage, because it is a compound of the first numerall male and
female; it is also fitly termed nature, because being multiplied it determins
and rebounds upon it self, for five times five makes twenty five, and
multiplied, by an old number it still represents it self, for if you take
five unto five by doubling the Cinque you make the Decade; and there is in it a
natural virtue or faculty to divide, as appears in the Fingers of each Hand,
so that nature seems to have took more delight to order and compose things
according to the number of five, then to fall upon any other form that might
have proved sphericall. Hence Plutarch observes that the Ancients were wont to
use the verb pempasesthai Plutarch in moral.
when they would signify to number or to reckon. And the Memphian Priests in
their Hieroglyphiques, by a Hand, the Fingers set upright, used to figure out
Arithmeticke. Great is the perfection of the total sum of our Fingers, for
Ten is the fount and head of all numbers, for this is compounded of 1. 2. 3.
and 4. which united, sum up Ten; the most complete of numbers, as possessed of
the forms of all the others, for both the eaven and odd, the square, cubique,
plain, the linear, the monade, and compound, with all the rest, are comprised
in the Decade; which therefore Pythagoras the Samian, who was thought to be the
first Author of the name Philosophy, as Plutarch affirms, concludes the
Denarie to be the most absolute perfection of numbers, because as the Poet
says we have, -- Tot digitos per quos [numerare] solemus. Ovid. l. 1. Fastorum.

Hadrianus Junius by an elegant and neat description, seems to allude to the
intention of nature in devising the Hand so fit for all accounts, that it may
serve for a counting table;

Porrigor in ramos quinos, and quilibet horum
Diditur in triplices nodos, nisi quintus egeret Hadrian Jun. in Aenigmat

Uno, qui solus respondet robore cunctis
Undique colligulis surgo, in vallumque resid^
Ast Abaci desit si forte, ego munia praste.
Abacus being a counting-table, such as Arithmeticians use.

An Index to the following Alphabet of natural Gestures of the FINGERS. Which
Gestures, besides their typical significations, are so ordered to serve for
privy ciphers for any secret intimation.
A Figures out the I Gesture. B Figures out the II Gest. C Figures out the III
Gest. D Figures out the IV Gest. E Figures out the V Gest. F Figures out the VI
Gest. G Figures out the VII Gest. H Figures out the IX Gest. I Figures out the
X Gest. K Figures out the XI Gest. L Figures out the XII Gest. M Figures out
the XIII Gest. N Figures out the XIIII Gest. O Figures out the XV Gest. P
Figures out the XVI Gest. Q Figures out the XVII Gest. R Figures out the XVIII
Gest. S Figures out the XIX Gest. T Figures out the XX Gest. V Figures out the
XXI Gest. W Figures out the XXII Gest. X Figures out the XXIII Gest. Y Figures
out the XXIV Gest. Z Figures out the XXV Gest.
A. Inventione laboro.


B. Fleo.


C. Approbo.


D. Extollo.


E. Collateraliter monstro.


F. Indico.


G. Terrorem icutio


H. Silentiu^ indico.


I. Redarguo.


K. Compello.


L. Veto.


M. Diffidentia^ noto.


N. Mollitiem prodo.


O. Conviciu^ facio.


P. Contemno.


Q. Ironiam infligo.


R. Contemptuose provoco.


S. Avariciam prodo.


T. Offensiunculam resentio.


V. Iram impotente^ prodo.


W. Stultitiae notam insigo.


X. Improbitatem objicio.


Y. Parce Do.


Z. Numero.
1 2 3 4 5





Courteous Reader, in some copies thou shall find these mistakes, hereafter
mentioned, which I pray thee charitably to amend, or not to censure.
PAge 3. line 18. for an read in, p. 22. l. 6. r. all good things, p. 43. l.
20. the paragraph indicative belongs to the last paragraph of that gesture in
p. 44. p. 62. l. 26 r. Rabbin, p. 76. l. 17. r. (...), p. 73. l. r. manners, p.
76. 34. leave out of, p. 83. l. 7. r. the, p. 90. in the margin r. Pulcheriae
with a Capital, p. 94. l. 6. r. utrasque, ibid. l. 30. r. affection, ibid. l.
32. r. impressam, p. 96. l. 30. r. STRETCHED, p. 112. l. 33. r. dextramque, p.
17. l. 34 r. Chirothlipsia, p. 141. l. 15. r. instituted, p. 143. l. 10. r.
coevality, p. 149. l. 1. r. sanat, p. 161. l. 16. r. 1000. p. 167. l. 19. r.
thanks, ibid. p. l. 14. malicious, p. 17 and 64. a marginall quotation
superfluous.

CHIRONOMIA


CHIRONOMIA: Or, The Art of Manual Rhetorique. WITH THE Canons, Laws, Rites,
Ordinances, and Institutes of RHETORICIANS, both Ancient and Modern, Touching
the artificial managing of the HAND in Speaking. Whereby the Natural GESTURES
of the HAND, are made the Regulated Accessories or faire-spoken Adjuncts of
RHETORICAL Utterance. With TYPES, or CHIROGRAMS: A new illustration of this
Argument. By J. B. Philochirosophus.

Ratio est Manus Intellectus; Rationis Oration; Orationis Manus. Scal. LONDON:
Printed by Tho: Harper, and are to be sold by Richard Whitaker, at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, 1644.

TO HIS HONORED FRIEND WILLIAM DICONSON ESQUIRE.
SIR,
AFter I had once well relished the sweetness of your conversation; having
calculated your temper and disposition according to the meridian of Friendship,
I soon proposed you to my self as an Idea and pattern of all Humanity. This
apprehension I have of your virtues, is so deeply settled in my understanding,
that I find it difficult to restrain affection from dilating upon this
Argument, even to a Panegyrique: Yet I confess I do not more truly honor and
revere you under any one notion, as I do in that relation you stand in to my
worthy Friend your Son, a relation which you have made more reverend and
amiable, by the felicity of your comportment. There, Nature and Education are
in their Zeniths. This is the Achma of worldly Beatitudes, when by a
reciprocal invention, without the confusion of distance and proximity,
reverence and affection; there results by converse, Idem Alter, and Alter Idem:
were not this a truth that has often been visible to discerning eyes, I might
be thought a little to play the Poet, and this assertion taken for an Allegory.
Sir, the congruity of this Art, with your Nature, in gaining upon the
affections of men, has made me pitch upon you as a competent Judge and Patron:
To you therefore I consecrate this Fruit of my Hand, as to one well read in the
prudentiall Laws of Civil Conversation, and by consequence knowing, to manage
the Hand, of your Intellect and Reason (your reason and speech) to the best
advantage and utterance of discretion and honesty. Be pleased in return of
those expresses of your affection and respect I have received from you, to
accept of this demonstration of respect from him, who is

Your faithful friend to command, IO. BULVVER.

To his affectionate Friend the Author, On HIS CHIRONOMIA.
THe Hand of Nature placed the Eye and Ear
As Parallels within Minerva's sphere:
Thou Have set the Understandings Optique line
Above the common sense of Discipline,
By Thy life-speaking Types, engraven by
A keen beam borrowed from Thy Muses eye.
The sprucer Arts of Speech will grow more neat
And rich in utterance, by Thy conceit.
Demosthenes might here his garb refine,
And Cicero out-act his Cateline:
Nay, in Thy Glasses typical Express,
Commanding Rhoterique may mend her dress.
Thou Have drawn all books de Oratore, dry:
And Polychronicons but few will buy,
While they may have Thy Hand to draw and mend
All Action by, their Minds can well intend.
Alcides Chain is Thine by just surprise,
Placed in Thy Hand, fixed to the peoples eyes;
Who may with greater sway by this Hands tongue
The Wise command, then he his long-ear'd throng.
Singularis amicitiae ergo, THO. DICONSON, Med. Templ.

To his loving friend the Author, On HIS CHIRONOMIA.
What dream last night I had! how sweet! how high!
And when I waked, how I desired to die!
If death such sleep had been: Minerva's Phane
Me thought wide open flew to entertain
Thy fair Chironomie, which there installed
Was by Wits Hand the new Pall^dium called.
The Graces Hand in Hand appeared, in sign
Of honor, acting with the Triple Trine,
The new persuasive gestures of thy Art:
But when I saw Thy active Muses part
So well performed, I lost my ravished sense,
Overcome by her Hands silent Eloquence.
May this good Omen strike Thee luck, and force
The Worlds dull eye to like Thy Hands discourse,
Until the Honors on Thy Front that stick,
We count with the Right Hands Arithmetique.
J. D.

Ad summum GESTUUM Artificem, and Chiromysten, in CHIRONOMIAM.
CVm Venerem spectas blandam mirare figuram
Omnia concinno membra decore nitent.
Omnia sint formosa, tamen superantur ab Vno;
Non habuit talem vel Cytherea Manum:
Ad eundem.
HOc si sit verum, senior quod prodidit olim
[Pulcher quod (...), ex sententia Julii Scaligeri.]
Scaliger, haud poterit pulchrior esse liber.
Ad eundem.
ALtera jam teritur Bellis Civilibus aestas,
Luxuriatque novo sanguine tristis humus:
Tu tamen in tuto es, nec territat hosticus ensis;
Defendit Manuum Te numerosa MANUS.
Ad eundem.
GYthing's commended, so is Martin too,
For Hands of any sort: but their Pens do
Fall short of thy Quills worth; they are at a stand,
Admiring You that write a better Hand.
JO. HARMARUS, Oxoniensis (...).

Amico suo ingeniosissimo, in CHIRONOMIAM.
CHIRONOMON, gestus Naturae legibus effers,
Commensuratos, Rhetoricosque facis.
Articulis, Digitis, Abacumrationis adornas,
Calcula et in Digitos mittere viva doces.
Sculpturae secreta typis manifesta renident,
Adventu lucis splendidiora novae.
Tunc fugienda notas, sed naevos primus Agentis,
Chirosolaecismos praevaricantis, habes.
Rhetoris invadis gravido comprensa maniplo,
Omnia puncta, gravi suavis ubique MANU:
Dulce decus Charitum! Manuali semper ab ore
Verbula commenso gesta decore sonant.
R. G. Nomenclator Chiro-musae.

Of the necessity and dignity of this Art of MANUAL RHETORIC.
PRAELUDIUM.
HOw prevalent Gestures accommodated to persuade, have ever been in the Hand;
both the Ancient Worthies, as also Use and daily Experience make good, it being
a thing of greater moment then the vulgar think, or are able to judge of:
which is not only confined to Schools, Theaters, and the Mansions of the
Muses; but do appertain to Churches, Courts of Common pleas, and the
Councell-Table; where we daily see many admirable things done by those, who in
the course of Humanity and profitable studies, have been well instructed and
informed in this faculty of the Hand. And the wisdom of the Ancients is in
good part placed in this care and diligence, That they who were nourished to
the hopes of great dignities, should have composed and comely motions, which
might signify an ingenious Mind, and adorn their very Eloquence. Some may
perchance imagine, that this Manual Rhetorique is a vain and unnecessary Art,
because they see little writ by the Greeks, who were the Doctors of Eloquence;
and but few things thereof by the Latins: when yet these men of excellent wits
of both Nations, have with great artifice beautified all the sublime kinds of
Eloquence, to heighten the Grandieure of a majestique Utterance. Cresollius
alleges many causes why this one part of most noble Science seems (though
not as neglected, yet) passed by and omitted by those great lights of
Antiquity. For, the Greeks borne in a region, which by reason of the
thinness and purity of the air, was more fertile of good wits then any other
productions; had naturally both motions of the Mind and Body to explain and
unfold their cogitations and recondite senses with an incredible facility: by
reason whereof they l^sse needed the precepts of this Art. For since they had
two Palaestra's, wherein a double Chironomia was practiced, one of Arms,
another of Peace, and proper to the pacifique temper of Humanity: a
domestical Theater, Doctors and Rhetorique Professors, and public
Declamations; having in common among them, such illustrious aides of
Pronunciation; no marvel that so few Rhetoricians have left any Manuscripts of
the Conformation of gesture; this artifice of the Hand being a thing so common,
and as it were natural unto them. Which volubility of a prompt and easy
nature, wonderfully accommodating it self to all things, made the Satyrist
say, that the whole Nation Juvenal. Satyr. 3.
of the Greeks were Comoedians: for in the Scene and Theater, and in
graphicall assimilating and imitating the affections, there were few of any
Nation could match them, and none that could out-act them. And as they were
very studious in all kinds of literature; when they applied their minds to
eloquence, it cannot be said how they excelled in gesture, by the force and
guide of Nature; which perchance was the cause why the Stagerite said, (...) to
be (...), That Rhetorique was Arist. l. 3. Rhet.
natural, and that any one, without the instructions of a Teacher, seems to be
of himself and by a Natural ingenie, fit to raise motions in himself and
others. But the Romans comeing out to speak, not from under the Canopie of
Minerva, but the Pavilion of Mars, being not of so ready and polished a wit,
thought it convenient and necessary to have books of Institutions for the
Conformation of these Rhetorical expressions: of which, Plotius and Nigidius,
two great Doctors in these Elegancies, (to omit others) published their
beauteous Commentaries. They that follow Aristotle in his mistaken opinion of
Action, esteeming these Chironomicall Notions as things of no great matter, are
much deceived: for that great Doctor of the Aristot. School near Athens.
Lyceum (as Cresollius well observes) spoke rather of himself, then of all men
in general: who being of a most excellent wit, and by Nature furnished with
all ornaments, he contemned Rhetoricians, as seeing himself to have little need
of those petty Rules which were carried about for the conformation of Manual
gestures. For else, he had Demosthenes in his eyes, a man wholly composed of
this Artifice, and turned after a manner, upon the wheel of Rhetorique: who at
first, by reason of his natural imperfection herein, was much discouraged: by
which it appears, that an Orator is not borne, but made: and to speak well
and laudably, there is need of study and striving, before the faculty can be
attained. For as for this opinion of ignorant men, who think that Gestures are
perfect enough by Nature, and that the climate availes nothing, it being not
material whether the Hand be moved hither or thither: that every one may
please himself, observing no rule or admonition of Rhetoricians: The daily
Example of speakers refute. For we see many both in sacred and profane places,
so preposterously and ilfavoredly expressing their minds, that it is a wonder
how any eye can behold them with attention. Certainly, men polished with
Humanity, cannot without loathing, behold the praevarications of such durty
and slovenly Orators, and with a just indignation distaste their inconsiderate
action. If the Natural motions were absolutely complete, and sufficiently fit
to open and unfold the sense of the Mind; or were accommodated to gain good
will, or opportune for the incredible force and variety of the affections;
would these goodly Orators and lovers of fair speech so bewray themselves, and
wallow in the dirt? But this is enough, to prove that the actions of the Hand
are not perfect by Nature. Therefore let those upstart and tumultuarie Orators
brag as much as they will, of the force of Nature, and facility of Gestures.
Reason, and the sayings of the learned Ancients do not only gainsay them, but
prove these Cosmetique gestures of the Hand to be things of great moment, and
the very Palm and Crown of Eloquence. Had the ancient pieces of this Art
(which ingenious Orators writ of old, more for the benefit of aftertimes then
their own) come to our Hands, men might have been more ready in speaking then
they are, and not so prone in these points, to offend the discreeter part of
their Auditory; but since those helps are lost, I cannot see how an Orator
can be perfect and absolutely complete, that has not consulted with the Oracle
of Quintilian, about this Manual pronunciation; whose institutions contain all
those ancient subtleties that escaped the injurious Hand of Time. Things which
of old, they were wont to learn with their Grammar, as Sidonius Apollinaris
witnesses, which perchance, was the reason why Polihymnia, whom that learned
Senator affirms to have Cassiodor.
taught the Elegancie of Gesture, the same by the Greeks is said to have taught
Grammar and Letters. And indeed Decency of expression does so depend upon this
Art, that (as Grammarians observe) Decency is properly spoken of Gesture, and
motions of the Hand and Body, and it so exalts Beauty from the concrete into
the abstract, that Nature and the tacit voice, and assent of all men, allow of
it as a thing very material in commerce, and is so looked for at the Hand of
an Orator, that the defects of extemporarie and jejune Orations, have been
covered by the Elegancies of this Artifice; and those that have come off
unhandsomly with their expressions, for want of these comely and palliating
graces of Elocution, were ever laughed at, and justly derided.

CHIRONOMIA: OR, THE ART OF Manual Rhetoric.
THE Clazomenian Sage (as Plutarch reports of him) upon a curious speculation
of the properties and motions of the Hand, as it were in an ecstasy of
Anaxagoras.
admiration, concluded Man to be the wisest of all creatures, because he had
Hands, as if they were the spring and fountain of all intellectual and
artificial elegancies: which opinion of Anaxagor as, Galen with Galen de usu
partiu^ lib. 1.
great elegancie and humanity, by way of inversion corrects, That because Man
was the wisest of all creatures, therefore he had Hands, given him, the Hands
being added, that as he was the most intelligent, so he might have fit organs
to do and explain what his knowledge did inlight him unto; Art in the Hand
being the same with Science in the Intellect; nor is the Genius of Nature
Arist. de part. Animal lib. 4 cap. 10.
silent herein. Plutarch endeavors to give an Allegorical interpretation of
this saying of Anaxagoras, Manus est causa sapienti^. Manus id est experientia,
est causa sapientia. But in regard Plutarch in moral.
of the Rhetorical properties of the Hand, Man may well be called Chiresophus,
id est, Manu sapiens, Hand-wise. Galen excellently observes Galen de usu part.
lib. 1.
Man to be armed by Nature with three weapons, Reason, the loud weapon of the
Tongue, and the Hand, which may be gave the hint to the President of the
College of Critiques to make them all Scaliger ^xercit.
three Hands, in that golden saying of his, wherein he subtly sets forth the
Rhetorical force and dignity of the Hand, Ratio est manus intellectus,
rationis oration, orationis manus. Hence the Hand, the famous companion of
Reason has ever obtained the pre-eminence in gesture, and been the Domius fac
totum in all matters of corporeal eloquence, as appears by the clear
testimony of the learned Sages, and the Chirogrophie of elder Time. Hippocrates
calls the Hand, Optimum dicendi magistrum. The brother of Basil very copiously
Hippocra tes in lib. de flatibus Greg. Nyss. l. de Hom. c. 8.
sets out the Rhetorical worth of this goodly Scepter and Caduceus of
ingenuity. Recte statuitur, manus esse proprium quoddam naturae loquendi
facultate praeditae instrumentum, hunc potissimum ad finem effict as ut earum
opere expiditior in nobis sermonis esset usus. Cassiodorus saw also the force
of this Handmaid of wisdom, and living Cassiod. l. de Anima cap. 18.
implement of elocution, Manus singulariter datae ad multas cogitationes
nostras communitur explicandas. The younger Pliny would have this Plin. Jun.
lib. Epist. 19.
saying marked and registered, Recitantium propria pronunciationis adjumenta
esse manus. And one taking his hint out of the Poesy of Homer, makes this
honorable mention thereof, Desectis manibus pereunt quoque Palladis arts.
Hence the Latins significantly call the Hand, Chiron.
Manum a manando quod hoc instrumento potissimum actiones e nobis emanent.
Therefore the Meletius de not. Hom.
Greeks for good cause seem to have called the Hands, (...) ab utilitate, for
that they are not only assistant to eloquence, but do incredibly conduce to
all the offices of Reason and Humanity. For it is the choicest Friend of Art,
the Artificer of Elocution, the Brother of the fancy, and Remembrancer to her
that dwells backwards in the high Tower of Pallas, the Bodies will and
Intellect, the Gift, the wit, and ingenuity of the outer man, and the better
Genius of the Microcosme: In which Minerva's darlings, the Phalanx of the
Muses, and the Pierian Band, are trained and exercised as in a convenient
Palestra or Gymansium. The Logisticall motions that appear in the Hands of
Disputants, as they demonstrate the large command of the signifying faculty of
the Body which flows not only into the vocal organs, but proceeds so far, as
to the Hands: so they significantly argue the Hand to be a peculiar instrument
of reasonable nature, especially ordained to set a gloss upon the vocal
expressions of the mind. The Hand being a part so prompt and officious to
afford the Tongue necessary aid, so powerfully inclined by its natural gifts
and abilities to bring relief to reason, so apt and fit on all essays to
deal in matters of expression, and to affect the hearers minds, that whereas
Man by a happy endowment of nature is allowed two instruments, Speech and a
Hand, to bring his concealed thoughts unto light; the Tongue without the Hand
can utter nothing but what will come forth lame and impotent, whereas the Hand
without the discourse of the Tongue, is of admirable and energeticall
efficacy, and has achieved many notable things. All Histories abound with
the exploits of the Hand, which has performed and brought to pass more things
by a significant silence, then the Tongue has ever done by an audible
demonstration. Apollonius Tyaneus by Philostratus in vita Apollonii
his most famous example alone, shall serve to clear this point, who when he
had with an incredible religion observed the Pythagorean silence, neither had
suffered any word to fall from him during the space of five whole years; yet
when he came into Cities laboring of sedition, (...) manu atque vultu sedabat
discordias: After which manner he traveled through Pamphylia, Cilicia, and
other regions of the earth: For whatsoever is expressed by the Hand is so
manifestly spoken, that men of the most obtuse understanding that are not able
to conceive of the words pronounced in an unknown Tongue, to whom an Orators
spent oil is merely lost, because their rich and elegant expressions in
conceits transcend the pitch of their capacity: yet these may see and perceive
the intention of the Hand, which by gestures makes the inward motions of the
mind most evident: for, all men (a thing nature has so appointed) are stirred
and moved by the same motives of the mind, and do in others understand and
take notice of the same moving demonstrations, by experience judging and
approving in themselves those affections that outwardly appear to work upon
others. Hence the ingenious are forced to confess that all things are more
expressive in the Hand, as that which does garnish the sense of words, and
gives the shape, figure, and winning glory unto eloquence. This strengthens
Speech with nerves, and the sinewed cords of twisted Reason. Speech divided
from the Hand is unfound, and brought into a poor and low condition, flags and
creeps upon the ground. The babbling Tongue (indeed) may have a long and
spacious walk, and the full mouth may prate and run ore with large and loud
impertinencies, but without the concurrence of the Hand, the mouth is but a
running sore and hollow fist^^a of the mind, and all such ayery trash but the
cracks of an uprofitable lip that wants the assistance of those native Orators
which were designed to attend the perfect issue of a well delivered cogitation:
for what can we expect from that eloquence that neglects the motions of the
Hand? or what can we conceive can be wrought out of that which is maimed and
deformed, that should be able to work upon the affections? Whence a grave
Father, an Author of Classical authority (the high pitch of whose fancy some
Greg. Nyss^^ l. de Hom. opi^ic.
may chance to admire) borne on the rapture of his thought, run so high in his
expressions, that he denies that man could have enjoyed the honor of an
articulate voice, had not nature planted this magazine of Speech in the body,
and stored it with native ammunition for the defense and arming of orall
reason. And verily if Man were disarmed of this native weapon, or organ
intended for the special advancement of utterance, wanting the subtle force of
his Hand and Fingers, the expression of his Tongue would be very weak and
unhewed; for the motions of the Hand in pronunciation, do much enrich and
endeare the expressions of the Tongue, which without them would many times
appear very mean: And if we consider the orations yet remaining among the
ruins of former ages which were publicly pronounced, we may cease to admire
the advantages they have had over others, or themselves only penned; so that we
may not so much wonder how they having been armed by discourse and voice
(together with the emphatical assistance of the Hand) have produced such
prodigious effects: For, these graceful aids of Speech and advantages are so
peculiar to pronunciation and the Hand, that the Pen or Preffe knows not what
they mean. This Fabius lib 11. cap. 3. de Inst. Orat.
is sufficiently confirmed by what Quintilian reports of Hortensius, a long
time Prince of Orators, afterward Coevall and Competitour with Cicero, but
always accounted the second, whose writings notwithstanding were so short of
that fame of his living eloquence of pronunciation, that it appears there was
somewhat in those Orations he pronounced which pleased very well, which they
who came afterward to read could not find; the gifts of speaking and writing
well, although compatible, yet not so inseparable that he who pretends to one,
must necessarily be possessed of both. That Virgin Monarch, Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory, whose Apothegmes may pass among the Oracles of Royal Reason,
and Civil Prudence, having heard, or rather seen a Sermon that was preached
before Her with the advantage of pronunciation, was much affected and taken
therewith, and having the same Sermon afterward presented unto Her, when She
came to read it, and found not the insinuations of elocution and gesture, gave
Her judgment of it, That it was one of the best Sermons She ever heard, and
the worst she ever read.

Not only profane, but sacred Authors have taken notice of this solemn bond
and Rhetorical obligation between the Hand and the mouth, and have not only
allowed the language of the Fingers by which the Ancients were wont to speak,
but have likewise punctually set down the office of these sides-men the Hands,
and gravely noted their necessary employment and concurrence to the more
advantageous setting out of speech. Among the recorded advantages of gesture
and Rhetorical uniformity, the observation of Noverinus is not to be passed
over Noverinus in elect. sacr.
in silence, whose ingenious animadversion it is, that the Septuagint in their
version of the Proverbs, where Solomon brings in wisdom Cap. 1. v. 24.
speaking; and where St. Hieroms translation, or the vulgar Latin has it,
Extendi manum meam, in the Septuagint translation it is (...) and extendebam
sermones; for that speech may have life and efficacy in it, the Hands must go
out, and gesture must appear to the eye that it may give evidence to both
senses: And Solomon where he accuses the sloathfull man for not Proverb. 19.
14.
bringing his Hand to his mouth, seems to have cast an eye upon the old
Egyptian symboll, and to have said, his Hands touch not his lips, his action
agrees not with his voice: For to this sense the Exposition of Saint Gregory
may with little wresting be drawn, Manum ad os porrigere, est voci suae opera
concordare; a good dependence and necessary relation, the Hand is joined to the
lips, and the lips must be so knit and held with the Hands, that sometimes our
very words and speeches are turned into Hands, as the Septuagint in this place
insinuate. And it is observable that the Spirit that is called the Finger of
God, appeared under the form of fiery Tongues, a most excellent Acts 2. 3.
connection land it may be not without a Rhetorical mystery of divine and
powerful elocution, the gift of speaking being granted hereby as well to the
Hand as the Tongue, and a door of utterance opened by the Spirit in both; no
marvel therefore that they of Listra seeing the chief Speaker of the Apostles
speaking in the power of these Tongues, as this Finger gave him utterance,
took Paul for Mercury their imaginary Acts 13. 12.
god of eloquence. Since (therefore) the T^^gue is obliged to the Hand, it will
become elegant Divines to be good at Action, bring thy Hand to thy Mouth, and
tie thy Tongue to thy Finger, and thou have a most perfect symboll of
Rhetorical heat and divine expression.

For the Hand of the Artificer the work shall be commended; and the wise ruler
of the people for his speech, says the son of Syrach. It stands him in Hand
therefore who would emblazon the Ecclus. 9. 17.
arms of the Queen of the affections Eloquence, to use her own pencill the
Hand, of a most secret property to quicken speech for where Eloquence swayes
the Scepter, the graces of utterance forsake their place and the feebleness of
the proper forces of the Tongue are perceived, if they be not this way relieved
by the Hand, by whose arms and allurements (as it were by main force) the
ancient Orators have so often extorted approbation from their auditors, and by
this third supply of elegant deportment, invading the mind through the eye,
with easy accesses put themselves into the possession of the people: And
questionless those brave generous forms of discourse wherein Art has been
married to abundance, and richness of speech mixed with sweetness and majesty
of action, wherewith those great and strange conceptions of the Ancients have
been so curiously limbed and plentifully adorned and graced, are but too
slenderly taken notice of in these times, the perfections whereof can be of no
mean importance, when without the help of this great secret, neither ornament
of Art, nor grace of Nature can be but in part pleasing, nor (as one well
observes) shall all the reasons the Tongue can allege, persuade Balzack.
a very woman, resolving to resist: For, the Hands are those common places and
Topiques of nature, which receive most of those extraordinary motions which
appear in Orations, the high excess, Enthusiasmes, raptures, and commanding
beauty of expressions are here found: For, although gesture naturally flows
out with the voice, yet comeliness and beauty are the decent issues of apt
motion, which appear in a sweet delivery, anticipating the ear by the eye.
And to speak seriously, this artifice of the Hand is no less necessary to
excellent discourses and conceits, then discipline among Soldiers, without
which courage is of no effect, and valor most commonly proves unprofitable:
They therefore, who in public, and before those who are versed in the Art of
welspeaking fall short in Manual performance, suffering the glory of Eloquence
to receive diseminution in their Hands; do no less then cast an aspersion upon
the Art they profess, and abuse their hearers; since no speech ought to be
public if you intend to perform it negligently, and not to allow it all the
ornaments whereof it is capable; for the polishing whereof we need not go far,
since the Hand is able to accommodate the Tongue in such occasions, as that
which has a greater variety of Synonymous expressions, and is able to outvie
it in equivalent variations. This is sufficiently proved by the old emulation
between that famous Orator Cicero and Roscius the great* Master in the Art of
Action; for it is certain that most eminent Orator would often contend and
strive avie with Roscius whether he should more often express the same
sentence in gesture; or whether he himself by the copiousnesse of his
cloquence in a differing speech and variety of expression pronounce the same;
which raised Roscius to that height and perfection of knowledge, that he wrote
a book, wherein he compared Eloquence with the Art or Science of
Stage Players: And indeed the fame and estimation of Roscius grew hereupon so
great, that learned Ca^o made a question whether Cicero could write better then
Roscius could speak and act; or Roscius speak and act better then Cicero
write. Hence a certain modern Author reckoning up nine kind of wits usual
at this day, makes up his account thus: Imprimis, In Speculo Humorum.
a Simian or Apish wit; an Arcadian wit, an Autolican or embezled wit, a
chance-medley wit, a smirke, quick and dextericall wit, and a Roscian wit,
which is only in gesture, when one can far more wittily express a thing by a
dumb external action, then by a lively internal invention, more by gestures
then jests. This was in that Pantomimicall Roscius, who could vary a thing more
by gestures then either Tully could by phrase, or he by his witty speeches. And
as concerning such men we may say of them as once Cicero said of Piso, They
are wise only by signs. These Actors, the cunning counterfeiters of men's
manners, were called Pantomimi from their multivarious imitation, their
faculty, Ars gestitulatoria by the Romans, which one Teletes is said to have
found out, or at least to have much amplified, who is reported to have been so
excellent in this subtle artifice of his Hands, that he could express by them
whatsoever Athaeneus l. 1.
could be spoken by word of mouth. And we read of a certain Philosopher, one
Memphis Idem.
by name, a master in this faculty, whose excellency therein when the same
Author would signify, Tacens (says he) gestu omnia nobis manifestius
indicabat, quam qui artem dicendi se docere profitentur, in the reign of
Domitian, Bathillus was famous for these measures of the Hand, concerning whom
the Satyrist: Chironomon Ledam molli saltante Batillo. ^uvenal l. 1. Satyr. 6.

Saltationem manibus gesticulantis Ledae representante mimo, as Farnaby upon
the place. We read also of one Mnestor a famous Pantomime, much Sueton. Calig.
cap. 55. lib. 4. Cassiodor var. Epist. ult.
affected by Caligula.

Cassidorus elegantly describing one of these Pantomimes, Tunc illa sensuum
manus occulis canorum carmen exponit, and per signa composita quasi quibusdam
liter is, edocet intuent is aspectum, in illaque leguntur apicesrerum, and non
scribendo facit quod Scriptura deolaravit. Monstraletus in his Chronicle makes
mention of a company of these Monstralet. in Chron. Carol. 7. Franc.
Chironomons, who before Trinity house in Paris represented the passion of our
Savior without any words at all, but by the mystery of gesticulations of his
Hands, all things being very exactly and graphically acted by them. These
Chironomons of old being sent for from the Theater to banquets, carved up
fowls and other viands to their Symphonies: To which Juvenal alludes, Nec
minimo sane discrimine refert Juvenal. Satyr. 8.

Quo gestu lepores and quo gallina secetur.
Hence Petronius, Ad symphoniam gesticulatus lacerebat obsonia. And Juvenal:
Idem Sat. 5.
Structorem interea nequa indignatio desit
Saltantem vide as and Chironomonta volanti
Cultello.
Lipsius confounds these structores or carvers, Caelius l. 5. Antiq. lect. c. 9.
with the Chironomonts. The scene of this Art (as is thought) lay first in
Syracusa, and that these Chironomicall expressions sprang from the immane
cruelty of Hieron, the Tyrant of that City, who among other his barbarous
edicts, prohibited the Syracusians all commerce of speech; and the vocal
liberty of communication, commanding them to call for their necessaries by nods
and significant motions of their Hands, eye and feet, which soon necessitated
them to fall into these dancing conferences and declarations of their minds.
The first man that usurped the name of Chironomon or Pantomime among the
Romans, was Pylades when he came out of Asia: an Art which about the time of
Nero was brought to that authority and perfection, that many Writers both
Greek and Latin as a thing most wonderful cried it up to the skies. Hence
Demetrius the Cynique who lived in the time of Nero, seeing one of these
Pantomimi dancing the masque of Mars and Venus: Vlderis ipsis manibus loqui:
Lucian de saltatione.

Or as Lucian has it, Non agere, sed arguta manu effari.
And we read of a certain Prince who coming out of Pontus about business to
Nero, then resident at the head of the Roman Empire, when Caelius l. 5. Antiq.
lect. cap. 3.
he together with others had seen this Chironomon dancing so conspicuously,
that although he could not hear nor understand what was sung (for they were
all semi-Grecians for language) yet they understood all things very perfectly:
This Prince when he was to return home, and Nero had invited him with much
courtesy and love, and liberally bad him ask what he would at his Hands,
promising him readily to grant his desire; Give me, quoth he, Roy all Sir, this
Chironomer, and with this gift you shall highly pleasure me: Nero demanding
what that fellow might advantage him in his affairs at home, I have quoth he
(most sacred Emperor) many barbarous neighbors differing in language, to
understand whom, I need a great number of Interpreters, which are not easy to
be had; therefore when I shall stand in need of an Interpretour, this man by
significant motions of his Hands shall interpret all things unto me. And
concerning these artfull gestures of the Hand, and loquacity of the Fingers, we
must understand many passages of the ancient Poets, and Philosophers. Thus is
Lib. de consulat. Maul. Theodor.
that of Claudian to be understood: Qui nutu manibusque loquax.
And that of Sydovins Apollinaris: Clausis faucibus and loquente gestu.
To this also belongs that of Petronius: Petron in Analectis.
Puer manu loquaci.
And what another speaking of this Art has: Anonymus lib. 4. Epigr.


Egressus scoenam populum Saltator adorat
Solerti pendet prodere verba manu.
Pugnat, ludit, amat, bacchatur, vertitur, adstat,
Illustrat verum cuneta decore replet.
Tot linguae quot membra viro, mirabilis est ars
Quae facit articulos voce silente loqui.
The Poet here says very aptly, Articulos loqui, for that these Pantomimi did
not only delight in gestures of the Hand, but more especially in motions of the
Fingers. Theoricus King of Italy called this, Musicam mutam, still music,
quae ore Cassiodorus l. 1. var Epist. 20.
clauso manibus loquitur, and quibusdam gesticulationibus facit id intelligi,
quod vix narrante lingua, aut scripturae textu posset agnosci. To this
appertains S. Cyprian de spectaculis.
that of St. Cyprian, Vir ultra mulierum molliciom dissolutus, cui ars sit
verba manibus expedire. And that of Seneca, Mirare solemus scoenae peritos,
quod in omnem significationem rerum and affectuum parata Seneca Epist. 121.
illorum est manus, and verborum velocitarem gestus assequitur. But of all that
have touched at this Cassiodorus lib. 6. Epist. ult.
Art, most wittily Cassiodorus, Hic sunt additae Orchestarum loquacissim^^
manus, linguosi digiti, silentium clamosum, expositio tacita, quam musa
polyhymnia reperisse narratur, ostendexs homines posse, and sine oris affatu,
suum velle declarare. And indeed the Prince of Roman Poets where he handles the
names and Virg. in Epig.
inventions of the nine Muses, ascribes the finding out of this kind of
utterance to Polyhymnia. Signat cuncta manu loquitur Polyhymnia gestu.
The learned observation of these premises made the ancient Masters of the
^ieroglyphiques who Pier. Hier. lib. 35.
used to decypher a distinct and articulate voice by a Tongue, add a Hand
comprehending the same, to note out eloquence, by that conceit implying, that
speech stood in need of that moist organ the Tongue, but pronunciation required
a Hand, to wit, an artificial help to set it off, and make it beautiful to
the eye. And the first inventer Zeno Eleates. As Arist. writes.
of the Art of Logique, to note the moods and brevity of argumentation,
exhibited Logique by a Hand comprest into a Fist, and Rhetoric by an open and
dilated Hand, which is but pugnus expansus. Analogicall to this, is that
symboll of the Cynique, Manus non sunt proferendae complicatae Diogenes.
confusis digitis, which insinuates that speech should not be perplexed in the
delivery, but should be open plain and free, for then speech labors of a
blind crampe, when it is too concise, confused or obscure. Hence Phisiognomers
according to their rule ad apparentiaem, infer such men to be full of words
whose manners and common use it is to hold the Hand spread out with the
Fingers. These Hand Critiques observing the apparent manners of men, say, That
he who customarily uses much action of his Hand, in his talk, is a fair
speaker, and neat in his language. And that ancient Interpretour of dreams, in
his Allegorical inferences, makes the Hand to signify Artemid. de Some.
interp. l. 1. cap. 44.
reason, understanding, speech and languages, which as it were by the conduct
of letters, or rather an opportune speech, declares the tacit affections of the
mind. Ribera observes, Ribera Comment in proph. minor,
that the Hand in Scripture does not only signify the divine suggestions of
Prophecy, but also all kind of speech, especially wherein there is any thing
commanded: and he adds the reason,. Quia sicut manns movet, it a movet locutio
praecipiens. The reasons why grave Antiquity did render and understand all
kind of speech and language (as Pierius notes) by a Hand, are, for that the
moving and significant extention of the Pierius in Hierogl.
Hand is known to be so absolutely pertinent to speech, that we together with
a speech expect the due motion of the Hand to explain, direct, enforce, apply,
apparel, and to beautify the words men utter, which would prove naked,
unless the clothing Hands do neatly move to adorn and hide their
nakedness, with their comely and ministerial parts of speech: And words would
have but a cold lodging in the ears of the auditors, if the Hand should not be
the Harbinger of the Tongue, to provide and prepare the eye for their better
entertainment; for as words paint out the image of the mind: So these
suffragans of speech by a lively sense afford that shadow which is the
excellency of the vocal pourtraicture. Since as these gestures of the Hand
alone, and by themselves do speak and show the mental springs from whence
they naturally arise; so invited by Art to the aid of Eloquence, they become
the Accessories and fair spoken Adjuncts of speech. Hence the first Artificers
of Manual Rhetoric, hit on the right vein of Oratorie, when conducted by a
learned curiosity of wit they took in hand that polite device, and elegant
design of reducing the usual gestures of Nature into strict rules of Art,
preparing the undigested motions of Nature, and making them more formal, and
fit for the intention of Rhetoric, whose life and force they made much to
consist in the just demeanor of the Hand, whose motions appear as emphaticall
to the eye, as speech does to the ear, two ports of sense, through which all
passions find an entrance to ceaze upon the mind. And hence such Orators have
ever won the prise, and have had their Hands crowned with the Olympique palm
of Eloquence, who have excelled in the subtle notions of this Art; who
conceiving Rhetoric to consist most in a decent motion of the body, bestowed
well near as much pains to adapt their gestures to Rhetorical
significations, as in the elegant disposing of their choice flowers; the Hands
so surpassing in dignity all the other corporal adjutants of man's wit, that
there can be no eloquence without them. And they perceiving that action (...)
most sway with the people, who most commonly are led by sense, which is moved
by some adequate object; that without the true knowledge of this secret of Art,
none could be accounted in the number of good Orators, and that a mean Orator
instructed in this knacke of action, did often excel the most eminent; they bent
their whole endeavors for the attaining this quality. Demosthenes who deserves
the surname of Chirocrates for his active judgment in these Rhetorical
endeavors, he was wont to compose the action and gesture of his body by a
great looking-glass, and for further acquaintance with this faculty, he
entertainned Andronicus the Stage Player, by whom being instructed in this Art
after he had reformed the defect that was before in his Orations for want of
Action, he grew very famous for Eloquence; insomuch that Aeschines the Orator
who in a discontent left Athens, and came to keep a School at Rhodes, and
begun to teach the Art of Rhetorique, when he otherwhiles read Plutarch in the
life of Aeschines the Orator.
unto the Rhedians (and that with action and gesture) the Oration he had
pronounced against Ctesiphon: when all the hearers marveiled thereat, and
namely, how possibly he could be cast, if he acted such an Oration: You would
never wonder at the matter (quoth he) my Masters of Valor. Max. lib. a cap. 10.
de pro^^ne. and apto mot^ corp.
Rhodes, if you had been in place, and heard Demosthenes, and seen the vigorous
sharpness of his eyes, the terrible weight of his countenance, a sweet voice
accommodated to every word, and the efficacious motions of his Hand and body.
This Art was generally practiced by all the eminent Orators of Athens, unless
perchance in that sad and solemn Session of the Areopagites, where when they
were to speak without affection, in an obscure and dark place, there was no
cause why they should use the motions of the hand

Among the Roman Orators, Cicero to this intent made use of Roscius the
Comoedian, and Aesope the Tragaedian, in his time the Masters of this kind of
learning, who was wont to call Roscius for his great skill in these subtleties
of the Hand, Delicias suas, his Darling: and upon a time, in a most eloquent
Oration, he rebuked the people of Rome, because while Roscius was acting, they
made a noise. What an apt Scholar he proved, and what his opinion was of this
Art, appears by his book de Oratore, wherein he so highly extolls Action, the
practice whereof helped to entitle him to the principality of Eloquence.
Plutarch relating the force of Cicero's eloquence, by reason of the sweet grace
of his pronunciation, reports him in his Oration Plutarch in the life of Ci^ero.
pro Ligario, so marveilously to have moved Caesar, [one that could well skill
in Manual Rhetorique] that he changed diverse colors, and showed plainly by
his countenance, that there was a marveilous alteration in all the parts of
him. For, in the end, when he came to touch the battle of Pharsalia, then was
Caesar so troubled, that his body shook withal, and besides, certain books
which he had, fell out of his hands, and he was driven against his will to set
Ligarius at liberty. Therefore the malice of Antonie forced tears and
lamentations into the Idem ibid.
eyes of the Romans, when they saw Cicero's Right Hand, the instrument of his
divine Eloquence, with which he penned and pronounced the Phillippiques, nailed
fast unto his head, and set upon the Rostrum or Pulpit of Common pleas in the
Forum. Cn. Lentulus also, for his excellency in this Art, was more famous then
for his vocal eloquence. C. Lentulus, P. Lentulus, C. Gracchus, L. Apuleius
Saturnius, Crassus, and C. Julius Caesar, were men expert in this mystery.
Antonius, he used the Asiatique phrase in his pleadings, which carried the best
grace and estimation at that time, full of ostentation and bravery of gesture.
As for Q. Pompeius, surnamed Bithynicus, C. Macer, Manilius Sura, etc. they
lost the estimation of good Orators, for their deficiencie in this Art. But
above all, most actively eloquent was Q. Hortensius the Orator; one could not
tell whether they should most desire to run to hear, or see him speak: his
presence and aspect did so a dorne and become his words, and assist his periods
to accomplish all their numbers; and again, his verbal expressions were so
conformable to his gesture, and so elegantly Aul. Gell. lib. 1. cap. 5
administered unto his hand, that for certain, Aesop and Roscius, two famous
Actors of those times, were often observed to crowd into the Assembly when he
was pleading, that they might by imitation transfer some of his expressive
Val. Max. lib. 8. de apt motu corp.
gestures from the Forum to the Theater. Some Lawyers and Divines I have
observed to have been very prevalent by virtue of this artifice of the Hand,
even in these times: among whom, most eminent was that much lamented Dr. Done;
of whom an ingenious friend thus in his Elegiack knell:

Yet have I seen thee in the Pulpit stand, Mr. Main, of Christ Church Oxford.

Where one might take notes from thy look and hand.
And from thy speaking action bear away
More Sermon then some Teachers use to say.
Such was thy carriage, and thy gesture such,
As could devide the heart, and conscience touch:
Thy motion did confute, and one might see
An error vanquished by deliverie.
Such (as Sconerus notes) was the action of the Prophets and Ecclesiastical
Orators in the Primitive times, plainly Heroique, as may be collected out of
Sacred Writ, and some Commentators thereon, in whom the Eloquence of the
Prophets is graphically described.

Nature exhorts all men to Action consentaneous to the style of their
Elocution: which inbred and commodious propensitie, unless illustrated by Art,
and confirmed by exercitation, is, as Trapezuntius notes, but as a field
untilled, which runs wild with disordered productions. Art being the Imitator
which perfects Nature, makes her actions more dilucid, illustrious and sweet,
by her positive accommodations. For whatsoever Nature does institute in the
individuals worthy observation, reduced into one exact idea, built upon
general precepts, by a perpetual order, Art does expose under one aspect of
the Understanding: And Nature again placed by Art, beholds the excellent
actions of eminent men, and expresses them by a happy exercitation. Wherefore
the ancient Rhetoricians, who cast their eyes upon Nature, and insisted in her
steps, whose Art was principally bent to imitate the several actions of the
Mind with a decent and comely grace; admitted no gesture to the hand, but what
they did find by an accurate collation to have some similitude with the truth
of Nature. That which Philostratus Junior requires of a Painter, who would be
eminent Philost. jun. de Iconib.
by his Hand, is more necessary to an Orator. He would have him that would
seem to manage that Art skilfully, to be a man endued with a good fancy and a
sound judgment, actively apt to every thing, and industrious in the observing
of men's natures, and assimilating their manners, and counterfeiting of all
things which in the gesture and composition of the body, are the signs and
notes of the tacit mind and affections. And indeed, then shall the hand of an
eloquent man move aptly, and as to the purpose applied to express what he
takes in hand, when he has converst with Nature, and insinuated himself into
all the veins of the affections of the Hand, and by diligent study has
attained to an exquisite experience in the properties of the fingers, and what
the natural motions of the Hand are wont to be. Hence Philosophers, who can
discern of the natural causes of things, have a notable advantage: for he
shall most elegantly and judiciously manage his Hand, and moderate the gestures
thereof, who by the discipline of Philosophy shall apply and conform himself
nearest to the nature and variety of the affections.

Hence Demosthenes, being demanded the question, Which was the first point of
Eloquence? Plutarch i^ the life of Demost.
he answered, Action: Which the second? He answered, Action: and which was the
third, he said, Action, still. Wherefore in the Olympian Games, at that famous
assembly of Greece, that Theater of Honor, where the Arts, wisdom, and the
illustrious Virtues were recompensed with public honors; there, in the sight
of the Cresol. in Anthologia sacra.
people of Greece, after the sound of a Trumpet, wherewith the minds of the
standers by were rowzed up to attend the solemn commendation of the public
Crier; the Hands were first crowned, before the Head, as S. Chrysostom
advertiseth Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de Davide,
us. For when the Brabutia, which were most skillful Judges, would declare,
that all the glory of the Victors did proceed from the Hand or Action; and that
in the first place, Industry, labor, and skill were crowned by them; not the
shoulders of the triumphant Olympianiceans, but their Hands were decked and
praised with the glorious Palm. Skilfully therefore S. Ambros. 62 Hexa^. cap.
13.
Ambrose: Palma manus victricis ornatus est. And Victory is called, Dea
palmaris: and victoriosus, with Isidor, is palmosus. But why the Palm was
given to them that overcame, and why the boughs thereof have been proposed as
rewards to such as were victorious in Arts or Arms, according to that of the
Poet: Horace lib. 1. Od.
-- -- -- -- Palmaque nobilis,
Terrarum dominos evehit ad deos.
There are who allege this reason: For that the fruit of the Palm does
resemble the Hand and fingers, and are thereof by the Greeks named dactili,
that is, digiti, fingers: for, the great See Sands Travaile^ lib. 1.
ends of the branches appear like hands stretched forth, and the dates as
fingers. It seemed therefore right, the Palm should be given to them whose
Hands were skillful in Arts, and Fingers cunning in battle; since the chief
weight and illustrious honor of all triumphs depend upon the hand or action,
or as if the fruit of the Palm were peace. And Tullie, when he had unfolded all
the (...) Orat.
ornaments of a costly and copious eloquence, he casts up all in the summary of
these grave words: Sed haec omnia perinde sunt ut agu^tur: implying, that
without a pleasing and opportune Action, all the other aids of Speech would
become vain and unprofitable. Talaeus is in the right, where he says, that
many Infants by the dignity of Action, Talaeus in Rhet.
have often reaped the fruit of Eloquence; while many eloquent men through the
deformity of gesture, have been accounted very babies in Expression. For
whereas Nature assigns to each motion of the Mind its proper gesture,
countenance, and tone, whereby it is significantly expressed; this grace of
Gesture is conceived to be the most elegant and expressive virtue of the three;
installed by Plato among the Civil virtues, as the speech and native eloquence
of the Body; for that those Elegant conceptions that enrich the pregnant Mind,
incite the mind by some stratagem of wit, to find out apt and fit
expressions: and while she labors to be free in pouring out her hidden
treasures, she imprints upon the body the active hints of her most generous
conceits, darting her rays into the body, as light has its emanation from the
Sun: which eloquent impressions, a kind of speech most consonant to the mind,
are in the moving of the Hand so neatly wrought and emphatically produced, that
the Hand many times seems to have conceived the thought. He therefore that
would purchase the repute of an accomplished Rhetorician, must pursue the
knowledge of this Art, which consists in understanding the lawful garb and
ordered motions of the Hand, the most puissant Agent of the soul, and which
has by some been called Men's corporis, or the Mind of the Body; the voice of
Philosophy admonishing in Epictetus, no less to be minded by a Rhetorician
then a Philosopher: Ne digitum quidem temere extendere.


Some notions of this Manual Rhetorique are Epict. Enchirid.
derived from the Heroique ages of the world, and were approved and allowed of
by So^^ates. Yet in the days of Aristotle were not delivered by any, as
digested into any form of Art, which had been a Subject worthy of his pen:
but, in Chirologicis dormivit Aristoteles. The Art was first formed by
Rhetoricians; afterward amplified by Poets and cunning Motists, skillful in
the pourtraicture of mute poesy: but most strangely enlarged by Actors, the
ingenious counterseiters of men's manners. The first Roman Orator that
collected these Rhetorical motions of the Hand into an Art, translating so
much from the Theater to the Forum, as stood with the gravity of an Orator,
was surely Quintilian, unto whose Quintil. in Ruer. inst.
curious observation in the Hand, I refer those who out of curiosity desire
to be more punctually informed in these most subtle and abstruce notions of the
Hand, which they may also find recited in Vosoius his Rhetorique, a mystery
in great request with the ancient Sophisters and Rhetoricians, and properly
handled by them, although some not well advised, would have them considered in
the Aethiques: for there is distinction to be made between that which Moralists
call Actionem moratam or civitem, and Oratoriam, which the Greeks call
Hypocris^n, and Quintil. Chiromomiam, which are acco^modated to move the
affections of the Auditors. And indeed the gestu^^s of Rhetorical utterance
do presuppose the Aethique precepts and the laws of civil conversation. The
Ancients, especially the Grecians, were men ever very inventive of such
subtleties, had a Palestra, or place of exercise for this purpose. Talaeus
preferres these Canonical gestures before the artifice of the Voice, although
his Commentator will allow the pre-eminence of this Art only among Nations
Claudius Minos in Talaeum.
of diverse tongues, and not where the assembly is of one lip. Keckerman gives
the voice the dignity of precedence for our times: but he is no better than a
precision in Rhetorique, of whose conceit let the learned judge, since he
confesses the Jesuits (known to be the greatest proficients in Rhetorique of
our times) instruct their disciples after this manner. And how wonderfully they
have improved and polished this kind of ancient Learning, appears sufficiently
by the Labors of three eminent in this faculty: Cresollius de gestu Oratoris,
Voellus de art dicendi, and Causinus de Eloquentia. Alstedius Alstedius in
Rhet.
could wish we had some book of the Pronunciation of the Ancients, that we
might take out of it such gestures as did square with our times: such a Book
as Laertius praises. And Schonerus wishes for Types and Chirograms, whereby
this Laert. l2. in vita Theodori.
Art might be better illustrated then by words. Which defect in this Art I have
here attempted to supply (and as I hope) with reasonable success. If I have
miscarried in any, it is the more pardonable, since in all my search after
these subtleties of the Hand, I never met with any Rhetorician or other, that
had picturd out one of these Rhetorical expressions of the Hands and fingers;
or met with any Philologer that could exactly satisfy me in the ancient
Rhetorical postures of Quintilian. Franciscus Junius in his late Translation
of his Pictura veterum, having given the best proof of his skill in such
Antiquities, by a verbal explanation thereof. That which enabled me to advance
so far in this Art, is the insight I have purchased in the groundwork or
foundation of all Rhetorical pronunciation, to wit, the Natural Expressions
of the Hand.

THE CANONS OF RHETORICIANS TOUCHING The Artificial managing of the HAND in
Speaking. With an Historical Manifesto, exemplifying the Rhetorical Actions
thereof.
Canon I.
THe Hand lightly opened, timorously displayed before the breast, and let fall
by short turns under the heaving shoulders, is an humble and neat action,
becoming those who daunted and dismayed, begin to speak as if their tongue were
afraid to encounter with the public ear; and such who shunning a profuse
excess of words, would sparingly express their Minds, or assuage and
mitigate the censorious expectation of their Auditors, by an ingenious
insinuation of a diminutive Action.

Quintilian thinks that Demosthenes in that lowly Fabius Inst. Rhet. lib. 11.
and fearful Oration for Ctesiphon, began with his Hand composed after this
manner: And that Ciero's Hand was formed to this composition of gesture in the
beginning of his Oration; for Archias the Poet, when he said, Si quid est in me
^^genii (judices) quod s^ntio quam sit exiguum.

Canon II.
THe stretching forth of the Hand is the form of pleading, and has a secret
help and preparative to ready speaking, and commends an Apology or any set
speech to the Auditors.

In the memorialls of Antiquity, in the writings of the old Annals, the
lineaments of Pictures, and ancient Statues, we shall find this postute of
preparation in the Hands of famous Orators. Aristides reports, that Prince of
Orators, M^ltiades Aristides.
to have been so painted in Greece to the eternal monument of his memory,
stretching out his Right Hand only, as he was wont most honorably to speak
unto his people. Phillip that eloquent Coelius var. lect. Cicer. de Orat.
man, was wont to say, that he did so rise up to speak that he knew not his
first word, yet he said he used to speak excellently well, when he had once
warmed his Arm. And Marcellinus observing the demeanor of Valintinian about
to make a public speech, when he had put forth his Hand (says he) that he
might speak more readily. That divine Orator and chief Speaker of the
Apostles, used this Action as a preparative to his ensuing Apology: for when
Agrippa had permitted Paul to speak for himself, Paul stretched out the Hand,
and answered for himself. This form of pleading is to be seen in the ancient
Statues of Roman Advocates.

Canon III.
THE indulgent putting forth of the Hand toward the Auditors, signifying a
kind of Humdnity, and good will, is a benevolent action, fit for those who
praise or congratulate, and is of great efficacy to move the affections.

This Action had a singular grace and comeliness in Meletius, that reverend
Bishop of Antioch, a man environed with a guard of all the Virtues, with which
Action of his Hand; as with the engine of good will, he seemed to lift up the
hearts of his hearers with him; therefore Gregory Nyssen attributes to him,
Com^m dextram and veluti lenocinio orationis perfusam, qua (...) cum Greg.
Nyff. de St. Melet.
or is facundia digites commovere soleat.

Canon IV.
THe gentle and wel-ordered Hand, thrown forth by a moderate projection, the
Fingers unfolding themselves in the motion, and the shoulders a little
slackned, affords a familiar force to any plain continued speech or uniforme
discourse; and much graceth any matter that requires to be handled with a more
lofty style, which we would feign fully present in a more gorgeous excess of
words.

The comeliness of this Action (which best suites with them who remove and
shift their standing) appears herein, that by this emanation of the Arm, and
delivery of gesture, speech is so well pronounced and powered forth, that it
seems to flow out of the Hand.

Canon V.
THE Hand directed toward the Auditors, with a kind of impetuous agitation
of the Arm, maintaining its gravity with a swift recourse, is an action (...)
of vehemency, fit to (...), denounce, reprehend, and (...), and by its
extension, implies power, and a prevalent authority.

This Action is not seasonable until an Oration begin to wax hot and
prevalent, and the discoursing appetite of the Hand: be rowsed up, and well
heated by a Rhetorical provocation, and is sufficiently affected to move
according to the nimble contention of the Tongue. And then this glittering dart
of speech, like lightning, or the shaking of Apollo's beams, expatiates it
self into a glorious latitude of elocution: The Oration with this military
gesture, as it were, pouring out it self. The left arm (if any thing is to be
done with it) is to be raised, that it may make as it were a right angle.

Canon VI.
THe Hand restrained and kept in, is an argument of modesty, and frugall
pronunciation, a still and quiet action, suitable to a mild and remiss
declamation.

This Action with Tully, is Molli brachio ageres with Fabius, M^lli articulo:
Gladiatorem vehement is impetus, adversarii, mollis articulus excepit. And in
the Primitive times of elocution, when eloquence began to flower and bud, and
insolency was rarely entertained. Orators were wont to keep their Hands
within their cloaks, for so, as Aeschines will have it, those ancient Orators,
Eschines in Timar.
Princes of Greece, in most account, both for their language and judgment
(Pericles and Themistocles) were wont to declame; as an action most suitable to
conserve their modesty. And he fetches his argument of so laudable a custom
from the statue of Solon, which the ancient Statuaries, skillful in the
counterfeiting men's manners made for Solon at Salamina, in this posture to note
his moderation and modesty; with which signification there was the like statue
long after his time erected at Rome for Scipio. And verily Aeschines who
approved of this posture of the Hand as an Index of moderation, he observed it
himself even in the heat of reprehension and reproof; but this animadversion
of Aeschines who spitefully carped at the important gestures of the Hand, the
Orator Demostheues did afterward most elegantly deride and explode; for that
statue of Solon, says he, the Salaminians say was not dedicated above fifty
years ago: But from Solon to this present time are two hundred and forty
years, so that the workman who expressed that gesture, no not his
grandfather, were then alive. But it cannot be denied that such a thing might
be with the Ancients, which Aeschines knew rather by conjecture, then any
certain assurance: For we read of one Polemon a deboyse young man, who upon
hearing of Xenocrates, became modest, and drew his Hand within Valor. Max.
his cloak. And the gravest Writers report of Cleon that turbulent Orator of
Athens, to have Plutarch in Nicia.
been the first that opened his cloak in speaking. This rational conceit
prevailed also with the Romans, for although in the ancient statnes of Lawyers
in Rome, we find the Right Hand put forth, the form of pleading: yet the
first year they were called to the Bar, they were not to put forth the Hand,
nor a young Advocate permitted to plead after the same manner as an ancient
Practitioner. Cicero has left a certificate of this custom, Nobis olim annus
erat unus ad cohibendum Cicero pro Coelio
brachium constitutus, ut exercitatione ludoque campestri Tunicati uterentur;
which garb of the restrained Hand, as it is an argument of frugall
pronunciation, the great Prelates of Rome observe at this day when they speak
before the Pierius in Hierogl.
Pope, as that great Master of the Hieroglyphiques testifies. But when wit
which lay asleep in those rude and simple times, began to be rowzed up and
instructed with Arts, those streights of bashfulnesse were enlarged, the Hand
released and set at liberty, and a more freer course of pleading brought in,
not that modesty should be excluded men's manners, which is a great ornament of
life; but that speech might have a greater force to work upon the affections
of men. Now, to use this fearful demeanor of the Hand, were the part of one
void of common sense and humanity; against whom that of Quintilian might be
brought, who reprehended Fabius Inst. Rhet.
those who in pleading inhibited the Hand, as if the business were done
sluggishly.

Canon VII.
THe Hand put forth and raised aloft, is an action of congratulatory
exclamation and amplification of joy.

This is drawn from Nature into the Schools and discipline of Rhetoricians,
who prescribe Cresol. Vacat. Aut.
this free and liberal motion of the Hand, as a fit periphr^sis of gesture
upon such occasions, and most consonant to the intention of Nature.

Canon VIII.
THe Hand collected, the Fingers looking downwards, then turned and resolved,
is a set form accommodated to their intention who would openly produce their
reasons.

The artificial conceit of this Action is, that it seems as it were indeed to
bring forth with it, some hidden matter to make the argument in Hand more
Rhetorically apparent.

Canon IX.
THe hollow Hand raised above the shoulder with some kind of grave motion of
the wrest, does cheer, exhort, embolden and encourage.

Canon X.
THe palm (the Fingers all joined together) turned up, and by the return of
the wrest, in one motion, spread and turned about with the Hand, is an action
convenient for admiration.

Canon XI.
THe Hand (the Fingers all joined at their tops) referred to the vocal passage
of the mind, does lightly admire; and fits their occasion who in the interim
are moved with sudden indignation, and in the end fall to deprecate, amazed
with fear.

Canon XII.
THe turned up Hand, (the Thumb bent in, and the other Fingers remiss)
transferred to the Northern side of our body, and then prone to our South side,
so, lightly waved to and from, does very aptly distinguish contraries, and may
show the variety of numbers.

Canon XIII.
THE hand after one sort is not still disposed to ask a question; yet commonly
when we demand, however it be composed, we use to change or turn our hand,
raising it a little upwards.

Canon XIV.
THE hand erected, and then so moved, that the inside is turnedout, is a
sensible Action that apparently presents the least disparity or difference.

Canon. XV.
THE Hand that by alternate motions contracts and unfolds it self, does aid
them in their pronunciation who are very instant to urge a thing.

Canon XVI.
THE turning of the Hand may serve to signify an easy dexterity of
performance.

This is a magistrall notion raised upon this principle, that the Hand is so
borne to Action, and so prompt to expedite all accounts of signification, that
nothing seems more easy then the motion of the Hand. Hence the Greeks very
ingeniously call that which is proclive and easy to be done (...), as if it
were no more difficult then to stir the Hand; for the ancient Greeks call the
Hands (...). Hence Manus non verterim, the Adage, pro eo, quod est, nihil
omnino laboro, a form of speech used by Apuleius. The Carthaginian Ambassador
used this adjunct of demonstration In Apolog^a.
to Andromachus at the City Tauromenion, for in his bold speech wherein he
threatened in the name of the Carthaginians, to make quick dispatch to the
overthrow of Tauromenion, he showed first the palm of his Hand, then the back
of his Hand, threatening him that his City should be so turned over -hand, if he
did not quickly send Plutarch in the life of Timoleon.
away the Corinthians: Andromachus turning his Hand up and down as the
Ambassador had done, bad him be going, and that with speed, out of his City,
if he would not see the keele of his Gally turned upwards. This Action as it is
expressive to the easiness of performance, is Canonical enough, but as a
demonstration of the Cities or Gallyes overthrow, it is Apochryphall.

Canon XVII.
THE Hand brought to the stomach, and spread gently thereon, is a gesture of
Rhetorical asseveration.

But whether it be convenient to touch the breast with the Hand; the sons of
Rhetoricians have made enquiry in their learned Disputations: Some would have
the Hand to be only turned, and so referred to the Breast: Others say, we may
touch the Breast with our Fingers ends; both, in the opinion of Cresollius may
be done without reprehension, when we speak any thing concerning our selves,
and that our speech glydes with a calm and gentle stream. But the touch does
most avail in a sharp and inflamed style, when the motions of the mind are
by Action unfolded: As when an Orator would express an incredible ardour of
love lodged in his bosom, and cleaving to his very marrow; or grief deeply
settled in his yearning bowels; in signifying these and such like affections,
none can rebuke an Orator if he shaltouch his Breast with his Fingers ends
only. Cresollius makes little doubt, but Tully used this gesture, when he said,
M. Tul. 2. in Anton.
miserum me, etc. for in such occasions, the splendor of pronunciation is
lacking, neither have words sufficient force to make the mind altogether
intelligible, unless the Hand be brought to the Breast.

Canon XVIII.
THE showing forth of the Hand, or beckning with the same, are Rhetorically
significant to speak to, call after, invite, bring in, and warn to come.

Tullie, in the Epilogue of his Oration for Plancius, Cicero in Epilog. Planc.
which did abound and overflow with lamentation, very commodiously explained
himself by this Rhetorical compellation, where with most excellent artifice
he called Plancius, and bids him come unto him, that he might touch and embrace
him. Cresollius rather prefers the first action to the Hand of an Orator, and
would Cresol. vacat Aut.
have invitations signified by putting forth the Hand only, without any waving
motion; for, that Beckning with the Hand, in his judgment, is the property of
an unskilful multitude, and of men of small account, who want gravitie and
moderation; who do not only induce and apply their bent-in-Hand to this
persuasive behavior, but do also revoke and bow back their whole body, and
wind and wrest about their very sides: Who though he do not forbid or
repudiate this calling gesture of the Hand alone, yet if the body be drawn in
withal, he would have it referred to the Stage, and to places of common resort.

Canon XIX.
THe Hand raised and stretched out with the arm, or the Hand waved toward the
auditors, are adva^tageous actions for them who would imply a generous
confidence, and their authority and ability to effect a thing: it serves also
to call for, and demand silence, and for the prologue to an act of
pacification.

This Canon is grounded upon the Axiom in Nature, That there does appear in
the Hand as 'twere a Natural mark of the Majesty and Authority of Man.
Hence Ovid, in this Rhetorical sense, attributing a Majesticall Gravity to the
Hand of Jupiter, -- qui postquam voce manuque
Murmura compressit, tenuere silentia cuncti, Ovid. lib^. Meta^.

Substitit and clamor, pressus gravitate regentis.
And Statius speaking of the action of Jupiters Hand in a Council of the gods,
advanced to the same purpose: -- veniam don^^ pater ipse sedendi
Tranquilla jubet esse man^ -- Statius l. 1. Thebaid.

Hence Aelian of Jul. Aug. Manu semper cos placare cuperet. Aelian Spartian, in
Jul. Aug. Stat. lib. 1. Syl.

But though the Hand only put forth, and advanced with authority, is of force
to assuage tumults, and procure audience, (as Domitian in Statius) Dextra
[vetat pugnas] -- Yet if a certain kind of motion be there withal exhibited,
it will be of more force and dignity; which (...) or (...), words which the
Greeks use in this case, do import. Herodians phrase is, (...), the proper
word in this business is (...): the Greeks also say, Lib. de anima and resur.
(...): with Greg. Nyss. it is (...): others (...), some also, (...), almost in
the same sense, although this last, seems to signify something less, only
the lifting up of the Hand. Verily, Cornutus upon Perseus grants as much: Magna
(says he) and profutura hominibus locuturi [tacere Cornut. ad Pers. Sa^. 4
jubent] moventes manum. See the Natural gestures, Gest. XVI. for examples of
Orators using this Action.

Canon XX.
THE Hand propellent to the left-ward, the left shoulder brought forward, the
Head inclined to the Southward of the Body, is an action accommodated to
aversation, execration, and negation.

Canon XXI.
TO shake the Hand, with bended brows, does abhor, deny, dislike, refuse,
and disallow.

Canon XXII.
The hand resilient or leapeing back to the Pl^^^nic^, the Right Hand is the
South of the Microcosme; the Left, the North.
Northward of the Body, whence it did descend, makes an action fit to
abominate, and to accompany words of refusal or dislike, and may serve also in
point of admiration.

Canon XXIII.
THe Hand with a gentle percussion, now greater, now less; now flat, now
sharp, according to the diversity of the affections, is fitted to distinguish
the Comma's and breathing parts of a sentence.

Canon XXIV.
BY his Hand referred unto him, an Orator may show himself, when he speaks
any thing concerning himself.

Caesar used this patheticall demonstration of himself, when one accused
Brutus unto him, Plutarch in the life of Brutus.
and bad him beware of him: What, said he again, clapping his Hand on his
breast; Think ye that Brutus will not tarry till this Body dies?

Canon XXV.
The Hand bent into a fist, and the Pulpit or Bar struck therewith, is an
action of Rhetorical heat, and very artificially accompanies Anger, and a
more vehement contention.

Canon XXVI.
The palm struck upon a book, (held usually in the left hand of an Orator) does
serve to excite and rowze up the Auditors.

This action is commonly used by our Modern Orators, and has succeeded in
the place of smiting upon the thigh, which cannot well be performed in our deep
and little pulpits.

Canon XXVII.
TO clap the hand suddenly upon the breast, is an actiof increpation, proper in
their hands, who would arrest their speech, and nonsuit it by silence, and by
a careful stop restrain their tongue, and call back as it were their
reprehended words, and put in a Rhetorical Demur, or cross bill against their
own Declaration.

To this Action, that of Homer appertains: Pectore autem percusso, [animum
increpuit] Homer. ^di^.
sermon.

Canon XXVIII
THe Hand brought unto the stomach, and in a remiss garb spread thereon, does
conscienciously assevere, and becomes them who affirm any thing of themselves.

Canon XXIX.
THE Breast stricken with the Hand, is an action of Grief, sorrow, repentance,
and indignation.

This is a very patheticall motion in Nature, and Rhetorical in Art; and action
in use with the ancient Orators, and with a profitable signification practiced
by the Jesuits; who are wont, not only with a light approach to touch the
Breast, but sometimes also to beat upon it with the Hand; which they do, for
the most part, to testify anguish of mind, repentance, and matters of
Mortification; which they act and personate with such substantial abundance
of speech, with such motion of the body, and such imminent gesture, that while
they beat their Breasts, they raise oftentimes great motions in the minds of
their Auditors, and religious tears are drawn from the eyes of many. Which
Rhetorical action of the Hand is not always (to an inch) framed by the
precepts of Rhetoricians, nor by line and level fitted to the rule of Art, nor
weighed, as 'twere, in the Goldsmiths balance; for they who assume this
gesture, strike their breast with an audible stroke, when they judge it fit
for their purpose; although some, who are more studious of eloquence, do not
heartily admit of this loud contact of the Hand; who with a peaceable meekness
bringing the quiet Hand unto the breast, by the forcible achievements of that
pronunciation, procure a dreadful influence to fall upon their Auditory. But
in a Senate of the Learned, and a solemn Assembly of venerable personages, a
vehement percussion of the breast is not convenient; but is to be remitted to
the Theater, lest (as my Author Cresol.
says) some Stripling in Eloquence, should tacitly throw at them that out of
the Comoedie; Plautus in milit. glorioso.
Hic pectus digitis pultat, cor credo evocaturus for as.



Canon XXX.
THE Forehead stricken with the Hand, is an action of dolor, shame, and
admiration.

Quintilian grants this to have been used by some turbulent Orators in their
pleadings, even Fabius lib 2. cap. 22.
in his time, and very availeable with them, who by a popular ostentation of
Eloquence, hunted after the applause of the people. His words are these: Jam
collidere manus, terrae pedem incutere; femur, pectus, frontem caedere, mire ad
[pullatu^ circulu^] faciunt. Yet Orators of very good esteem, by their
practice commended the use and signification of this gesture; but in Epilogue
only, and a certain fiery amplification; when for the moving of passion,
these tragical expressions of the Hand are held comely and convenient. A
gesture with the Greeks and Latins of equal use and signification, as far
as our understanding can light us to the knowledge of those Rhetorical
ornaments of Expression, in fashion with the Ancients. And it was wont to
attend upon three causes; to Dolor, Shame, and Admiration. In great grief,
they thought it of old a very expressive demeanor of the Hand. Cicero
commends it in Brutus. Dionysius Halicarnassensis acknowledges Dyonis. Hal.
Romans Antiq. l. 10 Cicero ad Attic. l. 1. Ep. 1. Liv^e, l. 25 Q^ Curtius, lib.
7. Apuleius Metamor. lib. 1. Hell. Aeth. Hist. l. 10. Libanius in Basilico
the use of this gesture: Percutientes frontes, and aspectus tristes prae se
ferentes. Cicero insinuates as much to his friend: Puto te [ingemuisse] ut
frontem ferias. Livie calls this affection of the Hand, Capitis offensationem:
[Flere] omnes and offensare capita. With Q. Curtius, it is, Os converberare: Is
tum [flere] caepit, and os converberare; [moestus] non ob suam vicem, etc. In
Apuleius the gesture stands thus, Dextra saevi^nte frontem replaudere. The
Greeks say (...), and (...), and (...). Hence Heliodorus of his old man, Cum
feriisset frontem and coll^crumasset. And Libanius of the Persian King, Caput
identidem percutiens deplorat: And we read it to have been the form of
lamentation used by the Spartans at their funerals. But of this dolorons
adjunct of discontent, and angry symptom of grieved nature, Tullie in a kind
of medley of natural invasions, and Rhetorical impressions of the Hand upon
Ci^^ro, Tusc. ^.
the assailed Body, makes this rehearsal: Mul^^bres lac^rationes g^narum
Pectoris, feminum, capitis percussio. That this gesture was used in
signification of shame, S. Chrysostom declares, who when he had upon a time,
with an incredible force of utterance, rehearsed diverse impious and Chrysostom.
Hom 2^. ad pop. Ant.
ridiculous superstitions observed by some of the people, he made the whole
multitude of his auditors ashamed. Of whose shame he puts down three visible
arguments, in words sounding to this effect: Vultum operuistis, Frontem
percussistis, and ad terram inclinastis. This (...) in another place he
expresses in his own Idem Sermon. 56.
language thus: (...). That it was significant in wonder and admiration,
appears by Nonnus a great Poet, who attributes this gesture Nonnus in Johan.
Ev^^g. paraph.
to admiration, in his paraphrase of the sacred History of S. John; where, of
Nathanael, wondering at the doctrine of our Savior: (...).
Prae admiratione Frontem divina manu feriens.
Hannibal used this adjunct of expression as a stratagem, at the battle of
Ca^nes: who when Giscon, a man of like state and nobility with himself, told
him that the enemies seemed afar off to be a great number; Hannibal [rubbing
his Plutarch in the li^e of Fabius.
forehead] answered him: Yea, said he, but there is another thing more to be
wondered at then you think of, Giscon. Giscon straight asked, What? Mary, says
he, this; That of all the great number of Soldiers you see yonder, there is
not a man of them called Giscon, as you are. This merry answer, delivered
contrary to their expectation that were with him, looking for some great
weighty matter [sutable to his gesture] made them all laugh a good.

This gesture, although it was with these senses admitted the hands of the
Ancients, yet it appears to Cresollius in the possibility of a doubt, whether
or no it can now with any advantage Cresol. l. 1.
be done, it being little used by Advocates, and the more judicious sort of
men, that speak in public; unless perchance by such who are of a more hot
complexion, and are apt to boil over with a sudden motion, whose choler in the
seething, bubbles into action; for men of this temper, soon moved, as having a
natural inclination to anger, in the vehement fervencie of passion, hastily
and swiftly with the Hand touch the forehead or cap: which action, because
there manifestly appears in it the virtuall effect and commotion of Nature, it
commonly escapes the lash of reprehension. But faintly and childishly applied,
and sav^ring more of Schoolartifice then the intentionall operation of Nature,
it is condemned as feigned and adulterate; for which reason, my Author
concurres in opinion with Quintilian, and adjudgeth it worthy of banishment
from the Hand of an Orator, and Rhet. Inst.
to be consined to the Theater, and the ridiculous Hands of Mimicks. Unless
it seem good to any to reserve it as a relic of Divine Courtship, which they
report the Polo^ians to do, who in their Churches at their holy mysteries, are
wont to beat their foreheads with the Hand.

Canon XXXI.
THe Thigh smitten with the Hand, was the gesture of one pleading more
vehemently, of one grieved and fuming with indignation, of one taking notice of
an others error, or confessing himself deceived.

Tullie believed that action of an Orator Cicero in Bruto and advers. M.
Callid.
feighned, who in some grievous matter deserving the sharpest hate and heaviest
indignation, did not use this expression; for he calls Callidius a cold and
dull Orator, and argues his guilt from hence, that in his Oration, Neque frons
percussa foret nec femur. The first Orator that used this gesture, Plu^arch in
Gracch.
by the testimony of the old Annals, was Cleon, who when he pleaded in Athens,
that famous mansion of the Muses, transported with a certain vehemency, and
provocation of spirit, and moved with indignation, smote his thigh, which when
he had vented with other such like signs of a fierce and turbulent
disposition, many wise men thought him to have thrust all decorum and ^^^^ible
moderation out of the Pulpit: This, many afterward did imitate, at the first
thought ill of for the novelty, but in the use of common life very frequent.
This gesture prudently, and with good advice exhibited, has a cunning force to
amplify and enlarge a thing, and to shake and astonish the minds of the
Auditors. Scopelianus a man of greatest account for eloquence, as Philostratus
has delivered it to posterity, that he might Philostratus lib. 1. de vita
Sophorum.
rowze up himself and his Auditors, now and then used this patheticall
demeanor of the Hand: This, as it was oftentimes necessary in the Forum, so
very fecible in those large pewes, where those that were retained in causes did
plead: but in our times, and the manner of pleading which we now use, it is
neither so frequent, neither can it so commodiously be done: But another thing
has succeeded in the room thereof, which the writings of the Ancients are
silent in; for the Advocates eagerly beat the Bar with their Hands, and
sometimes so madly and importunately, that the standers by heartily wish their
Hands qualified with some Chiragracall prohibition. This blemish and infirmity
of the Hand, has crept also into holy places, and there are many Preachers
found, who with an inconsiderate rashness shake the innocent Pulpit, while
they wax warm, and conceive a vehement action to excel. This action as it is
least unseemly when the wicked deceits and notorious dishonesties of men are
called in question, so used without judgment, it argues a turbulent and
furious motion of a vain mind, and dulls the Auditors.

Canon XXXII.
THe left hand thrust forth with the Palm turned backward, the left shoulder
raised, so that it may aptly consent with the head bearing to the Right Hand,
agrees with their intention who refuse, abhor, detest, or abominate some
execrable thing, against which their minds are bent as a distastefull object,
which they would seem to chase away, and repel.

With this Action these, and things of the like nature, are to be pronounced:
Haud equidem tali me dignor honor,
-- Dii talem terris avertite postem!


Canon XXXIII.
THe left hand explained into a Palm, obtaines a form of perspicuity.

These two last Canons are exceptions against the general maxim of Quintil.
Manus sinistra nunquam sola gestum facit.

Canon XXXIV
BOth the turned out Palms bent to the left side, is a more passionate form
of detestation, as being a redoubled action.

Canon XXXV.
BOth Hands objected with the Palms adverse, is a fore-right adjunct of
pronunciation, fit to help the utterance of words coming out in detestation,
despite and exprobration.

Canon XXXVI
BOth Hands extended forth, the Palms driving out to both sides, doubles the
Action to all the same intents and purposes of averseness.

Canon XXXVII
BOth Hands clasped and wrung together, is an Action convenient to manifest
grief and sorrow.

Canon XXXVIII.
BOth Hands dejected, make supplication more Canonical.

Canon XXXIX.
BOth Hands a little or far dis-joyned, show the manner and abundance.

Canon XL.
BOth Hands extended out forward together, is an Action commodious for them who
submit, invoke, doubt, speak to, accuse, or call by name, implore or attest.

With this Action are such as these to be set off to the best of utterance, Vos
Albani Tumuli atque Luci, vos, inquam, imploro atque obtestor! And that
addubitation of Gracchus, Quo me miser conferam? Cicer. pro Milone.
quo vertam? in Capitoliumne? at fratri^ sanguine redundat, an domum? etc. The
same emphasis of action is required to that of Cicero, Tu ex edito Idem pro
Milone.
monte latialis Jupiter, cujus ille lucos, nemora, sinesque saepe omni ne^ario
stupro and scelere macularat.

Canon XLI.
BOth Hands lightly smitten together, is convenient enough to express a
certain anxious and turbulent heat of cogitation of an Orator, that cannot
sufficiently explain his mind, or do as he would.

Cresollius conceives that infringere articulos, that Qintillian speaks of as
an elegant and comely action in the Hands of the ancient Rhetoricians, and so
commendable that they used it as a Manual introduction to their Orations, was
no other but this Action.

Canon XLII.
THe Hands gently set together by a sweet approach, causing a low sound by
their light encounter or complosion, make an opportune cadence of Action, to
attend the close or period of a sentence.

This Action was commended by the practice of Proaeresius that accomplished
Orator, of old time, the Master of brave speech, and grace in ready speaking,
who publicly pleaded his cause at Athens to the great admiration of all men,
of whom one of his Auditors, Eunapius, thus speaks: Proaeresius orditur flumen
quodaam orationis singulos periodos pulsu manum finiens.

Canon XLIII.
BOth Hands smitten together with a certain kind of gravity, does affirm
with Rhetorical asseveration.

Canon XLIV.
BOth the Palms held respective to the body, declare benevolence.

Canon XLV.
BOth Palms held averse before the Breast, denote commiseration.

This Action, with this signification, I have observed in some ancient painted
tables, the Hands of cunning Motists. And verily, without the knowledge of the
natural and artificial properties of the Hand, as Franciscus Junius well
observes, Francise. Jun. de pictura veterum.
it is impossible for any Painter, or Carver, or Plastique to give right
motions to his works or Hand; for as the History runs and ascribes passions
to the Hand, gestures and motions must come in with their accommodation. The
notions (therefore) of this Hand may be of good use for the advancement of
those curious Arts.

Canon XLVI.
THe Hands addressed to both sides, are well disposed to satisfy or to request.

Canon XLVII.
IF both Hands by turns behave themselves with equal Art, they fitly move to
set off any matter that goes by way of Antithesis or opposition.

Canon XLVIII
WE may use likewise the advantage of both Hands, when we would present by
some ample gesture the immensity of things; some spaces far and wide extent, a
great number, almost infinite, large affections, or when the voice is reiterate
by conduplication.

Canon XLIX.
BOth Hands modestly extended and erected unto the shoulder points, is a proper
form of public benediction, for the Hands of an Ecclesiastical Orator when
he would dismiss his Auditors.

It was the custom of the Hebrew Divines, to Godwin in his book of the
ancient rites of the Heb.
observe this Decorum in elevation of the Hands for solemn Benediction. And
the Romanists who in matter of ceremony much emulate the external devotion of
the Jew, in all their extensions and elevations of the Hand, which they use in
blessing, keep them within these prescribed bounds: Not that there is any
mystery in this point, only the elevation of the Hand declares that we have
chosen heavenly things, according to Origin, and the extension or spreading out
of Origin Hom. 11. in cap. 17. Exodus Basil in Isaiah. Tertul. de Orat. cap. 13.
Gavantus Comment in Rubricas Romans
the Hands signifies the effectual force of prayers, as Basil expounds it.
Tertullian therefore regulating the Hands in this rite to a decency of motion,
would have them temperately and modestly erected; whereupon it seems to me, the
Papists conforming their Rubrique to the Jewish Talmud, limit the Priests
Hands, not to overtop, or exceed the distance of the shoulders. This solemn
Action, according to some modern Expositors, implies the solemnity of a
presentation of the Auditors to God in prayer, and does denote unto them Gods
favorable goodness, ^ookers Eccles. polit.
protection, and spiritual Benediction, desires God to confirm the blessing
given, who opens with his Hands, and fills all creatures with his blessings,
and seems to wish the accomplishment of all that is comprised in their Manual
vote. That Priestly Blessing or solemn Benediction, with which the Priests
under the Law blessed the People, was apparently uttered and pronounced by this
advancement of Gesture: because they could not lay their Hands on all the
Congregation, they lifted them up only to the shoulderpoints: Godwins Jewish
Antiq.
the ordinary form that was then in use, was to impose the Hand, which could
not be done with any decent expedition: and this the Levites conferred face to
face, from the place where they stood. Such a solemn Benediction was that
where with Melchisedech is said to have blessed Abraham, when he met him in his
return Heb. 7. 7.
from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him. The like was practiced by
the Hand of Aaron, when he lift up his Hands toward the people, and blessed
them. And Simon the High Levit. 9. 22.
Priest, the son of Onias, in finishing the solemn service, lifted up his
Hands over the whole Congregation of the children of Israel, to give Ecclus.
50. 20. Psalm. 134.
the blessing of the Lord with his lips. The people bowing themselves, that
they might receive a blessing from the most High. The form of which solemn
Benediction the Psalmist gives us: Lift up your Hands to the Sanctuary, and
praise the Lord. The Lord that has made heaven and earth, Bless thee out of
Sion. For thus the Levites used to praise the Lord, and bless the People.
Spiritual Benediction having been ever accompanied with this sacred Manifesto
of the Hands. Hence we find it observed, that among the Hebrews of old, when
the Priest blessed the People, they used to erect three fingers, to wit, the
Thumb, the Index, and middle finger; by which number of their fingers they
tacitly employed a Secret of the Trinity. P^trus Blessensis seems to allude
to this action of the Hand. His Petr. Bless. Tract. contr. Jud. perfidiam.
Benedictionibus sacerdos alios Benedicens, protrusas ante vultum suum Palmas
utrasque tenebat. Cum vero dicebat, Dominus, quod and Hebraico illo trino and
uno nomine exprimebant, Tres digitos priores, id est, Policem, Indicem, and
Medium utriusque manus, rectum and altius erigebat, and dicto it a, Domino,
digitos remittebat ut prius. Addit statim: Quid per trium digitorum elevationem
melius quam Trinitatis Solomon Trecensis Comment in Script. idem testatur.
excellentia mystice intelligi potest? a qua scilicet vera and plena
Benedictio. A Gesture of the Hand, used in the same sense and signification, by
the Pope at this day: who when he is carried upon men's shoulders in solemn
procession, with the same posture of his Right Hand, and number of his fingers,
bestows his Canonical Benedictions upon the people, only waving them into a
Cross. Buxtorfius says, Buxtorf. ^n Synag. Jud.
that the modern Jews, at the feast of their Passover, when the Priest at the
end of their Prayers Blesses the people, he extends and spreads abroad his
Hands and Fingers, which they call Ch^^umim, whereupon Schechina or the Glory
and Majesty of God, does rest upon the Hands of the Priest: wherefore they
give a strict charge that none of the people presume to look upon their Hands
at that time, unless he would be imitten with blindness. And in the Feast of
Reconciliation, when the Priest pronounces the Blessing, he extends out his
Hands toward the people; the people presently hide their eyes with their
Hands, it being unlawful for any to behold the Hands of the Priest; as it is
written: Behold he stands behind the wall, he looks forth at the window,
showing himself through the Lattice: Cant. 2. 9.
That is, God stands behind the Priest, and looks through the windows and
lattices; that is, through the spread Hands, and dispersed Fingers of the
Priest, which the Hebrews cast the windows and lattices of the Gavantus in
Comment. in Rubric. Romans Eccl.
Hand. The Rubriques of the Romish Rites, which seem a little to squint this
way, prescribe three forms of Benediction for the Hands of the Priest. The
holding up of the Hands before the breast: The crossing of the Thumbes: and the
turning the little finger toward the people. All which have their several
seasons and significations in their Liturgy. Our blessed Savior was a
manifest observer of the Natural See Math. 10. 53. Luke 24. 50
form of Benediction, and has sanctified the Gesture to a more divine
importance. After Christ^ ascension, the Apostles communicating the virtue of
his last Benediction, to others; in the conveyances thereof used the same
expressions by gesture, and were famous for the effectual force of their
prospering Hands: their exemplary action was copied out by then successors, the
illustrious, Fathers of the Primitive Church, whose Hands preserved Blessing,
as their lips Knowledge. Christians in those ^ges being devoutly ambitious of
such benefits, thought themselves happy when they could receive this spiritual
favor at their Hands.

There is a story in Gregory Nyssen, of a Deacon of the Bishop of N^ocaesaria,
who in respect of Greg. Nyss. in vita Thaumaturgi.
the wonderful strange things which he wrought by his inspired Hands, was
surnamed Thaumaturgus. Which Deacon being to go a long and adventurous
journey, requested a Blessing at the Hands of his Dioce^an; who li^ting up his
Hands, most willingly bestowed this Manual viaticum upon him. This comfortable
elevation of the Hand in Benediction, has a force at this day in the Hands of
our Reverend Divines: And (verily) there is no Blessing formally conferred, or
authentically administered, unless the Hands denote their suffrages by their
visible attendance, and appear in a due conformity to the words ditected unto
the ear. And I never saw any Grave or Orthodox Divine from the Pulpit,
dismissing the People with a Blessing, without this adjunct and formal
concurrence of the Hands.

An Index to the following Rhetorical Alphabet of MANUAL Significations.
A Figures out the XIX Canon. B FIgures out the I Can. C FIgures out the II
Can. digit. D FIgures out the III Can. digit. E FIgures out the II Can. F
FIgures out the X Can. G FIgures out the IX Can. H FIgures out the VIII Can. I
FIgures out the XXVI Can. digit. K FIgures out the XI Can. L FIgures out the
XXIV Can. M FIgures out the XXXII Can. N FIgures out the XXXIII Can. O FIgures
out the VII Can. P FIgures out the XLVII Can. Q FIgures out the VIII Can.
Digit. R FIgures out the XLIV Can. S FIgures out the XLV Can. T FIgures out the
XLVIII Can. V FIgures out the XXXIV Can. W FIgures out the XXXV Can. X FIgures
out the XL Canon. Y FIgures out the XXXVII Can. Z FIgures out the XLIX Can.
The use of this following Table, besides the exhibition of the Manual Figures
of Rhetoric, may be for an Alphabet of Privy ciphers, for any kind of Secret
intimation.

To make up the Alphabet, C. D. I. Q. are taken in, out of those supernumerary
Gestures, following, under the Title of Indigitatio.

A Pacificat.


B Auditores mitigabit.


C Meotericis orditur.


D ad monstrandu^ valet.


E Modus agendi.


F Admiratur.


G Hortatur.


H Rations profert.


I Flocci facit


K Deprecatur


L Sic ostendebit seipsum.


M Negabit.


N perspicuitatem illustrat.


O Exclamationem aptat


P Antithes in exornat.


Q Argumenta digorit.


R Benovolentiam ostendit.


S Com^iserationem denotut.


T Im^ensitatem aperit.


V Valde aversatur.


W Execratione repellit.


X Addubitabit.


Y Dolebit.


Z Benedictione dimittit.




INDIGITATIO: Or, The CANONS of the Fingers.
Canon I.
THe two inferior Fingers shut in, and the other three presented in an eminent
posture in the extended Hand, is a speaking Action, significant to demand
silence, and procure audience.

The ancient Orators, when they prepared to speak to the incomposed
multitude, used this action. Of which gesture of the Fingers, Apuleius has
left a certificate, where Telephron, porrigit Apuleius lib. 2. Metamorph.
dextram, and instar oratorum conformat articulum, duobusque infimis conclusis
digitis, caeteros eminentes porrigit, and infesto pollice clementer subrigens,
i^sit. Fulgentius expounds this common fashion of the Hand after this manner,
Itaque compositus in dicendi modum erectisque in iotam duobus digitis, tertium
pollice comprimens, ita verba exorsus est, who differ not much, but that one
makes the Thumb erect, the other comprest. Many have made mention of this
matter, Libanius where he Libanius Curr. Heroum.
describes Nestor painted in the midst of the Hero's, Orationem apud ipsos
habere videbatur, idque significare conformatione digitorum, but what that
conformation of the Fingers was, he does not explain. But the most usual
garb of the Hand in way of preparative to speech, was this of Apuleius. Which
posture of the Hand preparing the Auditors attention, is found in many Statues
of the Ancients. There is a Colossus at Rome, which in times past stood in the
Baines of Anthony, the left hand whereof leans upon a club; but the two first
Fingers of the Right Hand extended out with the Thumb, such as of old time was
the gesture of Orators speaking, as Grutterus notes, which most authentical
copy of speech they seem to have followed, whose Grutterus in Sylloge inscript.
Hand the golden History of the Cross in Cheap was, for there were to be seen
two statues of mitred Prelates having their Hands figured in this manner, as if
they were speaking to the people. And in old hangings, in whose contexture,
most part of the Historical discourse is represented and insinuated by
gestures of the Hand: And in all ancient painted tables where any counterfeit
of speech is exhibited, nothing so obvious and remarkable as this Rhetorical
posture of the Fingers. And the inventions and painted Histories of our modern
Artists in their representations of speech had in public, have a constant
relation and respect unto this ancient form of the Fingers. And over the
ancient images of the Prophets, which pollished by the Hands of the Jesuits,
come over to us from the Mart, there is usually a Hand extended out of Heaven,
impail'd about with rays, the Fingers retaining this gesture, as it were the
Index of God speaking to his Prophets, as He was wont to do of old, when He
stirred up their hearts, and suggested His sacred Oracles unto them. For since
they could not by any fitting semblance or fancied pourtraiture of inventive
wit, describe God as He is in Himself; lest impiety should have tainted their
imagination, and they should seem to make the Prophet equal to his God, they
would not by a gross description shadow out God speaking Face to face, because
the Face presents the Person, Nudam Divinam Essentiam, as Brixian; clearly as
he is in Himself: but He Ric^hiard Brixian Symb.
has never been seen in that manner by dream or vision of His Seers, nor is
it possible any mortal eye should endure the infinite luster of so great a
Majesty: therefore to evade the profaneness of that presumptuous error, they
only displaied a Hand from Heaven, to that intent of signification, as a more
lawful note, and as it were a member more remote from the face; and because
the Hand is the Index, and sign of inspiration, and that Divine power and
impulsive ravishment wherewith the Prophets were raised up to Prophecy. For,
Prophecy if it be strong, with the Hebrews it is called the Hand, as Ribera
observes; Ribera Comment in Proph. minor.
in which sense the Hand of God is taken in diverse places of So 2 King 3. 15. 2 Chronicles. 30. 12. Isa. 8. 11. Ezekiel. 1. 3. 3 14. and 22 8. 1. 33. 22 37. 1. 40. 1
etc.
Scripture; for the Prophets used to call that Spirit the Hand of God which
fell upon them when He did inspire their disposed souls, and heating them with
the ravishing influence of a Prophetique fire, by a terrible illustration,
filled them strangely full of His revealed will. Cornelius a Lapide affirms
himself to have seen the like description of the Prophets in the ancient
Bibles of the Vatican Library; and in his Comment upon the four greater
Prophets, Cornel. a Lapide Comment in 4 Proph major.
he has prefixed to their Prophesies their several effiges after the same
manner; which, as it is probable, were copied out of the Vatican Bibles.

Canon II.
THe Thumb erect, the other Fingers gently bent in, is a convenient
composition of the Hand for an exordium, and to lead to the forming of the
other actions of the Hand; often used by our modern Chironomers.

Canon III.
IF any thing be to be showed, the Thumb must be bent in, the other four
Fingers remiss.

Canon IV.
THe Index joined to the Thumb, the other Fingers remiss, is another form of
the Hand, fit for an exordium.

Canon V.
THe middle Finger applied unto the Thumb, the other three let loose, is a
fashion of the Hand, most of all commodious for a Proem.

This Action must be performed with a gentle motion to both sides, the Hand a
little put forth, the Head together with the shoulders, with a shrinking
modesty, regarding that part to which the Hand is carried. In Narration the
same gesture, but a little more produced and certain; in Exprobration and
arguing, sharp and instant; for in these parts of an Oration it is put forth
longer, and appears in a larger extent. Which should be the best Rhetorical
figure of the Hand to frame it to express by Art what it cannot so well
insinuate by Nature; neither by the use and practice of experienced and
eloquent men that now are, nor by any advertisement of the Ancients can be
certainly collected, since they differ much about the matter; some pronounce
with the unfolded Hand, these holding it downwards, others contract it, and
make thereof a Fist; some frame their action by the fourth Canon, some by the
fifth Canon: Which Quintilian commends above all other forms allowed to be of
any moment, to set a gloss or vernish upon discourse. So many Orators, so
many varying and different forms of speaking. But Cresollius whose judgment
is Oracular in Cresol. de gest. orat. lib. 2.
such matters, conceives that posture best observed by an Orator, that when
he pronounces with the open Hand, held abroad, and set at liberty, he would
not hold it wholly down, nor altogether upwards, but in a certain mean, which
as it is (according to the opinion of Physicians) most natural, as he notes it
out of the two grand Patriarchs of Physic, so it seems Hippoc. l. de
fractis, and Galen de motu Musculorum l. 2.
to him most easy and agreeable to modesty, although this ought to be in
common use, yet upon occasion the Hand may fall into the other postures.

Canon VI.
THe two middle Fingers brought under the thumb, is an Action more instant and
importunate, and does urge more then is convenient for an Exordium or Narration.

Canon VII.
THE top of the Forefinger moved to join with the nail of the Thumb that is
next unto it, the other fingers in remitter, is opportune for those who relate,
distinguish, or approve. It Is also fit for them that mildly council, and
becomes the phrases of pompous Elocution, with which Rhetoricians polish and
enrich their Orations. It Is seasonable also for Narrations and Panegyriques,
where a soft and pellucid Oration flows with the copious streams of
Eloquence, and it availes in any painted kind of speech, and agrees with an
Epidixis.

Cresollius commends this composition of the Fingers, as most comely of all
others, and consonant to ingenious dispositions, if the arm be extended out
fore-right, which best agrees with a manly and courageous speech: or the Arm a
little bent and the Hand lifted up before; a gesture much affected by elegant
men.

Canon VIII.
THe two last Fingers drawn to the bottom of Cytherea's brawny hill, or the
pulpe of the Thumb; the Thumb apprest unto the middle joint of the two next: if
the Dexter Hand so formed, do smite with a light percussion on the sinister
Palm, it does conspicuously distribute and digest the numbers, arguments, and
members of an Oration.

Canon IX.
THe top of the Thumb joined to the middle of the nail of the Right Index, the
other Fingers remiss; is fit to distinguish contraries.

Canon X.
THE left Thumb pressed down by the Index of the Right Hand, does urge and
instantly enforce an argument.

Canon XI.
THE top or grape of the left Index gently apprehended, puts the Hand into a
Rhetorical shape for disputation.

Canon XII.
THE middle joint of the left Index apprehended, intends more earnestnes, and
sublimates the sense of words unto a point of greater vehemency.

Canon Canon XIII.
THE upper joint of the Index apprehended, the two next Fingers a little bowed,
the eare-finger in the mean time scarce bent at all; has a Rhetorical force
in Disputations.

Canon XIV.
THE Mid-finger pressed to the Palm, and the others at their own behest, makes
the Hand competently apt for to upbraid.

Canon XV.
THE two Middle-fingers bent inward, and their Extremes presented in a fork,
does object a scoff, and does contumeliously reproach.

Canon XVI.
THE Vice-hand, or Thumb, extended out with the Eare-Finger, the other Fingers
drawn in; does denote amplitude.

Canon XVII.
THE Thumb that presents it self upright, out of a Righthand bent into a
Fist; is a grave Masculine action, fit to advance the sense of Magnanimity.

Canon XVIII.
THE Thumb turned out, by a received custom, is made an act of Demonstration.

Canon XIX.
THe three last Fingers contracted close to the Palm, and compressed by the
Champion of the Hand, and the Index displayed in full length; upbraides: is a
point of indigitation, most demonstrative.

The force in this indicatorie action, Antonie Anton. (...). de Orat.
noted Crassus to have skilfully used to his purpose, in expressing his earnest
grief, and the vehement affection of his mind: Quae me hercule, Crasse, cum a
te tractantur in causis horrere soleo; tanta vis animi, tantus dolor, oculis,
vultis, gestis, Digito denique isto tuo, significari solet. Other very
excellent Pleaders, imitated this notable gift of Nature, or exquisite
endeavor and affection of Art, in that wealthy Orator; as we may gather out
of the monuments of the Ancients. To whom (says Cresollius) thus speaking, we
may cry out; as Seneca reports a faire-spoken Orator Seneca l. 8 Contro.
once did in a certain Declamation of his: O Digitum multa significantem!

Canon XX.
THe Index erected from a Fist, does crave and expect attention; and, if moved,
it does threaten and denounce.

Canon XXI.
THe Index advanced from a sist, and inclined respective to the shoulder; has
a great faculty to confirm, collect and refute.

This seems to be that Action, which Tertullian says, Hermogenes was wont to
use; to wit, Tertul. ^d Hermog. cap. 27.
Nutu Digiti accommodato: and he calls it, Lenocinium pronunciationis. Indeed,
this Action can do much in gathering together, and reciting the matter to be
debated and concluded by reason; to wit, when that, we take up from others, is
such, as cannot be denied, and does seem necessarily to follow, especially in
Controversies and Disputations, when the falsitie of erroneous opinions, are
with great gravitie of speech and asseveration refuted: in which case
Cresollius dares pronounce that of Phrynicus in the Comoedie; Stimulum and
aculeum quendam habent in Athen. l. 4.
Digitis.


Canon XXII.
THe Jndex (the rest composed into a Fist) turned down perpendicular; does
urge, inculcate and drive the point into the heads of the Auditors.

Canon XXIII.
BOth the Indexes joined, and pyramidically advanced; do exalt the Force that
flows from more splendid and glorious Elocution

Canon XXIV.
BOth the Indexes, with a countenance averse, directed to one side, do point
out an ironicall intention.

This Action although it may with honesty enough be done by an Orator, yet to
do it often, and to charge them strongly and vehemently against them that are
present, as if he would dig out the eyes of his Auditory: Cresollius makes a
question whether such may be thought less out of their wits then that
miserable matron Hecuba, who with great force and violence flew upon
Polymnestor: -- Et digitos in per^ida lumina condit: Ovid. l. 13 Metamor.

Or ever a whit modester then Cleodemus, Qui intento digito Zenothenidi oculum
effodit in convivio; for this is rather the garb of those who rage Lucian in
Convivio.
and rave like mad men, then of those who with understanding and moderation
exercise the faculty of the Hand in speaking.

Canon XXV.
THE Middle Finger put forth, and brandished in extent, is an action fit to
brand and upbraide men with sloth, effeminacie, and notorious vices.

This action is Magistrall in Rhetorique, but grounded upon Nature: for this
Finger, as some Chiro Crittiques was for its sloth and unactivenesse placed in
the midst, as seeming to stand in need of the defense of the other
neighboring Fingers, and being longer then the rest, length and laziness
going usually Hand in Hand, it may help to relate in a more open way of
expression, the notoriousnesse of their vices, who exceed others in vildenesse
as far as this idle Finger appears eminent above the rest.

Canon XXVI.
THe middle Finger strongly comprest by the Thumb, and their collision
producing a flurting sound, and the Hand so cast out, is an Action convenient
to slight and undervalue, and to express the vanity of things, in searching
after which things, and the immoderate care of keeping them, the industry and
strength of most men's wit are impertinently exercised and spent.

Cresollius though he give a tolleration to this knacking adjunct of
expression, yet he would have it sparingly used, and adds in an assembly of the
people, for in the solemn Session of learned and judicious men, this action,
perchance, as taken from the scene and Hands of Mimiques, is to be rejected,
and left unto the customary levity of men.

Canon XXVII.
IF the Ring Finger by a single Action go out of the open Hand, as it were to
serve the Tact, it may much advance their utterance, who in discourse touch and
handle a matter lightly.

This is a Magistrall notion of my own, never thought on by any Ancient or
Modern Rhetorician, for all I can find, (unless Inst. Rhet. lib. 11.
Quintilians Interim Quartus oblique reponitur, darkely allude unto it) but,
grounded upon the same principles of observation as all their precepts of
gesture are. Galen says this is the Finger we use to put out when we would
touch any thing lightly; and the ancient Physicians used Galen de usu part.
gently to stir their cordialls; and Collyriums with this Finger, thence called
Medicus, upon which ground of Nature, I was induced to cast in my mite into the
treasury of this Art.

Canon XXVIII
THe Ear Finger appearing erect out of a bended Fist, does by that action
obtain a force to explain more subtle things.

Canon XXIX.
THe Right Index, if it Marshal-like go from Finger to Finger, to note them
out with a light touch, it does fit their purpose who would number their
arguments, and by a visible distinction set them all on a row upon their
Fingers.

Hortensius the Orator was wont after this manner to set his arguments all on
a row upon his Fingers: But although he excelled in this way of numbering, and
dividing arguments upon his Fingers, yet others used that fashion also, the
Fingers having been devoted after a certain manner for the numbering of things
by an universal and natural custom; as we may learn out of St. Hierom, for
he speaking of a S Hierom Epist. 51.
certain smatterer in learning swollen with a conceit of his own skill, Cum
caepissit in digitis partire causam, etc. And Tully significantly to Tullie
Divin. in Verrem.
the same purpose, Quid? cum accusationis tuae membra dividere caperit, and in
digitis suis singulas parts causae constituere? Quintilian denies thi^ gesture
admittance to the Hand in a mournful cause, perchance, because it seems to
have a certain splendor and elegancie of Artifice, Ansi de morte silii sui,
vel injuria quae morte sit gravior dicendum patri fuit, aut argumenta diducet
in digitos, aut propositionum ac partitionum captavit leporem? This gesture of
the Hand is not to be used unless the distinctions and distributions be
substantial and weighty, being things of great moment which we desire, should
fix and take deep impression in the minds of men, and of which we are
accurately and subtly to dispute, for in this case it is advantageous to use
the Fingers. It seems probable to Cresollius that Tully used this gesture when
he made mention to the Romans of the honorable Cicero pro lege manil.
Captain, in whom he did note these four notable things, Scientiam rei
militaris, virtutem, autoritatem, and faelicitatem, which he afterward
amplified distinctly and particularly, with a most high and rich variety of
utterance. This numeration by the Fingers, does likewise avail in an Epilogue,
and Anachephalasis, as when we reckon up all the chief heads and aides of a
matter in question, which have been brought in and alleged for the advancement
of truth, or which have been evidently refuted or proved. Hence in the
Areopagetique Schools or Councel-house at Athens, they painted Chrisippus with
his Fingers in this posture, for the signification of numbers; and our modern
Artists when they would exhibit Arithmeticke counting, observe the same gesture
of the Fingers. Such a Statue of Arithmeticke there is in the new Ovall
Theater, lately erected for the dissecting Anatomies in Barber-Surgeons Hall in
London.

Canon XXX.
TO lift up, or put forth some of the Fingers, is a plain way of Rhetorical
Arithmeticke fit to signify a small number, a simple action serving well
enough their occasions who would inculcate two or three chief points to an
ignorant multitude.

Roscius made use of this Arithmeticall intimation instead of speech, when he
rose to speak against the Laws Gabinius had propounded for Pompeyes Authority
against the Pirates: for Plutarch in the life of Pompey
when he could have no audience, and that he saw he could not be heard, he
made a sign with his Fingers that they should not give Pompey alone this
Authority but join another unto him; while he was signifying this by the
gesticulation of his Hand, the people being offended with him, made such a
threatening out^rie upon it, that a Crow flying over the Marketplace at that
instant was stricken blind, and fell down among the people. Then Roscius held
not only his ^ion lib. 36. de Bello Pyratico.
Tongue, but his Hand also. This is most properly performed by the Fingers of
the left hand. Cresollius commends this way of numeration in the Hands of our
modern Divines. So some of the Fathers when they did expound the mystery of
the Sacred Trinity, they lifted up three Fingers of the Right Hand. But this
simple way of computation has been entertained since the ancient manner of
account has grown somewhat out of use. For, the ancient Rhetoricians who
lived in that age wherein Wit and Industry were in their prime taking their
hint from Nature, by an accommodation of Art reduced all numbers into gestures
of the Hand, which did represent as it were the lively images of numbers: And
this Art of Manual Rhetoric was so punctually observed by the ancient
Rhetoricians, that it was accounted a great absurdity and disparagement to them
that erred through a false and indecent gesture of computation, as appears
plainly by Quintilian who gives in this testimony Quintil. Rhet Inst. lib. 1.
c. 10
thereof; In causis Actor si digitorum incerto aut indecoro gestu a
computatione dissentit, judicatur indoctus. And Apuleius reprehends this in
Ruffinus the Lawyer, for that by a deceitful gesture Apul. in Apolog. lib. 2.
of his Fingers he added twenty years: Whose words alluding to the same
Arithmeticall expressions run thus: Si tringinta annos per december dixisses,
possis videri pro computationis gestu errasse, Idem Apologia l. ^
quos circulares debueris digitos aperuisse. Quin vero qua ^r^ginta, quae
facilius caeteris porrecta palmula significantur, ea quadraginta tu dimidio
a^ges; non potes digitoru^ gestu errasse, nisi forte triginta annorum
Pudentilla ratus, cujusque anni Consules ^umerasti. This Manual Arithmeticke
was much in use with the Ancients, as appears by the frequent allusions to it
in Authenticke Authors, the knowledge whereof will bring much light to many
obscure and difficult places which occur in diverse old Writers, which cannot
be understood without the knowledge of this Manual Arithmetic. To trace it a
little through the gloomie (...). Senec. Epist. 88.
walks of Antiquity. Thus Seneca: Numerare docet me Arithmetica avarici^
accommodare digitos. Tertullian thus: Cum digitorum supputatoriis gesticulis
Tertul. Apol. c. 90 Mart. Capel. l. 2. de nupt. Phil. and Merc. Plin. Jun.
Epist. 20. lib. 2. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 53. Plutarch in Apoth.
assidendum. Martian. Capella thus: In digitos calculumque distribuit. The
younger Pliny thus: Componit vultum, intendit oculos, movet labra, agitat
digitos, nihil computat. St. Augustine thus: Omnium vero de hac re calculantium
digitos resolvit,, and quiescere jubet. Orontes, son in law to King Artaxerxes
was wont to compare Courtiers, Computatorum digitis; for like as they make a
Finger sometimes stand for one, another time for ten thousand; even so those
that be about Princes at one time, can do all at once, and another time as
little or rather just nothing. And Quintilian in disallowing one of those
numericall Quintil. Inst. Rhet. lib. 11.
gestures to be used to a Rhetorical intention, acknowledges the
Arithmeticall force and validity thereof. To these allusions appertains that of
I know not what Poet: Utile sollicitis computat articulis.
Hence grew the Adage, Ut in Digitos mittere: that Erasm. Adage.
is, to number in the most accurate and exact way.

Their manner was, to reckon upon the Left Hand, until they came to 100. and
from thence began to reckon upon their Right Hand. Solomon is thought to allude
to this, where he faith, Prove. 3. 16.
Wisdom comes with length of days upon her Right Hand: meaning (as some
expound that Salazar super hoc multa ingeniose. Godwyn antiq. Jud. Pier. in
Hierogl.
place) that Wisdom should make them live a long age, even to an 100 years.
Pierius in affirmation of this artificial way of account, brings in a
facetious Epigram of one Nicharchus a Greek Poet, jesting at Cotyttaris, an
old Hagg, who dissembling her true age, began again to number her years upon
her left Hand. The epigram rendered by him in latin, runs thus:

Multum garrula anus, caput omne Cotyttaris alba,
Propter quam Nestor non sit adhuc senior.
Quae cervos annis superavit, quaeque sinistra
Vitae iterum caeptet connumerare dies.
Vivit adhuc, cernit, pede firma est, virginis instar,
Plutonem ut dubites passum aliquid gravius.
To this, Juvenal speaking of the long life of

Nestor, does also allude. Satyr.

Rex Pylius magno si quicquam credis Homero,
Exemplum vitae fuit a Cornice secund^,
Faelix nimirum, qui tot per secula vitam,
Distulit, atque suos jam Dextra computat annos.
Chrysologus upon the Parable of the 100 sheep, Chrysol. in P^r^^. centum o^ium.
has a most excellent conjecturall meditation, alluding to this artificial
Custom. Which of you having a 100 sheep, and if he lose one, etc. Why not 50?
why not 200? but 100. Why not 4? why not 5? but 1. And he shows, that he
grieved more for the number, than the loss; for the loss of one, had broke
the century, and brought it back from the Right hand to the left, shutting up
his account in his Left hand, and left him nothing in his Right, etc. The first
posture in the Right hand, wherein the Eare-finger is circularly bent Beda de
Indig. and Scholiast. J. Novi^ in ag.
in; by Bid is referred to Virgins, as that which expresses, as it were, the
Crown of Virginity. The Gesture [Thirty] is referred to Marriage; for the very
Conjunction of the fingers, as it were, with a soft kiss embracing and
coupling themselves, paints out the Husband and Wife. S. Hierome, willing to
explain the reason why Hier. l. 1. in Jovian. in princip.
S. Paul would have a widow indeed, chosen not under 60 years of age: to show
why this number is so properly referred to widows, very learnedly betakes
himself unto the Hieroglyphique of this number, wherein the Thumb i^ deprest
by the upper Finger, and very straightly girded by the same: It shows (says
he) in what streights Widowhood is afflicted, which is so restrained in on
every side. Capella bringing in Mart. Capella, l. 7. de Nupt. Plut. and Merc.
in principio.
Arithmetique, at the marriage of Philologie; and Mercury describing the
posture of her Fingers: Digiti vero Virginis recursantes, and quadam
incomprehensae mobilitatis scaturigine vermiculati. Qu^ mox ingressa
septingentos december, and septem numeros complicatis in eo digitis Jovem
salutabunda subrexit. Which made the Numbers 70. and 17. And Philosophy
standing by, Tritonides enquires of her what Arithmetique might mean by those
postures of her Fingers? To whom Pallas: She Salutes Jove by his proper name.
And indeed, the Manual number, 70. was the ancient posture of adoration; which
was, the saluting Finger laid over-thwart the Thumb; Made more apparent by
Apuleius, speaking of the adorers of Venus, Et admoventes oribus sui^ dextram
Priore digito Apuleius in Metam. lib. 4.
in erectum pollicem residente, ut ipsam prorsus deam Venere^ religiosis
adorationibus venerabantur. Many of these Numericall postures of the Fingers,
are found in the statues of the Ancients. Witness that image of Janus, with two
faces, dedicated Pliny, Not. Hist. and Macr. in Saturnal. lib. 1.
in the Capitol, by King Numa; the Fingers of whose Hands were in such sort
fashioned and formed, that they represented the number, 365. which are the
days of the whole year: by which notification of the year, he showed
sufficiently, that he is the god and Patron of times and ages. Pierius
endeavors to represent the Posture of his Fingers, by a verbal description.
And it was the custom, to place the ensigns of Honor on the more honorable
Hand, and to Pier. in Hierogl. lib. 37.
figure the left Hand of Orators, and other great men, to note out the first,
second, or third time of their access unto that Office or Dignity.

These postures, devised by a happy dexterity of wit, were recorded among the
Egyptian Letters or Hieroglyphics, as unfit to be prostituted to the Vulgar,
in regard they did allude to all the Pythagoricall secrets of Numbers, insomuch
as the Caveat of Pythagoras might have been placed over the
Rhetorique-School-doore of the Ancients: Nemo Arithmeticae [Manualis] ignarus
hic ingrediatur. And the Notions of this Art are not only necessary to
Orators, but to all men, especially the Sons of Art, although by the
carelessness and negligence of men, it is grown somewhat out of use. In the
practice of this Art, some follow Bid, others embrace a more probable way of
account. Some follow the order of Irenaeus the Divine, a man of great Iraeneus.
in Valent. lib. 1. c. 13.
learning and general parts, who flourished some ages before Bid. But among
the modern, Lucas Minoritanus is above comparison the best, who has a most
absolute Tract of this argument.

A 1
G 100
N 10
T 1000
B 2
H 200
O 20
V 2000
C 3
I 300
P 30
W 3000
D 4
K 400
Q 40
X 4000
E 5
L 500
R 50
Y 5000
F 6
M 600
S 60
Z 6000
7
700
70
7000
8
800
80
8000
9
900
90
9000


PARALIPOMENON.
THey who desire a more complete account of this Art, so far forth as this
Chirogram may seem defective; as the continuation of the account from 10 to
19. as the numbers, 11. 12. 13. 14, etc. To satisfy their curiosity, may
consult with Pierius in his Hieroglyphiques. And Beda Indigit.
if they would know the greater numbers, as the manner of computing from a
Myriad, to wit, 10000. unto 100000. may advise with Reverend Bid, who has
written a whole Book de Indigitatione, or the Ancient manner of computation by
gestures of the Fingers: and is the Bapt. Port. de furt. lit. not. Plautus
Milit. Act 2. Sc. 2
man (as it is thought) to whom we owe the preservation of this subtle piece of
Hand-learning; which he may find transcribed in Baptista Porta, in Furtivis
literarum notis.

Plautus alludes to the Grand Account thus: Pectus Digitis pultat, cor credo
ev^caturus for as.
Ecce autem avertit nixus, laevam in faemore habet manum.
Dextra digitis rationem computat, ferion^ f^mur.


An Index to the following Alphabet of Action, or Table of Rhetorical
INDIGITATIONS.
A Figures out the I Canon. B Figures out the IV Canon. C Figures out the V
Canon. D Figures out the VI Can. E Figures out the VII Can. F Figures out the
VIII The verbal periphrasis of the gesture F, by accident has been
overslipped: but the Plate speaks Canonically for it self. It is one of
Quintilians Gestures, which he observes the Greeks much to use (even with both
Hands) in their Enthymemes, when they chop, as it were, their Logic, and
inculcate and knock it down, as with a horn.
Can. G Figures out the XXX Can. H Figures out the XIII Can. I Figures out the
XII Can. K Figures out the XVIII Can. L Figures out the XVII Can. M Figures out
the XIX Can. N Figures out the XX Can. O Figures out the XXI Can. P Figures out
the XXII Can. Q Figures out the XXIII Can. R Figures out the XXIV Can. S
Figures out the XXVII Can. T Figures out the XXVIII Canon. V Figures out the XV
Canon. W Figures out the X Canon. X Figures out the XXIX Canon. Y Figures out
the XVI Canon. Z Figures out the IX Canon.
This following Table does not only serve to express the Rhetorical postures
of the Fingers; but may be used as Ciphers for private ways of Discourse or
Intelligence.

A Audientiam facit.


B Quibusdem orditur.


C Exordium accomodat.


D Instabit.


E Approbabit.


F Enthymemata tundit.


G Distinguet


H Disputabit.


I Acrius Argumentatur.


K Demonstrat.


L Magnanimitatem ostendit.


M Indigitat.


N Attentionem poseit.


O Colligit.


P Urgebit.


Q Splendidiora explicat.


R Ironiam ostendit.


S Leviter tangit


T Subtiliora explicat


V Exprobrabit


W Arguebit


X Mem: orati: distribuit


Y Amplitudinem denotat.


Z Contraria distinguet




THE APOCHRYPHA OF ACTION: Or, certain Prevarications against the Rule of
Rhetorical Decorum, noted in the Hands of the Ancient and Modern ORATORS.
Praevaricationu^ Sect. 1.
TO use any Grammatical gestures of compact, or any snapping of the Fingers,
or amorous intimations invented by Lovers of old, is very unsuitable to the
gravity of an Orator. The natural discourses of the Hand being so plain to
be understood, the Ancients assayed to find out in the Hand a more close and
private way, contriving by a close compact how men might signify their minds;
a kind of speaking, used by such who would not openly express themselves, yet
in a dumb and wary kind of signing, intimate their intention, an Art first
found out and exercised by Lovers, when with great caution they would present
their affections, and make their Fingers convey a message from their heart. Of
these cautionarie notes of Lovers, Ovid that grand Master of love knacks, and
amorous expressions, affordes us many touches: Nil opus est digitis per quos
arcana loquaris. Ovid de Art. Amand.

And in another place: -- Et in digitis litera nulla fuit.
And again glancing at the same Grammatical expressions, he says; -- Nec vos
Lib. 2. de Art. Amand.

Excipite arcana verba notata manu.
And instructing his Mrs. in the way of tacit conferences:

Verba legis digitis verba notata mero.
Cum tibi succurrit veneris lascivia nostrae
Purpureas tenero pollice tange genas.
Si quid erit de me tacita quod mente loquaris,
Pendeat extrema mollis ab aure manus.
Cum tibi quaefaciam mea Lux dicamve placebunt,
Versetur digitis annulus usque tuis.
Tange manu mensam, tangunt quo more praecantes,
Optabis merito cum mala multa viro.
And to this kind of amorous discourse by speaking Idem. l. 1. de Trist.
signs, that of his refers: Utque refert digitis saepe est nutuque locutus.
To which Propertius also alludes: Aut tua quum digitis scripta silenda notas.
Propert. l. 3. Ennius in Tatentil.

To this is referred that which Ennius speaks of a certain impudent
Companion, who had no part of his body free from some shameless office or
other, his words are these: Quasi in choro pila ludens datatim dat sese, and
communem facit, alium tenet, aliis nutat, alibi manus est occupata, aliis
pervellit pedem, aliis dat annulum expectandum a labris, alium invocat, cum
alio cantat, attamen aliis ^at digito Salom. Proverb. 6. 13.
literas. And Solomon alluding to these kind of expressions, He winketh with
his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with his Fingers. Sometimes
the Ancients did to this purpose of secrecy and private communication, order
an Alphabet upon the joints of their Fingers, which Artifice of Arthrologie
obtained a privy force by showing those letters by a distinct and Grammatical
succession. Amongst which Grammars by gestures, The postures of the Fingers
which appertain to the old Manual Arithmeticke, have been contrived into an
Alphabet, of which way of intimation, Baptista Porta has treated at Bapt. Por
ta de fur. lit. notis.
large. To the same intent the Natural and Rhetorical postures of this Hand
may be reduced into mystique Alphabets, and be very significantly used for
ciphers without any suspicion. Sometimes of old they used for a light
watchword a snapping collision of the Fingers called Crepitus Digitorum, which
imperious way of silent expression, and the phrase whereof is used for a
hyperbolicall diminitive of the least signification. Lyra Lyra in Prove. 6. 13
in his learned descant upon the Proverbs harping upon this string, The
unthrifty and wicked man instructs with his Fingers, says, Digito loqui,
arrogantiam and superbiam indicat. And St. Hierom in a certain Epistle, says,
Superbiae est signum cum quis per digitorum crepitum vult intelligi. The
notification and sound of this arrogant gesture, was reckoned among the
nocturnall and dark signs of Lovers. Masters also by this snapping of their
Fingers used to call their servants, upon the hearing of which watchword, they
were to be presto and at Hand to execute their dumb commands. To this custom
I find that of Petronius referred, Trimalcio lautissimus homo digitis
concrepuit, ad quod signum matellam Petron Arbiter Satyr.
Spado ludenti supposuit, exonorata ille vescica, etc. To this also belongs
that of Tibullus: Et votet ad digiti me taciturna sonum. Tibullus Eleg. In
Epigram.

To which Martial likewise alludes Dum poscor [crepitu digitoru^] and verna
moratur,
O quotiens pellex culcitra facta me est.
And in another place: Digiti crepantis signa novit Eunuchus.
Which custom the Christian Pedagoge would have excluded from the Hands of men
piously affected, whose mind Clemens Alexandrinus has Lib. 2. c. 7. Paedag.
expounded thus: Digiti expressi soni, quibus accersuntur famuli, cum sint
rationis exportes significationes, ratione praeditis hominibus vitandi sunt.
This kind of commanding gesture is most common to the Spaniard, whose humor
is only a medley of arrogance and imperious pride, whence he is Palomatius in
proport.
most commonly detested of all Nations, for his natural odious desire of
sovereignty over others. And the Romans, the ancient Lords and Masters of the
World grown insolent by the greatness of their Empire, could well skill of
this proud intimation of their Fingers. For, Tacitus tells us, that the
innocence of Pallas was not so grateful Tacitus Annal. lib. 13.
to the people of Rome, as his insupportable pride was odious. For when some of
his freedmen were said to have been privy to the practice of a conspiracy
against Nero, he made answer, that in his house he appointed nothing to be
done, but with a nod of his Hand or head, or by writing, if he had much to say,
lest if he should have spoken unto them, he should seem to have made them his
fellows. Some Orators of old affected this percussion or knacking with the
Fingers, both to procure audience, to maintain their authority, and for the
signification of gravity; of which custom many Authors make mention,
especially St. Hierom, for so he has left it written: D. Hieron Epist. 101.
Et audet quidam ex iis adducto supercilio and [concrepantibus digitis]
eructare and dicere. And in another Idem Epist. ad Rusticum Monach.
place speaking of that jangling fellow Grunnius, he has this, Cum mensa
posita librorum exposuisset struem, adducto supercilio, contractisque naribus,
and front corrugata, [digitulis concrepabat,] hoc signo ad audiendum
discipulos provocans, etc. And of this custom, Veleius Longus is to be
understood, In Orthograph.
Digitorum sono pueros ad respondendum ciemus: So that this gesture has
traveled from the business of common and individual life, into Schools,
Auditories, and Common Pleas; for, this knacke of the Fingers was got in use
with many, so that [Digitis concrepare] seems to have been used by the Learned,
pro re facilima. So in the judgment of Cresollius, Tullie disputing of his
Offices, takes Cicero l. 3 de officiis.
it, Itaque si vir bonus, habeat hanc vim, ut si [digitis concrepuerit] possit
in locupletum testamenta nomen ejus irrepere. For, this gesture was performed
in entering upon inheritances: they who did desire to try their title, and take
possession of an inheritance, they signified their mind by this percussion of
the Fingers, which was the usual symboll as Cujacius says; for this Percussio
digitorum Cujacius observat lib. 3. c. 18.
(as Cresollius rightly collects) is altogether the same with [crepitus
digitorum] or digiti concrepantes, which may be very clearly gathered out of
Tullie, where when he had said, Si vir bonus habeat hanc vim, ut si digitis
concrepuerit, etc. a Tul. lib. 3. de. offi^
little after touching the same string, he has it thus: Quem Paulo ante
singebam digitorum percussione haereditates omnium posse adse'convertere, etc.

Praevar. Sect. 2.
THe gestures of one requiring the Cup, or threatening stripes, or the
numericall gesture which with the Thumb bended in, and reaching to the mount
of Mercury, makes the number 5000. according to the computation of Manual
Arithmeticke, are gestures that have been noted by some Writers, but yet so
uncomely, that Quintilian never observed them in the Hand of Quintil. Institut.
Rhet. l. 11
any Rustique.

Praevar. Sect. 3.
TO stretch out the Hands in length to a racked extent, or to erect them upward
to their utmost elevation, or by a repeated gesture beyond the left shoulder,
so To throw back the Hands, that it is scarce safe for any man to remain
behind them. To thrust out the Arm, so that the side is openly discovered, or
To draw sinister circles, or rashly To fling the Hand up and down to endanger
the offending of those that are nigh; are all Prevarications in Rhetoric,
noted and condemned by Quintilian.

Praevar. Sect. 4.
TO throw down the Hand from the Head, with the Fingers formed into a gripe or
scratching posture; or To use the action of one that Saws or Cuts; or of one
dancing the Pyrrhique lyard; or To throw it upwards with the Palm turned up,
are actions prevaricant in Rhetoric, and condemned by Quintilian.

Prevar. Sect. 5.
TO represent a Physician feeling the pulse of the arteries, which with them is
manum mittere in carpum; or To show a Lutenist striking the chords of an
instrument, are kind of expressions to be avoided; for an Orator should be
far from any light imitation of a Dancer, and is not permitted to show what
he speaks, but his gesture must more express his sense, then his words.

Praevar. Sect. 6.
TO denounce with a high Hand, or To erect a Finger to its utmost possibility
of extension, is a blemish in the Hand of an Orator; That habit which the
peacemakers of old were painted and See Picr. in Hierogl lib. 35.
carved in, wherein the Head inclined to the Right Shoulder, the Arm stretched
out from the Ear, the Hand extended out with the Thumb manifestly apparent,
which most pleases them, who brag that they speak with a high Hand is reckoned
by Quintilian among the moales of Rhetoric; an action not far from the usual
pendent posture of Changelings and Idiots.

Prevar. Sect. 7.
TO bring the Fingers ends to the Breast, the Hand hollow, when we speak To
our selves, or in cohortation, objurgation, or commiseration, is an action that
will seldom become the Hand of an Orator; or to strike the Breast with the
Hand, which is Scenicall.

Praevar. Sect. 8.
TO apply the Middle-Finger to the Thumb, is the common way of gracing an
exordium, yet to direct it as it were toward the left shoulder, and so make it
a collateral action, Quintil. Inst. Rhet. lib 11.
is naught, but worse, to bring forth the Arm transverse, and to pronounce
with the elbow.

Praevar. Sect. 9.
TO set the Arms a gambo or aprank, and to rest the turned in back of the Hand
upon the side, is an action of pride and ostentation, unbeseeming the Hand of
an Orator.

Praevar. Sect. 10.
THe trembling Hand is scenicall, and belongs more to the theater, then the
forum.

Praevar. Sect. 11.
THere are certain hidden percussions of speech, as it were a kind of feet, at
which the gesture of most of the ancient Orators did fall, which though they
were usual, yet Quintilian Quintil. Just. Rhet. lib. 11.
condemns them for most deceitful motions, noting it also for a fault in young
Declamers, that while they write, they first tune their sentences to gestures,
and forecast for the cadence of the Hand, whence this inconvenience ensues,
that gesture which in the last should be Right, does frequently end in the
sinister point. It were better, that whereas there are certain short members
of speech, (at which if there be need we may take breath) to dispose or lay
down our gesture at those pauses.

Praevar. Sect. 12.
TO clap the Hands in giving praise and allowance, is a Natural expression of
applause, encouragement, and rejoicing, heard in common assemblies of people,
and in public Theaters; which was at first, according to the simplicity of
those times, plain and natural: for Ovid speaking of the primitive and
ancient Plays of the Romans, says: Naso l. 1. de Art Amandi.
-- Plausus tunc art carebat.
But afterward they had an artificial manner of clapping their Hands, to a
certain measure or proportionable tune. Of which, the Poet Carippus:
Ingeminantque cavos dulci modulamine plausus.
For, the applause was done with the hollow of both Hands; which being smitten
together, caused that sound which is called Popismus, a word altogether feigned
to the similitude of the sound. The posture of this artificial plaudite of the
Hands, and the sound also raised from their collision, Philostratus most
elegantly describes in the Philostratus, l. 1. de Iconibus.
image of Comus the god of Ebrietie, in these words: Plausum etiam quendam
imitatur pictura, cujus maxim indiget Comus. Nam Dextra, contractis digitis,
subjectam sinistram ad cavum plectit, ut Manus cymbalorum more percussae
consonae siant. The very figure of which gesture is to be seen in the French
translation of that Author. How ambitious was Nero of this popular approbation,
when he entered upon the Theater to contend for the prize of Harpers; and
kneeling, showed a reverence to the Assembly with his Tacit. Ann^l. lib. 16.
Hand: and the Citie-people accustomed also to approve the gesture of the
Player, answered him with a certain measure and artificial applause. Thou
would have thought, says Tacitus, they had rejoiced, and perhaps for the
injury of the public discredit. But those which from towns far off, and
from remote provinces, unacquainted with dissolute behavior, came either as
Ambassadors, or for private business, could neither endure that sight, nor
applaud any way so dishonorable a labor: but weary of their unskilful
clapping of Hands, and troubling the skillful, were often beaten by the
Soldiers, placed in thick array, lest any moment of time should be lost by an
untuned and disproportionable cry, or slothful silence. The like applause he
expected and had from the Hands of his friends at home; for Xiphilinus reports,
that Seneca, and Burrhus, though lame of his Hand, when ever Nero spoke, they
applauded him with their Xiphil. in Nerone.
Hands and Vestments. The ancient Sophisters were so greedy of this manner of
applause in their Schools and Auditories, that they purchased Cresol. Theat.
vet. Rhet.
it; having for that purpose a Chorus of domestical Parasites, who were ready
in the assemblies, at every Gesture to give them this sign of approbation.
This Applause, which Nazianzen Hierom. cap. ad Ephesians. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de verb.
Isa.
calls, Canoram Manuum actionem; and S. Hierom, Theatrale miraculum; and
condemned by Chrysostom, among the trifling and unprofitable gesticulations of
the Hand, and Theatricall gestures, crept into the Christian Churches, and was
given to the Divine Orators of the Primitive times, until such time as it was
exploded out of the Temples, by their grave and sharp reprehensions. But
although the ancient Orators received this token of approbation from the hands
of their auditors, yet they never exhibited upon any occasion, such Manual
plausibilitie to the people, it being a Gesture too plebeian and Theatrically
light for the Hands of any prudent Rhetorician, who can never decently advance
his intentions, by the natural or artificial plaudite of his Hands.

Prevar. Sect. 13.
TO discourse customarily with the Hands turned up, of old said, supinis
Manibus disserere, is an effeminate and ill habit in the Hand of Dio Prusaeus.
orat. 33.
an Orator. Dio Prusaeus, among the Symbolls of Intemperance, reprehends this
habitual demeanor of the Hand: for when he would reckon up those things
which signify a corrupt and naughty custom, which he calls (...), he sets
down among the rest, Supinis Manibus disserere.

Now they are properly called Manus s^pinae, that are so advanced, that the
Palms respect the Cresol. de gestu Orat. lib. 2.
heavens, (...), with the Atticks. Cresollius has cast in his mind, what
should be the cause why so excellent and weighty an Author should seem justly
to have reprehended this gesture: for he could not altogether condemn it,
because in things sacred, it has been so religious, and received with so great
consent of all Nations, that the most ancient holy mysteries, which vulgarly
were called Orgia, (as some Grammarians will have it) took their denomination
from this very gesture of the Hands. But my Author conjecturing what his
meaning should be; Perchance (says he) his intention is, to reprove the action
of some foolish men, who, Quintil. inst. Rhet
as Quintilian says, hold out their Hands after the manner of them who carry
something; or of those, who as if they craved a Salary or Minervall of their
Auditors, most unskilfully bear about their Hands upwards: in whom that of the
Roman Poet may be verified; Ille cava praetium, flagitat usque Manu. Tibullus
l. 2. Eleg. 4. Galen. de usu part.

For Galen, when he would express the Hand to be conveniently disposed for the
containing of water that it flow not out, calls this purpose of the Hand, Manum
supinam. But this would be done more unseasonably, and to less purpose, if a
man by the motions of his Hands should use to imitate one taking up water out
of some river, as he in Virgil; -- rite cavis undam de flumine palmis
Sustulit --


That which seems most probable, and to come nearest the true sense of that
ancient Author, Cresollius conceives to be an intended reproof of a certain
action incident to nice and effeminate men: for in that place, Dio prosecutes
the sins of voluptuousness, and a lascivious habit of the mind. Indeed,
tender and delicate minkes, after their right womanish garb, lay their Hands
upright, which a wise man should not imitate: and therefore in his opinion,
that excellent Poet Aeschylus, with exquisite Aeschylus in Prometh. Arist.
Physiog. lib. 3.
judgment, aptly said; Manus muliebri more supinatas. So that great Emperor of
learning, and perpetual Dictator of the Arts, among the portentous signs of
Impudence, lays down, Supinas manuum motus, teneritudine quadam and mollicie
dissolutas. After which manner Tatian paints out Crescens a Cynicall
Philosopher, the only Tatian. Orat. cont. Grae^.
ringleader to all abominable lust and beastly concupiscence: whom he
therefore calls, delicato corpore fractum, and (...).

Praevar. Sect. 14.
THey who cast and throw out the Hand, or raise the Arm with a shout, if they
do it as of a customary disposition, declare thereby the jovialitie of their
natures. To this vapouring expression of the Hand, some refer that of the
Prophet Hosea: This is the day of our King: the Princes have made him sick with
flagons of wine: he stretched out his Hand to scorners. Hosea cap. 7. v. 5.
And Lipsius tells us, that in Westphalia, where they drink super Lipsius
Epist. ad Heur.
naculum, as an ordinary elegancie, at every quaffe and carouse, they put for
th the hand: and this seems natural to good fellows, whose sociable
disposition makes them very apt to fall upon this joviall exaltation of the
Hand, which in the Meridian of mirth naturally imports the elevation of the
cheered heart, raised by the promotion of the brisked spirits.

Praevar. Sect. 15.
THe wagging and impertinent extension of the Fingers in speaking, has ever
been accounted a note of levitie and folly. And such who by a certain
reciprocal motion do ever and anon lift up one or other of their Fingers
visibly prolonged, they seem to try conclusions with their hearers, and to
play with them at that exercise which was in use among the ancient Romans, who
had a game or lotterie wherein one held up his Finger or Fingers, and the other
turning away, ghessed how many he held up: Or if you will have it according to
Polidors relation, the play was after this manner: Polidor. lib. 2. c. 13. de
rerum invent.
Two, having first shut their Hands, forthwith let out their Fingers, naming a
certain number. As for example, I put forth three fingers, you as many; I name
four, you six: so you by ghessing and naming the right number, win. And
because the Fingers thus unfolded, suddenly appear, by a metaphor they were
said in this sport Micare digitis. Hence Varro; Micandum erat cum Graeco, utrum
ego illius numerum, aut ille meum sequatur. This is well known among the
Italians at this day, and vulgarly called Mor; perhaps (says Polydor) quod
Maurorum hic sit ludus. But the more approved opinion is, quod (...), id est,
Stultorum ludus. And perhaps Nero had observed in Claudius his predecessor,
some such Suetonius and his Interpreter.
kind of indiscreet prevarication with his Fingers, who in spightfull and
contumelious manner both in word and deed, was wont every way to taunt and twit
him with his folly; and among other opprobrious indignities offered to his name
and memory, in scoffing wise he would say of him, that he had left now Morari
any longer among men; using the first syllable of the word, long: in which word
there is couched a double sense, which gives the grace unto this pleasant
scoff; for being a mere Latin word, it signifies to stay or make long
abode: and taking it thus, it imports, that Claudius lived no longer among
Mortals. But as Nero spoke of Moros in Greek, which signifies a fool, and
has the first syllable long, it imports, that Claudius played the fool no
longer here in the world among men. Cresollius condemns this Finger-loping
gesture as very uncomely, and unworthy Cresol. de de gestu Orat. l. 2.
the discreet Hand of an Orator, so unadvisedly to counterfeit the common
gestures of Buyers of confiscate goods: and he would have the Edict of
Appronianus, Provost of the City of Rome, to be set before them; in which he
did desire this up-and-down motion of the Fingers to be cast not only out of
the Courts of Justice and the Senate house, but from the Forum, and very
intercourse of buying and selling. This Edict is yet to be seen in a marble
table at Rome, beginning thus. EX AUCTORITATE TURCI APRONIANI, V. C. Gr^terus
ex Si^ctio in literis Digitalibus, sic exsculpsit.
PRAEFECTI URBIS RATIO DOCUIT UTILITATE SUA DENTE CONSUETUDINE MICANDI SUBMOTA
SUB EXAGIO POTIVS PECORA VENDERE QVAM DIGITIS CONCLUDENTIBUS TRADERE, etc.



They that would conserve the quality and state of an Orator, must avoid this
ridiculous custom of wagging the Fingers, lest now they do not seem to stand
in their Pulpits to sell sheep, but to sell them often, or to brag and boast of
their parts.

Praevar. Sect. 16.
SUch who have Hands too active in discourse, and use to beat the air with an
odious kind of Chiromachia, bewray the cholerique transportation of their
individual natures, a habit of the Hand incident to young men, who as a
Learned Father says, are wont to glory that in them, Supra Greg. Nys. orat. de
Beatitud. Juvenal l. 1. Sat. 3.
modum vigeant manus ad motionem. This habitual imperfection the Ancients
called, Jactare manus; even as the Satyrist scoffs at those who had a
smackering of the Greek Tongue, who did, a facie jactare manus -- a gesture it
seems Parasites Juvenal. lib. 1. Sat. 3
in their way of admiration, were wont to use: for, Martial, -- geminas tendis
in ore manus. Martial. Epigram Hieron. Epist. 5.



S. Hierome very elegantly mocks at this fashion: Nam si applosisset pedem,
intendisset oculos, rugasset frontem, [jactasset manum] verba tonasset,
tenebras illico ob oculos effundisset Judicibus: imitating perchance herein
that renowned Stoique, thus setting it down. Nec supploderem pedem, nec [Manum
jactarem] nec attollerem vocem. Quintilian Seneca Epist. 75. Fabius Inst. Rhet.
affirms this behavior of the Hand became only Demetrius the Comoedian,
famous in those times; and beside him, none. As for the Athenian Eagle
Socrates, so called for his quick insight of understanding, he was wont to use
Zopyrus Phisiogn.
this vehemency of the Hand, which was observed in him as a token of his
violent nature and hot spirit; who, because in his pleadings he was transported
with such heat of action, and and would often in the eagerness of disputation,
skirmish as it were with his Fist, he was Laertius lib. 2.
therefore despised and laughed at by many, and not undeservedly: for his
immoderate action was somewhat hot, and madman like, arguing an impotent
mind, and an ill tempered spirit. Cresollius reports, he once saw a learned
man, a Rhetorique Professor, make his Clerum in a public Cresol. de gest.
Orat. lib. 2.
assembly of learned men: But he with such a continued swiftness moved his
Hand before his face, that he could scarce discern his eyes or countenance
while he spoke. How other of his Auditors conceived of his gesture, he knew not
a to him it seemed most odious; for with that argute and vehement action, his
eyes were almost dazzled. This my Author would say properly to be that, which
Aristophanes facetiously calls Muscas abigere; as if all that labor of his had
tended to no other end, then to make his Hand a Flie-flap. Domitius Afer,
seeing Manilius Sura handling a cause, and in his pronunciation running up and
down, dancing, Manus jactantem, tossing his Hands, casting back and putting
aside his gown, said, that he did not Agere, sed satagere: Actio enim Oratoris
est; Satagit Quintil. lib. 11. de pronunc.
autem, qui frustra misereque conatur.

Praevar. Sect. 17.
IN a sewing posture to drive out the Elbowes to both sides, as one of the
Gentle-craft, is a Prevarication noted and condemned by Quintilian. Cresollius
says, A learned and reverend friend of his, once saw a Mushrome Doctor Cresol.
de g^st. Orat. lib. 2.
pronounce after this manner; that at every comma, he drew out his Elbowes with
such constancy, or rather pertinacie, that he seemed to know no other gesture.
At which sight he tacitly to himself: Either I am deceived in my opinion, or
this man has been of some sewing occupation. And it seems, upon further
inquiry, his Augurie failed him not; for he had been lately a Cobbler. This
absurd motion of the arms, makes an Orator seem rather to have come to
speak, from his Last, then his Book: or as if he newly came from vamping his
Oration.

Praevar. Sect. 18
TO shake the arms with a kind of perpetual motion, as if they would
straightway fly out of the sight of their Auditors, or were about to leave
the Earth: is a Praevarication in Rhetorique. Such Orators have been compared
to Ostriches, who go upon the ground, yet so, that by the agitation of their
wings, they seem to think of flight. This happens to some by reason of a
certain Plethorique wit and ardor of Nature, which scarce suffers it self to
be kept down and holden by the body. Cresollius once saw such a Divine, whose
habitual mobilitie of his Hands was such, that the strongest men could scarce
emulate, unless by an incredible contention of labor. Some, through a puerile
institution, or by a contracted custom do the same; imitating little birds,
which being not yet fledged, nor strong enough for flight, yet in their nests
move and shake their wings very swiftly. These the Greeks call (...), which
they use to object against those who by a foolish gesticulation appear in the
posture of little birds. The Polite Comoedian elegantly, (...), nugaris
gesticulando. This does usually Aristoph.
appear in many, in the gesturing and skipping motions of joy, when the
exultant Mind leaps and lifts up it self; and tickling the body with an
active sweetness, shakes those parts most which are more free and prompt to
action. Diphilus a Greek Poet, pleasantly expresses this in his Parasite; whom
he brings in, rejoicing, with Athen. l. 9
this exultant motion of his arms. Atticus Lysias, in an Oration of his, has
elegantly signified the same; who, when he would prove the Adversary not only
to be conscious of the injury, but to be the principal author of it; he
brings this perspicuous sign, that he imitated the crowing gesture of a Cock
of the game, after his victory; and clapped his sides with the applause
Dionys. Halicarn.
of his Arms, as with wings, incircled in a ring of wicked men. This gesture
is most proper to Mimiques, and the Theater; and can scarce stand with the
gravitie of the Forum, or the reverence of the Church; unless some part of it
well moderated, may be permitted in signification of Gladness of heart.

Praevar. Sect. 19.
TO use no Action at all in speaking, or a heavy and slow motion of the Hand,
is the property of one stupid and sluggish. Hyperides, whom Plutarch reckons
in the Decad of Orators, was of this temper; for it is said, that in his
Orations he showed no action or gesture at all: his manner was, to set down the
Cafe, and lay open the matter plainly and simply, without troubling the Judges
any otherwise then with a naked narration. Which Aeschines, as some think, did
strive to imitate; who in a foolish emulation of Solon, and by praising his
Hand, strove to countenance his opinion of an unactive pronunciation. But from
that time, all Antiquity has repudiated those for stupid and brutish
Orators: of whom one may justly say C^ssiodor. lib. de Anima, cap. 12.
that which Cassiodorus of that drunken wise man: Virum illum prudentissime
disserentem, difficile est vivum credas, quem se nec movere posse conspicias.
Who may be described, as the miserable woman in the Fable, turned into a stone
by Latona: Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 5.
Nec flecti cervix, nec brachia reddere gestus;
Nec pes ire potest, nihil est in imagine vivum.
There was no kind of writer, that did not with frank language inveigh and
pleasantly scoff at the sluggishnesse of those Orators. Juvenal prettily
compares them to the stumpe of Hermes, and Juvenal. Satyr. 8.
in one, disgraces them all. Nullo quippe alio vincis discrimine quam quod
Illi marmoreum caput, est, tua vivit imago.
Aristides was wont to say, that such dull Orators Aristides to. 3.
were very unlike Orpheus; for he, as the fables report, enticed and drew
stones after him: but they, as wood and stones, move no man. Cresollius (who
has prepared much of this intelligence Cresol. in Vacat. Autumn.
to my hand) sticks not to join together such men who speak without action,
to those statues made by the Ancients in the ignorant ages of the world: for
they had their eyes shut, their hands hanging down and joined to their sides.
Daedalus, a cunning and witty man, was the first that formed the eyes, and put
forth the Hands, so giving life and motion to all the parts, with singular
judgment, teaching thereby the decency thereof; wherefore he is feigned to
have made those statues and pourtraictures of men so excellently, that they
moved of themselves. The inconvenience of this cold vacation in the Hand, gave
being to that Axiom in Rhetorique, Est maxim vitiosum, si action manuumque
motu careat: for such, my Author thinks a wrestling place were necessary; but
that of the Ancients, wherein the apt and comely motions of the whole Body,
especially Chironomia, the eloquent behavior or Rule of managing the Hand, was
taught. But since these helps of eloquence now fail, his advice is, they
would mark the gestures of famous and excellent men, honestly and freely
brought up, and by a certain diligent imitation, garnish their own Hands with
those dumb figures of Rhetorique.

Prevar. Sect. 20.
THey who have Hands slow and ponderous, and who without any comeliness bear
and offer about their leaden Hands, together with the arm, after a rusticall
manner; so lifting it up sometimes, that they seem to move a great lump of
trembling flesh, reaching their slow Right hand out so timerously, as if they
gave provender to an Elephant. Such are by this customary habit, discovered to
be Clownes, and men of a most unfaithful memory. Such men we shall sometimes
see so faint and idle in their discourse, that they stick in the briers, and
demurre in a gross gesture of pronunciation; and stricken as it were with
astonishment, they seem nailed to that ill behavior. This in old time, was
called, Agere suspensa manu. For that Clownes, and men not so well exercised in
speaking, or such whose unfaithful memories fail them, while they are
altogether ignorant of the matter, and are not certain whither they shall be
carried, or where they shall at length rest; they hang the Hand, and hold it as
it were in suspense. Therefore Pliny the younger elegantly Plin. Secund. Ep.
lib. 6.
usurps Suspensa manu commendare, for a faint and cold commendation, destitute
of that ardent affection which is wont to appear in those who are moved in
matters of great moment.

Praevar. Sect. 21.
THe subtle gesticulation, and toying behavior of the Hands and Fingers, was
called by the Ancients, Gestuosa Manus, arguta Manus, and argutiae Digitorum:
and are certain quick and over-fine delicate motions of the Fingers; such as
our Juglers use, who perform tricks by slight of Hand, and by a colorable
craft mock the eye. Hence [Manus arguta] are spoken of thieves, whose Hands do
quickly leap up, and issue forth, instantly vanishing out of sight: a non they
show themselves, and are called to every part. Sidonius Apollinaris, very
skilfully; Scrinia tuaconniventibus nobis, ac subernantibus, effractorum
Sidonius Apolinaris l. 9. Ep. 7.
[Manus arguta] populabitur. This prattling and busy talking of the Hand, and
chattering vanity of the Fingers, by the common verdict of all discreet and
knowing men, has been ever condemned for a ridiculous weakness in those that
use it much: against which the most judicious Rhetoricians have entered their
caveats. See that grave precept of the Prince of Eloquence: Nulla sit mollicia
cervicum, nullae [argutiae digitorum] Cicero in Oratore.
non ad numerum articulus cadens. That rich Orator, whose wealth begot a
Proverb, very wisely also to this purpose: Digitus subsequens vexba non
exprimens. This genuine blemish and epidemicall disease, takes hold of the
Hands of light and unskilful persons, and young men, Crassus de Oratore. 3.
who are usually too hot at Hand in their expressions: yet it has been the
noted and deforming property of some learned men, who by reason of the lively
force of their wit, and vigorous alacrity of their spirits, do manifest and
signify their minds with a tumultuous agitation of the whole body, whose
Hands are never out of action, but always stirring and kept in play, their
words plentifully issuing out on all Hands. Q. Hortensius, otherwise a man
excellent, was taxed with this genuine or contracted affectation of the Hand:
concerning whom, let us hear the report of Agellius. Cum manus ejus [forent
argutae] admodum and gestuosae, maledictis appellationibusque Agellius lib. 1.
cap. 5
probrosis jactatus est, etc. In which he says true: for he was upbraided by
the Orators of those times, for the gesticulation of his Hands, and called
Stage Player; and Torquatus, his enemy, nick-nam'd him, Gesticulariam
Dionysiam: as if he had been but the zanie and ape of Dionysia, a tumbling
girl, and shee-Mimique of those times. Tullie relates the same man to have
used such Cicero Divinat. in Verrem.
subtle and swift motions of his Hands, that he dazzled the eyes of the
beholders. Such a one was Titius, who as the same Author reports, was so
effeminate and dissolutely active in his gestures, Idem de Clar. orat.
that the Pantomimi of those times made a dance of him, and called it by his
name, Titius his Coranto. Tyrtamus that sweet-mouth'd Sophister, whom Aristotle
for his divinity of Elocution, pointing out with his finger, as it were, the
man, called him Theophrastum: yet Athenaeus Laert l. 5. Athenaeus De^pnos. lib.
1.
reports him, Nullum gestum and corporis motionem praetermisisse; and so by
consequence guilty of an impertinent vexation of the Hands and Fingers.

Praevar. Sect. 22.
TO play and fumble with the Fingers in speech, is a simple and foolish habit
of the Hand, condemned by the ancient Rhetoricians, as an argument of a
childish and ill-temper'd mind. This, with the Ancients, was, [Vibrare
digitis:] There are, says Quintilian, Qui sententias vibratis Fabius ^^st
Rhet. cap. 28.
digitis jaculantur: and the Hebrew Proverb says, Stultus digito l^quitur,
The Fool speaks with his Finger. Wherefore it was the saying of Chilo the
Lacedemonian; Inter loquendum manus movere non debere, which he spoke not
Laertius l. (...).
of Rhetorical motions, since in Sparta there was scarce any man esteemed the
copious elegancie of speech worth his study; but his intention was either
closely to carpe at this foolish toying with the Fingers, or else to admonish
his Citizens to be sparing in speech, and to affect Laconicall brevity, and
where one or two words would serve the turn to express their mind, there
would be no great need of gesturing with the Hand. To this may be referred that
which Suetonius Suetonius cap. 68.
reports of Tiberius Nero, Caesar, whose speech was exceeding slow, not without
a certain wanton gesticulation, and fumbling with his Fingers, which with
other signs were reckoned and observed in him by Augustus, as properties
odious, and full of arrogancy.

Praevar. Sect. 23.
TO use the Middle-Finger instead of the Index in points of demonstration is
much to be condemned in the Hand of any man, much more of an Orator. The
ancient Grecians noted and reproved such for witless dotards. Hence Diogenes
the Cynique said, Multos insanire praeter Laertius lib. 6.
digitum, covertly inferring that they are not (only) mad, who err in putting
forth of their Finger. Which gives a notable luster to that elegant, but dark
place of Perseus, hitherto understood of none, not excepting Cornutus the
ancient Scholiast, for Ramirez marvells not that Erasmus was ignorant thereof,
in his Adage* Ramirez Comment Epig. (...). Mart. in Amphit. Caes.
Toll digitum, the place is Satyr 5. Nil tibi concessit ratio, digitum exere,
peccas,
Et quid tam parvum est?
Art thou void of reason, and a stark fool: shall I prove it to you? exere
digitum, mimically he feignes him to have put forth his Middle-Finger, which is
the fools Index, according to that vulgar versicle: Miles, mercator, stultus,
maritus, amator.
And he adds Peccas, thou errest in putting forth that Finger, and he urges an
argument, a minori, and what is so small and easy to do? as if he should say,
if you mistake in so small a matter, what would you do in a case of greater
moment? Lubinus commenting upon these words, Lubinus Comment in Perseu. Satyr 5.
Digitum exere, peccas, says the Poet speaks according to the opinion of the
Stoiques, who did demonstrate, Ne digitum recte a stultis exeri posse; and that
a wise man only can do a thing: which that he might make good, he puts him to
an easy trial, in which this foolish Dama miscarried, which discovered, he
was not able to move the least member of his body without fault and incurring a
just reprehension. Paschalius alluding to Paschal. lib. 26. virt. and vit.
Charact.
the same misprision of the Hand in demonstration says, Stultus medium digitum
monstrat, and hinc sese denudat, an action so unnatural and uncomely, that we
will not permit children to be guilty of committing it.

Praevar. Sect. 24.
TOme a sure out and distinguish the intervals of an oration by scanning
motions of the hand, and certain delicate flexions, and light sounding
percussions of the Fingers, is an action condemned in the Hand of an Orator,
called by Quintilian in his Prohibition against this action, Ad numerum
articulis cadens; and explaining himself in this matter, he says, Soluta
oration non descendit, ad strepitum digitorum. Indeed Protagoras called Man
Fabius l. 9. cap. 4.
the measure of all things. The Learned very fitly call Measure the daughter of
the Fingers, and the Egyptians used to signify measure by a Finger painted.
Hence the meeting and scanning of verses upon the Fingers, has been a very
ancient custom, and it was the manner of old in the recitation of the verses
of Poets, in the measuring and singing them, to note out the intervalls and
strokes by a certain motion of the Hands, wherein the Fingers exhibited a
sound, which Quintilian calls [Digitorum ictum] for he says in meeter, Fabius
l. 9. cap. 4.
[Digitorum ictu] intervalla signari. S. Augustine not obscurely consents to the
same, who attributes singing, applause and percussion, to the recitation of
verses: hence that sentence of Seneca's to be taken notice of, Quorum Digiti
aliquod inter se carmen metientes semper sonant, where S. Aug. l. 2 de Music.
Senec. de Brevit. Vitae, c. 12 Cresol. de Gest. orat. l. 2.
(as Cresollius observes) that great guide of literatur, Lipsius, has
corrected a place which was sound of it self; but the Fingers (says he) in
that measuring do scarce sound, therefore for sonant he puts sunt; yet
Cresollius is loath to think that the above mentioned place of Quintilian had
escaped his knowledge, which confirms this [ictum digitorum] or sounding motion
of the Fingers, which Seneca in this sentence alludes unto: So, a Dactyl, one
of the Poetical feet, on which verses run, they will have to have took Diomedes
denomination from the drawing in length of the Finger, which they very
cunningly used to express the modulation of the instrument. But this ietus or
musical cadence of the Fingers, which Cresollius thinks was not usurped of
old by Orators, when they related the verses of anclent Poets, unless
perchance of the more effeminate of them, (who hunted also after delicate
flexions of words) though it may be tolerable for the setting off the
intervalls of restrained numbers, yet in free prose, which Fabius calls
orationem Seneca in sent. citata
solutam, to affect these subtle cadences, deserves the sting of the Stoique,
which he put out against it.

Prevar. Sect. 25.
TO use the left hand commonly as principal in Action, which should be at most
but accessory, is the idle property of one destitute of all Artifice, and
common notions; and of one that would seem to speak in despite of the
advertisements of the Ancients; a strange error in the Hand of Orator, yet
observed and condemned by Cresollius in some pretenders to divine Rhetoric,
Cresol. Vac. Aut.
fit only to preach before such as the children of Nineveh, who cannot discern
between their Right Hand and their left; for in those things that are done in
the sight of honest men, it was never thought the property of an ingenious
mind, and one well bred to use the left hand. Neither is there any cause why
in the education Plutarch of Fortune, and the education of children.
of Noble-mens children it is diligently given in charge, that they feed
themselves with the Right Hand, yea, and nurses use to rebuke infants, if
happily they put forth their left; which precept is drawn out of honesty it
self, and nature, and has ever been in use with those Nations who have
addicted themselves to humanity, and good manners. Hence the Egyptians,
because in writing and casting account, they frame their letters, and lay their
counters from the Right Hand to the left; and the Grecians (as Herodotus notes)
coutrariwise, from the left to the Right; used to Herodot.
gird and trump at the Grecians, saying, that themselves do all to the Right
Hand, which is well and honestly; but the Greeks to the left, that is
perversely and untowardly. And indeed the Nomenclators seem to have excluded
the left hand from all actions of decency and importance. The Hebrews call
the Right Hand Jamin, the South, the light and active Hand; and the left the
North, the obscure and dark hand, much inferior to the South. Homer, though
he differ, yet maintains the dignity of the Right Hand above the left, in
calling it the Orient, and the left the Occident. The Hand is so occupied in
endeavoring and doing, that the Greeks, who to the advancement of wisdom have
flourished in polishing humanity, and inventing names, call it (...), quod ut
magni Grammatici animadvertunt, (...). Meletius says the left hand is called
(...), quod in rebus per agendis, ipsa per se claudicet and oberret: And that
is called (...) laevam, Meletius.
(...), quod ob sui imperfectionem ab omni pene functione removetur. Sometimes
with the Greeks it is called (...) a (...), i. relinquo. Hence with the
Latins, Relicta a relinquo, a retro and linquo, and laeva (it may be) for that
in most actions we leave it out, for the same reason in the English
Nomenclature, the left hand, for that it is most usually left out. With the
Germans, it is Die link hant, quasi leigend hant, id est, quiescens vel
cessans manus. With the Italians Mano flanca, Manus lassa, and Mano ^anca, id
est, Manus desiciens. S. Hierom so attributes virtue and honesty to the Right
Hand, that ^e will not S. Hierom in Mat. 5.
acknowledge a just man to have so much as a left hand; and the Hebrews and
Greeks ascribe the left hand to vice. Who (says Cresollius) is so great a
forrainer and stranger in the nature of man, that he knows not the Right Hand
to be naturally more vigorous, and able then the left? If there be any such, I
could produce a cloud of witnesses for his information, and the chief Authors
and Ringleaders of Antiquity trooping together under this banner, the
splendor of whose Arms and Martial looks shall put all ignorance to flight.
Aristotle in his Problems filled Arist. Probl. 25. Sect. 31.
with incredible variety of learning, says, Dextrae parts corporis nostri
long sunt nobiliores sinistris, and multo amplius solent efficere. They who
followed him in the chorus of the Learned, taking their hint from this their
renowned principal, adhere to the same opinion; for Plutarch totidem verbis,
sinistra est (...) to omit what Plutarch in Romans quest. 78.
Apuleius, Censorius, Pliny, Solinus, and others deliver, who have given their
manual suffrage and assent unto this point. Philo Judaeus enquiring Philo lib.
de praem. Sacerd.
the reason why the Divine Law in the rite of sacrifices, gave to the Priests
the part of the oblation, which they call the Right shoulder, says, there is a
symbolicall signification in that mystery: That the Priest ought to be diligent
and swift in action, and exceeding strong in all things. We know that commonly
in Cresol. de gest. orat.
combats the left hand, is it were affixed to the body, manageth the shield,
and staying as it were at home quiet; the Right Hand shows it self forth, and
is occupied in doing and giving the charge. In which we may see a certain
shadow of Rhetorical motion; for in speaking, motion and action is proper to
the Right Hand only, the left remains quiet, and is scarce openly brought
forth. Tullie not very obscurely advises thus, who disputing of Action, makes
Cicero ad Herenn. l. 3.
mention only of one Hand, which he somewhere calls the Right Hand, no where
the left, Si erit sermo cum dignitate, laevi Dextrae motu loqui opportebit. But
the most clear Interpretour of all the Ancients, Quintilian, has brought this
Oracle of Rhetoricians from behind the curtain, Manus Fab. in Rhet Inst.
sinistra nunquam sola gestum facit, and how should it make of it self a
complete action, since the action thereof is more contracted, infirm,
incomposed, and out of order? whereas the actions of the Right are free,
frequent, continued, composed, and resembling the sweet cadencies of numbers;
and therefore has the prerogative of eloquence in the body, as being nearest
the principle of motion, and most apt to move and signify. And because the
left hand of it self is of very small dignity in pronunciation, common
humanity does teach us, that as a Virgin shut up in her chamber, it should be
modestly concealed; the Right Hand on the contrary, as a most goodly Scepter of
Reason, with its force and weight, does much among men.

But although this praevarication of acting with the Left hand in chief, be an
error so gross, that we cannot away with it even in picture, where an
imitation of speech is expressed: Yet there might be a Quaere raised, what
toleration might be granted to such who are Left Handed or Ambodexters by
nature or custom. And I could furnish a Prevaricator in Chirosophie, with some
notions to advance with, toward an excuse, or Apology, in the behalf of those
who are Scaevaes and Scaevolaes in this point of Rhetorique. For, many of the
ancient Sages, who gave themselves to the speculation of Nature, are of
opinion, that both Hands are by nature equally qualified. The great Oracle of
Physique, says, Utramque in homine Manum esse consimilem. And Plato, where he
speaks of the Hands, with that Hippocrates. Plato. l. 7. de legibus.
wit wherewith he comprehended things divine and humane, affirms, Parem Dextra
atque Sinistra vim a Natura fuisse concessam. And that it happened by Custom,
that one Hand is better, and the other more infirm: yet Custom is another
Nature. But Goropius has a saying to Plato for this. Meletius, point-blanke,
from an Goropius in Hieroglyph. Meletius de Not. Hom. Plato l. 7. de legibus.
exemplar argument proves, Dextram Laeva potiorem neutiquam esse. Plato, the
Prior of all ancient Philosophers, where he sets forth the education of
honorable Childhood, he would have them all in war and handling their
weapons, to be like those Sons of Thunder in Homer, (...), and no less then
the Scythians in battle, equally to use both Hands, since it seems easy to
be done. The laws of which most acute Philosopher, when the Interpreter of
Nature briefly sets down in illustrating his learned Arist. l. 2. Polit. cap.
ult.
Tractate of Polity, he remembers this to be one: Gives omnes (...) esse
oportere. Since there is little reason why one Hand should be idle and quiet.
And Commodus the Emperor preferred Dion. Cas.
the Left hand for any action, and was wont to boast much that he was
Left Handed. We read also, that Ehud and Tiberius were of this complexion.
Judge. 3 Suet. in Tib. c 28. Barthol. Anat. inst. fol. 260.
But although some are found more nimble and active in their left hands, and
some Ambodexters, (which Bartholinus imputes to a pair of veins, whereas the
puissance of the Right Hand proceeds from a vein sine pari, (on that side
only) yet the utmost dispensation can be granted, is a connivence in common
actions; for in matter of speech or ornamentall gesture, there can be no
toleration granted to an Orator to play the Ghibeonite, and to sling words at
his Auditors out of the Auke of utterance, Judge. 20. 16.
though he can do it at a hairs breadth. For the truth is, the Left Hand
wants that agilitie, excellence, force and grace in point of action, being made
contrary and unhappy by its situation: whereupon it is called Sinistra in
latin, quia sine astris bonis. And the lack of grace in doing of a thing, is
called Sinisterit as, and sinistre the adverb sounds unhappily. The best way
(therefore) that it can be employed, is in attendance on the Right; which by
the course of Nature has the prioritie, as the more proper and propense, and
apter to make good its actions by a more handsome diligence, as being planted
nearer the fountain of the blood. And verily, the Left Hand seems to be born
to an obsequious compliance with the Right. And therefore when Quintilian calls
for this acco^modation, he seems to have had respect unto the Interpretour of
Nature, whose well-grounded Axiom it is, Ita comparata esse a Natura, ut Laeva
Dextris obsecundent. Arist.
And the Philosopher adds his reason, Arist. probl. 25.
in another place: quod omnia Sinistra Dextris humidiora sunt facilius obsequi,
atque ad nutum alterius fingi and moveri: which the Hebrew Divines, (as
Cresollius says) seem to have had respect unto, in their exposition of
Deuteronomie, about the ceremony of washing Hands; where they say thus:
Denique opus est, ut in ablutione manuum Sinistra tanquam famula subserviat
Dextrae. Meletius de not. Hom.
Hence some Critiques would have the Left hand called by the Greeks, (...),
quasi quod egregia optimaque non sit, sed ad Dextrae obsequium ministeriumque
procreata. And the ancient Lingones called improsperous things, Eperistera; but
good and fortunate things, Dexia. By the Greeks, indeed, sometimes by Caelius
Rhod. var. Lect.
way of Antiphrasis, the Left Hand is called (...), ab (...), i. e. optimus.
But in all humane affairs, Sinistrum signifies as much as unluckie.

FOr an Ecclesiastical Orator, to bless or dismiss his auditors with the
Left hand, is a Sole cisme Prevar. Sect. 26.
in Manual Divinity. For the Left hand in this business, has only usurped
the office in the second place, as being of a lower nature then the Right;
neither is it of that fortune or reputation: whence, in all Natural devices
and matter of form or token of the Hand, or any utterance implying the
freedom of election, the introducing of the Left hand does abate, and denotes
a subordinate property. It Is the Right Hand (according to Isidor) that has
its name a dando, by which we understand a joyful abundance Isidor.
of all good: the extension of that Hand therefore, has been ever of more
repute in conferring Benediction. And Justin Martyr says, it was an
institution of the prime Apostles, that the Right Hand should confer the badge
of Just. Martyr. q. 1. 8. ad Orth. Cresol. in Antholog. sacr.
Christianity in Baptism, for that it is more exlent and honorable then the
Left; and, as Cresollius thinks, accompanied with Blessing: Whereas in the left
hand there is a contrary Genius; certainly, it is found to be of a very
different condition, and naturally more apt to deteine, then to bestow a
Blessing. Yet notwithstanding, the Left Hand, though it contribute little, yet
as in some Natural and civil actions, it is conformable and obsequious to
assist the Right: so in the more accomplished and plenary exhibition of this
sacred rite, it has often Diaconiz'd unto the Right; but of it self alone
somewhat improper, and ever subordinate unto the Right. Hence among other
prodigies happening in the time of Caesar Dictator, which were thought to
prognosticate but small happiness. When certain Infants were borne with their
Left Hands upon their Heads, the Sooth-sayer concluded that there was signified
Dion. l. 42 C. Jul. Caes.
thereby, that men of an inferior condition should rise up against the more
Noble. And the people, who relied much upon these kind of Allegorical
inferences, thought as much, and believed it.

CERTAIN CAVTIONARY NOTIONS, Extracted out of the Ancient and Modern
RHETORICIANS, for the completing of this Art of Manual Rhetorique, and the
better regulating the important gestures of the Hand and Fingers.
Cautio I.
THE ancient Rhetoricians were very precise in the Doctrine of Action, and had
many inve^tions for the forming thereof, which happened by reason of the manners
and complexion of those times: but we are not to tread in their steps so far,
as to revoke the whole Art of their obsolete Rhetorique, since it is not very
apparent, what Action the Ancients used: and if it were known, the whole and
perfect discipline, cannot be observed so properly now, since the times and
dispositions of men, now differ; and Oratorian Action must vary according to
the diversity of people and Nations, In the mean time, their universal
precepts, which may be drawn out of the ancient Orators, are not to be
neglected, but diligently learned, and as much as can be, reduced to practice.

Cautio II.
ACTION accomodated to persuade by an apt enumeration of utterance, called by
Rhetoricians, Pronunciation, divided into the figure of the voice, and motion
of the body, whose chief instrument the Hand is; has been ever accounted
absolutely necessary for a Rhetorician: yet all things that the Ancients
prescribe for Action, do not properly belong to a Rhetorician; neither are all
things that appertain, convenient for our times; nor do all actions of the
Hand become speech; for there are some so far from advancing elocution, that
they render it unamiable and deformed.

Cautio III.
THere are two kind of Actions, which are more perceived in the motion of the
Hand, than any other part of the Body: one, that Nature by passion and
ratiocination teaches; the other, which is acquired by Art. An Orator is to
observe both the Natural and the Artificial; yet so, that he add a certain
kind of art to the Natural motion, whereby the too much slownes, too much
quicknes, and immoderate vastness may be avoided.

Cautio IV.
THe incomposure of the Hands is to be avoided, for to begin abruptly with the
Hand, is a sin against the laws of Speech. In the exordium of an Oration,
the Hand must not go forth, nor stand extended, but with a sober and composed
heed proceed to its first Action, it is good, as Rhetoricians say, simulare
conatum, and when it first breaks forth into gesture, while it is softly
brought forward, we may look upon it with an eye, expecting when it should
supply our words: Wherefore when an Orator has exhibited his honor to his
Auditors, and laid his Hands upon the Pulpit, let him stand upright, and that
without any motion of his Hands, or his Right Hand not brought forth beyond his
bosom, unless a very little way, and that gently.

Cautio V.
When the Oration begins to wax hot and prevalent, the Hand may put forth with
a sentence, but must withdraw again with the same.

Cautio VI.
GEsture does with most conformity to Art, begin at the left Hand, the sentence
beginning together from the left side, but is put off and laid down at the
Right Hand, together with the end of the sentence.

Cautio VII.
It Is absurd often to change gesture in the same sentence, or often to conclude
sinister motions.

Cautio VIII.
GEsture must attend upon every flexion of the voice, not Scenicall, but
declaring the sentence and meaning of our mind, not by demonstration, but
signification: for it must be accommodated by the Hand, that it may agree and
have a proper reference, not so much to the words, as to the sense; wherefore
it is added as an authentic clause, that the Hand must attend to begin and end
with the voice, lest it should outrun the voice, or follow after it is done,
both which are held unhandsome.

Cautio IX.
Join not ESAU'S Hands, with JACOBS Voice.

Cautio X.
TO raise the Hand above the Eye, or to let it fall beneath the Breast, or to
fetch it down from the Head to the lower belly, are accounted vicious
misdemeanors in the Hand: yet the masters of this faculty do grant a
toleration sometimes to raise the Hand above the Head, for the better
expressing of a just indignation, or when we call God, the Courteours of
Heaven, or the common people of the Skies to witness.

Cautio XI.
TO avoid the long silence of the Hand, and that the vigor thereof might not
be much allayed by continual motion, nor prove deficient, there is a caveat
entered for the interposing of some intervall, or pause, as 'twere a measure of
the expression, or stay, of the active elocution of the Hand: some that are
skillful and curious in this matter, would have three words to make the
intervall of every motion in the Hand. But Quintilian condemns this for too
nice a subtilty, as that which neither is, nor can be observed.

Cautio XII.
NO gesture that respects the rule of Art, directs it self to the hinder
parts: Yet otherwhiles the Hand being as it were cast back, is free from this
prohibition: for whereas there are seven parts of motion, To the Right Hand, To
the left, upwards, downwards, forward, backward, and circular, the first five
are only allowed a Rhetorician.

Cautio XIII.
TAke heed of a Hand Solecisme, or of transgressing against the rule of Action,
by the incongruity of your Hand and Speech: For to speak one thing with the
Tongue, and to seem to mean another thing by a contrarient motion in the
signifying Hand, and so to thwart and belie a man's self, has been ever
accounted a gross absurdity in Rhetoric, and the greatest solecisme of
pronunciation. Which makes to this purpose; We read how at the Olympique Games
which in times past were celebrated at Smyrna, where Polemon, that skillful
Sophister was present, there enters the Stage a ridiculous Player, who when in
a Tragedy he had cried out (...), o Coelum! he put forth his Hand to the earth:
and again pronouncing (...), o Terra! Philostratus de vita Sophorum
erected his face toward Heaven. The learned Sophister laughed at the absurd
Actor, and withal alow'd, so that all were near might hear him, (...), hic
manu solaecismum admisit: Wherefore being President of those Games, he by his
censure deprived that rude and ignorant Mimique of all hope of reward. For
reconciling of the Hand and Tongue, and bringing them to an uniformity of
signification, and for maintaining their natural and most important relations,
Rhetoricians have agreed upon many Canons and Constitutions. And the Hand then
only accords and complies with Speech, when it moves to verify our words; for
if the motions of the Hand do dissent from the expressions of the Tongue, it
may contradict and convince the tongue of vanity; for so we may commend even
when we do reprove, if the gainsaying Hand should have a contrarient motion;
seem to confirm when we are in doubt, when we forbid, our Hand may deport it
self into the form of an exhortation; we may acquit when we accuse, accept,
when we refuse, and abhor, comply in words, yet by our disordered Hand bid
defiance, be sad, with a rejoicing Hand, affirm and grant, what we deny, and
many other ways thwart and belie our selves. No true construction can be made
of any speech, nor can we evade such dull absurdities of this voucher of our
words, do move in opposition to their meaning; for without judgment and
advice, which should set in order and support the thought into the Hand, that
is ever ready to maintain that trust that the Tongue endeavors to obtain,
Truth wants her warrant, and is so absurdly crossed, that the efficacy of Speech
is utterly defaced, and all the credit that such language amounts unto, is the
pittance of a doubtful faith.

Cautio XIV.
SHun similitude of gesture; for as a monotone in the voice, so a continued
similitude of gesture, and a Hand always playing upon one string is absurd, it
being better sometimes to use a licentious and unwarrantable motion, then
always to obtrude the same Coleworts. Cresollius says, he once saw an eminent
man, one Cresol. vacat. Autumn. l. 2.
who had a name for the knowledge of honest Arts, and indeed there was in the
man much learning, and that of the more inward and recondit, a great Antiquary,
and one that had a certain large possession of Divine and Humane Laws,
goodness of words, soft and pellucent; and decked with flowers, adorned and
polished with the sayings of wise men, and a speech flowing equally after the
style of Xenophons: But it can scarce be imagined how much the ill composed and
prevaricant gestures of his Hands took off from the common estimation of his
accomplished wit: For when he had turned himself to the left Hand, he powered
out a few words with little gesture of his Hands; then reflecting himself to
the Right Hand, he plainly did after the same manner, again to the left Hand,
strait to the Right Hand, almost with the like dimension, and space of time, he
fell upon that set gesture and univocall motion; his Hands making
circumductions, as it were in the same lineall obliquity: you would have took
him for one of the Babylonian Oxen (with blinded eyes) going and returning by
the same way, which for want of variation gave an incredible distaste to his
ingenious Auditors, which did nauseat that ungrateful saciety of Action; if he
might have followed the dictate of his own Genius, he would either have left
the Assembly, or given him money to hold his peace: But he considered there was
but one remedy, that was to shut his eyes, or to hear with them turned another
way; yet he could not so avoid all inconvenience, for that identity of motion,
entering at his ears, did disturb his mind with nodious similitude.

Cautio XV.
TAke care that variety of gesture, may answer the variety of the voice and
words, which that it may be better done, four things are to be observed:
First, see to the whole cause, whether it be joyful or sad; then look to the
greater part; for in an Exordium, a gentle motion is most commodious.
Narration, requires the Hand a little spread, and a quick and freer motion.
Confirmation, a more sharp and pressing Action: the conclusion of an Oration,
if it be composed to excite, must have rowsing motions; if to pacify, gentle
and sweet; if to sadness, slow and short, and broken motions; if to joy,
liberal, cheerful, nimble and brisk accommodations. Then the sentences are
to be weighed, which vary with the affections, in expressing which, diligence
must be used. Last of all the words, some whereof are now and then to be set
off with some emphasis of irrision, admiration, or some other signification;
yet those gestures which fall from the slow Hand, are most patheticall.

Cautio XVI.
TAke heed of levitie, and a scrupulous curiosity, in a pedanticall and nice
observation of these gestures of the Hands and Fingers.

Cautio XVII.
SHun affectation: for all affectation is odious: and then others are most
moved with our actions, when they perceive all things to flow, as it were, out
of the liquid current of Nature.

Cautio XVIII.
Use some preparation, and meditate beforehand of the action you intend to
accommodate your voice with.

Cautio XIX.
ALthough an Orators art should not altogether consist in imitation, yet
remember, that Imitation is one of the great Adjutants, and chief Burnishers
and Smoothers of Speech: it having been an ancient and laudable custom, for
ingenious Sparks of Oratorie, to be present at the Declamations of eminent
Orators, and studiously to observe their Countenance and Hand. Pliny dislikes
those, that imitate none, but are examples unto themselves. The same Plinius
Secundus, a famous Plin. lib. 6. Epist. ad Maxim.
Pleader, and most sweet Orator, among others that applied themselves unto him,
had Fuscus Silinator and Numidius Quadratus. Junius also commended to him by
his ancestors, was trained Idem. lib. 8. epist.
up in the Examplar doctrine of Manual gestures. Hence the Tribe and Nation of
Orators were called by the name of those eminent men which they did imitate.
Sidonius, truly surnamed Apollinaris, called those Frontoneans, who did imitate
Fronto a famous Philosopher and Orator, the pattern of Eloquence to M.
Antonie. So the followers of Posthumus Festus were called Posthumians.
Sulpitius, not the least in the Chorus of elegant men, imitated the Hand of
Crassus, that Nightingall of the Forum, the glory of the Senate, and (as Tullie
says) almost a god in speaking: (of whom, that (it seems) might be spoken,
with small exchange of words, which was Hyperbolically said of Herod's
eloquence; Non Manus hominem sonat!) Wherein Acts 12. 22.
He was so happy and industrious, that he was accounted to be very like unto
him.

Cautio XX.
IN Imitation, propose to your self the best pattern, according to the
Aethique Rule of Aristotle: Par est in omni re optimum quenque imitari. Arist.
in Aeth. lib. 9
Fusius erred in this part: of whom Tullie reports, that he did not imitate the
sinewie expressions of C. Fimbria, but only his Prevarications. Cicer. l. 2.
de Orat.
Basil the Great, a grave and perfect Orator, a man accomplished in all kind
of humanity, which in him had a sacred tincture of piety: when he had been
acknowledged to be Ensigne-bearer to Virtue, he had not only admirers, but some
that strove to be his Imitators. And what did some imitate? Certain moales and
defects of Action, and so fell into an unpleasant and odious kind of Manual
composition. Therefore Nazianzen, a man of a most Greg. Naz. orat. 20.
sharp judgment, sticks not to call them, Statuas in umbris, a kind of
Hobgoblins and nightwalking spirits, who did nothing less then aemulate the
splendour of Rhetorical dignity. Take heed therefore, that Imitation
degenerate into Caco-zeale, and of proving a Left Handed Cicero.

Cautio XXI.
When you have judiciously proposed your pattern, keep close unto it without
levitie or change, for diversity of copies is the way to mar the Hand of
Action. Titanius Junior was famous for this vice, who (as Capitolinus says)
was the Ape of his time. The same levitie or facility of imitation Libanius the
Sophister had, who was called by those of his times, the very painted Map of
men's manners and dispositions.

Cautio XXII.
Use Exercise. For as the most learned of the Philo de Joseph. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Stob^us Ser. 3. Aus. in lud. Sap.
Jews, there are three Ideas, Nature, Art, and Exercitation; by which we
endeavor to the best end. The Corinthian Orator much commends this
Exercitation. And the Oracle of the Grecian Sage, is, Omnia sita sunt in
Exercitatione. The absolute perfection of all Arts, is from thence; and from it
Eloquence receives her beauteous colors, her Musive or Mosaique Excellency;
whereby she becomes most accomplished.

Bend and wrest your Arm and Hands to the Right, to the Left, and to every
part: that having made them obedient unto you, upon a sudden, and the least
signification of the mind, you may show the glittering orbs of Heaven, and the
gaping jaws of Earth. Sometimes place your arguments upon your Fingers;
sometimes lifting up your Hands, threaten and denounce punishment, or with a
rejecting posture abominate: sometimes shake and brandish your Hand as the
lance of Elocution; that so you may be ready for all variety of speech, and
attain that (...) or facility of action, with the decorum and beauty of
decent motion: which excells both that of colors and proportion. Charmides a
goodly young Orator, when he would compose his gesture to all kind of
elegancie, Xenoph. in Convi.
and (as Ovid speaks) Numerosos ponere gestus) that is, acurate, and made neat
by a subtle judgment) at home, alone, (...) he practiced the gesticulations of
his Hand.

Cautio XXIII.
TO have Censors at times of exercise, who shall inform truly and skilfully of
all our gestures, would much help to the conformation of the Hand. Or to
practice in a great Looking glass: for though that Mirror reflects that image
of one Hand for another, yet we may believe what we see to be done. Demonax, a
great Philosopher, and an acute Rhetorician, advised an untoward Declamer to
use more exercise, and while he answered, that he always first acted his
Orations to himself; Demonax replied, that may very well be; for you act so
little to the purpose, Lucian in Daemo^.
because you have always a fool to your Judge.

Cautio XXIV.
THe gestures of the Hand must be prepared in the Mind, together with the
inward speech, that precedes the outward expression.

Cautio XXV.
Use no uncomely or irregular excess of gesturing with your Fingers in
speaking, nor draw them to any childish and trifling actions, contrary to the
rules of Decorum, and to that they serve for; lest you diminish the glory of
fair speech and Rhetorical persuasion; and offer a great indignity to
Minerva, to whom these organicall parts of Elocution were sacred.

Cautio XXVI.
THe Left hand of it self alone, is most incompetent to the performance of any
perfect action: yet sometimes it does, but very rarely. Most commonly it does
conform and accommodate it self to the Right Hand. And where both Hands concur
to any action, they exhibit more affection. Wherefore (...) in the Duall, is
masculine, cause vis unita fortior.

Cautio XXVII.
BOth Hands do sometimes rest, and are out of action: yet this Rhetorical
silence of the Hand, is an act proper, where no affection is emergent: though a
long intermission of gesture be displeasing.

Cautio XXVIII.
Avoid Knackings, and superstitious flexures of the Fingers, which the Ancients
have not given in precept.

Cautio XXIX.
THe Actions of the Hand are to bend that way, that the voice is directed.

Cautio XXX
TAke heed, that while your Hand endeavors to accomplish the acts of
Rhetorical pronunciation, you lose not modesty, and the moral and civil
vertves, nor the authority of a grave and honest man.

Cautio XXXI.
IN all Action, Nature bears the greatest sway: Every man must consider his
own Nature and temperament. The reason is, because no man can put off his own,
and put on another nature. One Action becomes one man, and another kind of
behavior, another. That which one does without Art, cannot wholly be delivered
by Art; for there is a kind of hidden and ineffable reason, which to know, is
the head of Art. In some, the Civil virtues themselves have no grace: in
others, even the vices of Rhetorique are comely and pleasing. Wherefore a
Rhetorician must know himself, yet not by common precepts; but he must take
counsel of Nature for the framing of the complexionall and individual
properties of his Hand,

Cautio XXXII.
IN the Rhetorical endeavors of the Hand, as in all other Actions, the golden
Mediocrie is best, and most worthy the hand of a prudent man. For the action of
the Hand should be full of dignity and magnanimous resolution, making it a
liberal and free Index of the Mind; such as theirs is, who are said by
Xenophon to be inspired with divine love, who (as he says) gestus ad Xenoph.
in Symp.
speciem quandam maxim liberalem conformant. Which form of appearance consists
in a certain moderation of gesture, no chafed and incomposed rashness, or a too
daring garb of action, nor superfinicall demeanor: nor on the other side, a
rustique and homely fearfulness, which is wont to discourage and disappoint
the purpose of necessary motion. Yet of the two extremes, it is least faulty to
draw nigh to modesty, and an ingenuous fear, than to impudency. The manner
and tempering of gesture, is not only to be fetched from the things
themselves, but also from the age and condition of the Orator: for otherwise a
Philosopher, or some grave person: otherwise a young Sophister, lifted up with
study, and boiling over with the fervencie of an active spirit. A soft and
calm action most commonly becomes grave men, endued with authority: which to
one in the flower of his youth, would be accounted slownes, and a slacking
negligence. Modification of gesture has also regard to the condition and
quality of the Auditors; for an Orator should first consider, with whom, and
in whose presence he is about to act: for in the Senate, or hearing of a
Prince, another action is required than in a Concion to a Congregation of the
people, or an assembly of light young men. Among Kings, and Potentates, and
Fathers of the Court, regard is to be had to their illustrious power and
authority, all juvenile gestient pomp and ostentation laid aside, by a
submisse Action he must transfer all dignity from himself. Concerning this
golden point of moderation, there is a National decorum imposed upon men by
time and place; for according to the Genius of that climate, wherein we
converse, moderation, may admit of a diverse construction. In Italy a fair
spoken, and overmuch gesturing with the Hand, is held comely and acceptable.
And in France he is not a la mode, and a complete Mounsieur, who is not nimble
in the discoursing garb of his Hand, which proportionable to that language is
very brisk, and full of quick and lightsome expressions. And your French
Protestant Divines are easily good Chirologers, some I have lately seen in the
Pulpit, to my great satisfaction, and have gone away more confirmed in the
validity of these Rhetorical gestures, there being scarce any one gesture that
I have cut, but I have seen used in the heat of one discourse of Polemicall
Divinity, such Logical asseverations appeared in their Hands. In Germany, and
with us here in England, who in our National complexion are near allied unto
the Germans, moderation and gravity, in gesture, is esteemed the greater
virtue. The Spaniards have another Standert of moderation and gravity accorded
to the lofty Genius of Spain, where the Hands are as often principalls, as
accessories to their proud expressions. But our language grown now so rich by
the indenization of words of all Nations, and so altered from the old
Teutonique, if the rule of moderation, be calculated according to the
Meridionall propriety of our refined speech, we may with decorum and gravitie
enough (as I suppose) meet the Hand of any of these warmer Nations half way,
with the Manual adjuncts of our expressions.

Chirepilogus.
THus, what my Soul's inspired Hand did find
T'exhibite in this Index of the Mind,
What Nature, or her subtle Zanie can
By signs and tokens reach with Speeches span:
(While many Hands made lighter work) at last
Brought to the nail, has crowned the labor past.
Here my Hand's Genius bids my Fancy stand;
And (having her discoursing Gestures scanned)
Beckens lest for a Manual unfit,
The Work should rise, to make a Hand of it.
MANUM DE TABULA.

