QUESTIONS About the NATURE AND PERPETUITY OF THE Seventh-day Sabbath.

And Proof, That the First day of the Week Is the true Christian-Sabbath.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath day. LONDON: Printed for Nath.
Pond^r, at the Peacock in the Poultry. 1685.

TO THE READER.
SOME may think it strange, since Gods Church has already been so well
furnished with sound Grounds and Reasons by so many wise and godly men, for
proof that the first day of the week is our true Christian Sabbath, that I
should now offer this small Treatise upon the same account. But when the Scales
are even by what already is put in, a little more, you know, makes the weight
the better.

Or grant we had down weight before, yet something over and above, may make his
work the harder, that shall by hanging Fictions on the other end, endeavor to
make things seem too light.

Besides, This Book being little, may best suit such as have but shallow
Purses, short Memories, and but little Time to spare, which usually is the lot
of the mean and poorest sort of men.

I have also written upon this Subject, for that I would, as in other
Gospel Truths, be a fellow witness with good men that the day in which our Lord
rose from the dead should be much set by of Christians.

I have observed that some, otherwise sound in faith, are apt to be entangled
with a Jewish Sabbath, etc. and that some also that are far off from the
observation of that, have but little to say for their own practice though good;
and might I help them I should be glad.

A Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath has no promise of Grace belonging to it, if that
be true (as to be sure it is) where Paul says, The command to honor Parents,
is the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3.

Also it follows from hence, that the Sabbath that has a promise annexed to the
keeping of it is rather that which the Lord Jesus shall give to the Churches of
the Gentiles, Isai. 56.

Perhaps my Method here may not in all things keep the common path of
Argumentation with them that have gone before me: But I trust the godly-wise
will find a taste of Scripture-truth in what I present them with as to the
sanction of our Christiansabbath.

I have here, by handling four Questions, proved, that the Seventh-day Sabbath
was not moral. For that must of necessity be done, before it can be made appear
that the First day of the week is that which is the Sabbath day for Christians.
But withal it follows, that if the Seventh-day Sabbath was not moral, the first
day is not so. What is it then? Why a Sabbath for holy worship is moral; but
this or that day appointed for such service, is sanctified by Precept or by
approved Example. The timeing then of a Sabbath for us lies in God, not man; in
Grace, not Nature; nor in the ministration of death, written and engraven in
stones: God always reserving to himself a power to alter and change both time
and modes of worship according to his own will.

A Sabbath then, or day of rest from worldly affairs to solemnize worship to
God in, all good men do by nature conclude is meet, yea, necessary: yet that,
not Nature, but God reveals.

Nor is that day or time, by God so fixed on, in its own nature, better than
any other: the holiness then of a Sabbath lies, not in the Nature or Place of a
day, but in the Ordinance of God.

Nor does our sanctifying of it, to the ends for which it is ordained, lie in a
bare confession that it is such; but in a holy performance of the Duty of the
day to God by Christ, according to his Word.

But I will not enlarge to detain the Reader longer from the following Sheets;
but shall commit both him and them to the wise dispose of God, and rest,

Thine to serve thee, Joh. Bunyan.

QUESTIONS About the NATURE and PERPE TUITY Of the Seventh-day Sabbath.
QUEST. 1. Whether the Seventh-day Sabbath is Of, or made known to man by the
Law and Light of Nature?
SOmething must be here premised, before I show the grounds of this Question.

First then, By the Law or Light of Nature, I mean, that Law which was concreat
with man; that which is natural to him, being Original with, and Essential to
himself; consequently that which is invariable and unalterable, as is that
Nature.

Secondly, I grant that by this Law of Nature, man understands that there is
one eternal God; that this God is to be worshipped according to his own will;
consequently that time must be allowed to do it in: But whether the Law or
Light of Nature teaches, and, that of it self, without the help of Revelation,
that the Seventh day of the week is that time sanctified of God, and set apart
for his Worship, that is the Question; and the grounds of it are thief:

First, Because the Law of Nature is anticedent to this day* yea completed as
a Law before 'twas known or revealed to man that God either did or would
sanctify the Seventh day of the week at all.

Now this Law, as was said, being natural to a man, ( for man is a L^m unto
himself, (Romans 2.) could only teach the things of a man, and there the Apostle
stints it, 1 Cor. 2. 11.)* But to be able to determine, and that about things
that were yet without being either in Nature, or by Revelation, is that which
belongs not to a man as a man; and the Seventh-day Sabbath as yet, was such:
For Adam was completely made the day before; and God did not sanctify the
Seventh day before it was, none otherwise than by his secret Decree. Therefore
by the Law of Nature Adam understood it not, it was not made known to him
thereby.

Secondly, To affirm the contrary, is to make the Law of Nature Supernatural,
which is an impossibility. Yea, they that do so, make it a Predictor, a
Prophet; a Prophet about divine things to come; yea, a Prophet able to foretell
what shall be, and that without a Revelation; which is a strain that never yet
Prophet pretended to. Besides; to grant this, is to run into a grievous error;
for this does not only make the Law of Nature the first of Prophets; contrary
to Genesis 3. 10. compared with Joh. 1. 1. but it seems to make the will of God,
made known by Revelation, a needless thing. For if the Law of Nature, as such,
can predict, or foretell Gods Secrets, and that before he reveals them, and this
Law of Nature is universal in every individal man in the world, what need is
there of particular Prophets, or of their holy writings? (and indeed here the
Quakers and others split themselves:) For if the Law of Nature can of it self
reveal unto me one thing pertaining to instituted Worship, for that we are
treating of now, and the exact time which God has not yet sanctified and set
apart for the performance thereof, why may it not reveal unto me more, and so
still more; and at last all that is requisite for me to know, both as to my
Salvation, and how God is to be worshipped in the Church on Earth.

Thirdly, If it be of the Law of Nature, then all men by nature are convinced
of the necessity of keeping it, and that though they never read or heard of the
revealed Will of God about it; but this we find not in the world.

For though it is true that the Law of Nature is common to all, and that all
men are to this day under the power and command thereof, yet we find not that
they are by nature under a conviction of the necessity of keeping of a
Seventh-day Sabbath. Yea, the Gentiles, though we read not that they ever
despised the Law of Nature, yet never had, as such, a reverence of a
Seventh-day Sabbath, but rather the contrary.

Fourthly, If therefore the Seventh-day Sabbath is not of the Law of Nature,
then it should seem not to be obligatory to all. For instituted Worship, and
the necessary circumstances thereunto belonging, is obligatory but to some. The
Tree that Adam was forbid to eat of, we read not but that his Children might
have eat the fruit thereof: and Circumcision, the Passover, and other parts of
instituted Worship was enjoined but to some.

Fifthly, I doubt the Seventh-day Sabbath is not of the Law of Nature, and so
not moral; because though we read that the Law of Nature, and that before
Moses, was charged upon the world, yet I fi^d not till then, that the
profanation of a Seventh-day Sabbath was charged upon the world: and indeed to
me this very thing makes a great scruple in the case.

A Law, as I said, we read of, and that from Adam to Moses (Romans 5. 13, 14.)
The transgressions also of that Law we read of them, and that particularly, as
in Genesis 4. 8. chapter 6. 5. chapter 9. 21, 22. chapter 12. 13. chapter 13. 13. chapter 18. 12, 13,
14, 15. chapter 19. 5. ( Ezekiel. 49. 50.) chapter 31. 30. chapter 35. 2. chapter 40. 15. chapter 44.
8, 9, 10. Deuteronomy. 8. 19, 28. chapter 12. 2. Psalm. 106. 35, 36, 37. and Romans the
first and second Chapters.

But in all the Scriptures we do not read, that the breach of a
Seventhday-Sabbath was charged upon men as men all that time. Whence I gather,
that either a Seventh-day Sabbath was not discerned by the Light of Nature, and
so not by that Law imposed; or else, that men by the help and assistance of
that (for we speak of men as men) in old time kept it better, than in after
Ages did the Church of God with better assistance by far: For they are there
yet found fault with as breakers of that Sabbath ( Ezekel 20. 13.)

It follows therefore, that if the Law of Nature does not of it self reveal to
us, as men, that the Seventh day is the holy Sabbath of God. That that day, as
to the sanction of it, is not Moral, but rather Arbitrary, to wit, imposed by
the will of God upon his people, until the time he thought fit to change it for
another day.

And if so, it is hence to be concluded, that though by the Light of Nature men
might see that time must be allowed and set apart for the performance of that
Worship that God would set up in his House, yet, as such, it could not see what
time the Lord would to that end choose. Nature therefore saw that by a positive
Precept, or a Word revealing it, and by no other means.

Nor does this at all take away a whit of that Sanction which God once put upon
the Seventh-day Sabbath; unless any will say, and by sufficient Argument prove,
that an Ordinance for divine Worship receives greater Sanction from the Law of
Nature than from a divine Precept: or stands stronger when it is established
by a Law humane, for such is the Law of Nature, than when imposed by Revelation
of God.

But the Text will put this controversy to an end. The Sanction of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, even as it was the Rest of God, was not till after the Law
of Nature was completed; God rested the seventh day, and sanctified it, (Genesis
2. 3.) Sanctified it; that is, set it apart to the end there mentioned, to wit,
to rest thereon.

Other grounds of this Question I might produce, but at present I will stop
here, and conclude, That if a Seventh-day Sabbath was an essential necessary to
the instituted Worship of God, then it self also as to its sanction for that
Work, was not founded but by a positive Precept; consequently not known of man
at first, but by revelation of God.

QUEST. II. Whether the Seventh-day Sabbath, as to Man's keeping of it holy, was
ever made known to or imposed by a positive Precept upon him until the time of
Moses? which from Adam was about two thousand years.
SOmething must also be here premised, in order to my propounding of my grounds
for this Question; and that is, That the Seventh day was sanctified so soon as
it had being in the world, unto the rest of God (as it is Genesis 2. 2, 3.) and he
did rest from all his works which he had made therein. But the Question is,
Whether when God did thus sanctify this day to his own rest, be did also by
the space of time abovementioned, impose it as an holy Sabbath of rest upon
men; to the end they might solemnize Worship to him in special manner thereon?
And I question this,

First, Because we read not that it was. And reading, I mean, of the divine
Testimony, is ordained of God, for us to find out the mind of God, both as to
Faith and our performance of acceptible service to him.

In reading also, we are to have regard to two things.

1. To see if we can find a Precept: or, 2. A countenanced Practice for what we
do: For both these ways we are to search, that we may find out what is that
good, that acceptible will of God.
For the first of these we have Genesis 2. 16, 17. and for the second, Genesis 8. 20,
21.

Now as to the imposing of a Seventh*day-Sabbath upon men from Adam to Moses,
of that we find nothing in holy Writ either from Precept or Example. True, we
find that Solemn worship was performed by the Saints that then lived: for both
Abel Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob sacrificed unto God ( Genesis 4. 4. chapter 8. 20,
21. chapter 12. 7. chapter 13. 4. chapter 35. 1.) but we read not that the Seventh day was
the time prefixed of God for their so worshipping, or that they took any notice
of it. Some say, that Adam in eating the forbidden Fruit, brake also the
Seventh-day Sabbath, because he fell on that day; but we read not that the
breach of a Sabbath was charged upon him. That which we read is this; Have thou
eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat? ( Genesis
3. 11.) Some say also that Cain killed Abel on a Sabbath day; but we read not
that in his Charge God laid any such thing at his door. This was it of which he
stood guilty before God; namely, That his brothers blood cried unto God against
him from the ground, ( Genesis 4. 10.)

I therefore take little notice of what a man says, though he flourishes his
matter with many brave words, if he bring not with him, Thus says the Lord.
For that, and that only, ought to be my ground of Faith as to how my God would
be worshipped by me. For in the matters material to the Worship of God, it is
safest that thus I be guided in my Judgment: for here only I perceive the
footsteps of the Flock ( Ezekiel. 3. 11. Song 1. 8.) They say further, that for
God to sanctify a thing, is to set it apart. This being true; then it follows,
that the Seventh-day Sabbath was sanctified, that is, set apart for Adam in
Paradise; and so, that it was ordained a Sabbath of rest to the Saints from the
beginning.

But I answer, as I hinted before, that God did sanctify it to his own rest.
The Lord also has set apart him that is godly for himself. But again, it is one
thing for God to sanctify this or that thing to an use, and another thing to
command that that thing be forthwith in being to us. As for instance: the Land
of Canaan was set apart many years for the Children of Israel before they
possessed that Land. Christ Jesus was long sanctified; that is, set apart to be
our Redeemer before he sent him into the world ( Deuteronomy. 32. 8. Joh. 10. 36.)

If then, by Gods sanctifying of the Seventh day for a Sabbath, you understand
it for a Sabbath for man, (but the Text says not so) yet it might be so set
apart for man, long before it should be, as such, made known unto him. And that
the Seventh-day Sabbath was not as yet made known to men, consider

Secondly, Moses himself seems to have the knowledge of it at first, not by
Tradition, but by Revelation; as it is ( Exodus 16. 23.) This is that, says he,
that the Lord has said, (namely to me; for we read not, as yet, that he said
it to any body else) To morrow is the Sabbath of the holy rest unto the Lord.

Also holy Nehemiah suggesteth this, when he says of Israel to God, Thou
made known to them thy holy sabbaths ( Neh. 9. 14.) The first of these Texts
show us, that tidings of a Seventh-day Sabbath for men, came first to Moses
from Heaven: and the second, that it was to Israel before unknown.

But how could be either the one or the other, if the Seventh*day-Sabbath was
taught men by the Light of Nature, which is the moral Law? or if from the
beginning it was given to men by a positive Precept for to be kept.

This therefore strengthening my doubt about the affirmative of the first
Question, and also prepares an Argument for what I plead as to this we have
now under consideration.

Thirdly, This yet seems to me more scrupulous, because that the punishment due
to the breach of the Seventh-day Sabbath was hid from men to the time of Moses;
as is clear; for that it is said of the breaker of the Sabbath, They put him in
ward, because it was not as yet declared what should be done unto him, Numb.
15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.

But methinks, had this Seventhday-Sabbath been imposed upon men from the
beginning, the penalty or punishment due to the breach thereof had certainly
been known before now.

When Adam was forbidden to eat of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil,
the Penalty was then, if he disobeyed, annexed to the Prohibition. So also it
was as to Circumcision, the Passover, and other Ordinances for Worship. How
then can it be thought, that the Seventh-day Sabbath should be imposed upon men
from the beginning; and that the Punishment for the breach thereof, should be
hid with God for the space of Two thousand years! Genesis 2. 16, 17. chapter 17. 13,
14. Exodus 12. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. and the same Chapter, verse. 19.

Fourthly, Gods giving of the Seventh-day Sabbath was with respect to stated
and stinted Worship in his Church; the which, until the time of Moses, was not
set up among his people. Things till then were adding or growing: Now a
Sacrifice, then Circumcision, then again long after that the Passover, etc. But
when Israel was come into the Wilderness, there to receive as Gods
Congregation, a stated, stinted, limited way of Worship, then he appoints them
a time, and times, to perform this Worship in; but as I said before, before that
it was not so, as the whole five Books of Moses plainly show: wherefore the
Seventhday-Sabbath, as such a limited day, cannot be Moral, or of the Law of
Nature, nor imposed till then.

And methinks Christ Jesus and his Apostles do plainly enough declare this very
thing: For that when they repeat unto the people, or expound before them the
Moral Law, they quite exclude the Seventhday-Sabbath: Yea, Paul makes that Law
to us complete without it.

We will first touch upon what Christ does in this case.

As in his Sermon upon the Mount, Matthew chap. 5. chap. 6. chap. 7. in all
that large and heavenly Discourse upon this Law, you have not one syllable
about the Seventh-day Sabbath.

So when the Young man came running, and kneeling, and asking what good thing
he should do to inherit eternal Life, Christ bids him keep the Commandments;
but when the Young man asked which Christ quite leaves out the seventh day, and
puts him upon the other.

As in Matthew. 19. 17, 18, 19.

As in Mark 10. 18, 19, 20.

As in Luke 18. 18, 19, 20.

You will say, he left out the first, and second, and third likewise. To which
I say, that was because the Young man by his Question did presuppose that he
had been a doer of them: For he professed in his Supplication, that he was a
lover of that which is naturally good, which is God, in that his Petition was
so universal for every thing which he had commanded.

Paul also when he makes mention of the moral Law, quite leaves out of that the
very name of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and professes, that to us Christians the
Law of Nature is complete without it.

As in Romans 3. 7, 19.

As in Romans 13. 7, 8, 9, 10.

As in 1 Timothy 1. 8, 9, 10, 11.

He that loves another, says he, has fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall
not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, Thou shall not
covet: and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended under
this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Love works no ill to
his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law.

I make not an Argument of this, but take an occasion to mention it as I go:
But certainly, had the Seventh-day Sabbath been moral, or of the Law of Nature,
(as some would fain persuade themselves) it would not so slenderly have been
passed over in all these repetitions of this Law, but would by Christ or his
Apostles have been pressed upon the people, when so fair an opportunity as at
these times offered it self unto them. But they knew what they did, and
wherefore they were so silent as to the mention of a Seventhday-sabbath when
they so well talked of the Law as moral.

Fifthly, Moses and the Prophet Ezekel both, do fully confirm what has been
insinuated by us; to wit, that the Seventh day as a Sabbath was not imposed
upon men until Israel was brought into the Wilderness.

1. Moses says to Israel, Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand,
and by a stretched-out arm; therefore the Lord thy God commands thee to keep
the sabbath day.

Yea, he tells us, that the Covenant which God made with them in Horeb, that
written in stones, was not made with their forefathers (to wit, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob) but with them, Deuteronomy. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15.

2. Ezekel also is punctual as to this: I caused them, says God by that
Prophet, to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the
wilderness. And I gave them my statutes, and showed them my judgments, which
if a man do he shall even live in them. Moreover, I gave them my sabbaths to be
a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that
sanctifies them, Ezekiel. 20. 10, 11, 12, 13. Exodus 20. 8* chapter 31. 13. chapter 35. 2.

What can be more plain? And these to be sure, are two notable witnesses of
God, who, as you see, do jointly concur in this; to wit, that it was not from
Paradise, nor from the Fathers, but from the Wilderness, and from Sinai, that
men received the Seventh-day Sabbath to keep it holy.

True, it was Gods Sabbath before: for on the first Seventh day we read, that
God rested thereon, and sanctified it. Hence he calls it in the first place MY
Sabbath. I gave them MY Sabbath: But it seems 'twas not given to the Church
till he had brought them into the Wilderness.

But, I say, if it had been moral, it had been natural to man; and by the Light
of Nature men would have understood it, even both before it was, and otherwise.
But of this you see we read nothing, either by positive Law, or countenanced
Example, or any other way, but rather the flat contrary; to wit, That Moses
had* the knowledge of it first from Heaven, not by Tradition. That Israel had
it, not of, or from their Fathers, but in the Wilderness, from him, to wit
Moses, after he had brought them out of the Land of Egypt. And that that whole
Law in which this Seventh-day Sabbath is placed, was given for the bounding and
better ordering of them in their Church State for their time, till the Messiah
should: come and put by a better Ministration this: out of his Church, as we
shall further show anon.

The Seventh-day Sabbath therefore was not from Paradise, not from Nature, nor
from the Fathers, but from the Wilderness, and from Sinai.

QUEST. III. Whether when the Seventh-day Sabbath was given to Israel in the
Wilderness, the Gentiles, as such, was concerned therein.
BEfore I show my ground for this Question, I must also first premise, That the
Gentiles, as such, were then without the Church of God, and pale thereof;
consequently had nothing to do with the essentials or necessary circumstances
of that Worship which God had set up for himself now among the children of
Israel.

Now then for the ground of the Question.

First, we read not that God gave it to any but to the Seed of Jacob. Hence it
is said to Israel, and to Israel only, The Lord has given [you] his Sabbaths:
And again, I also gave [them] my Sabbaths, Exodus 16. 29. Ezekiel. 2. 5, 12.

Now, if the gift of the Seventhday-sabbath was only to Israel, as these Texts
do more than seem to say; then to the Gentiles, as such, it was not given.
Unless any shall conclude, that God by thus doing preferred the Jew to a state
of Gentilism; or that he bestowed on them by thus doing, some high Gentile
Privilege. But this would be very fictious: For, to lay aside reason, the Text
always, as to preference, did set the Jew in the first of places, ( Romans 2.
10:) nor was his giving the Seventh-day Sabbath to them but a sign and token
thereof.

But the great Objection is, Because the Seventh-day Sabbath is found amongst
the rest of those Precepts which is so commonly called the Moral Law; for
thence it is concluded to be of a perpetual duration.

But I Answer, That neither that as given on Sinai is moral; I mean, as to the
manner and ends of its Ministration; of which, God permitting, we shall say
more in our Answer to the fourth Question, whither I direct you for
satisfaction. But,

Secondly, The Gentiles could not be concerned, as such, with Gods giving of a
Seventh-day Sabbath to Israel, because, as I have showed before, it was given
to Israel considered as a Church of God, (Acts 7. 31.)

Nor was it given to them, as such, but with Rites and Ceremonies thereto
belonging, so Levit. 24. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Numb. 28. 9, 10. Neh. 13. 22. Ezekiel. 46.
4.

Now, I say, if this Sabbath has Ceremonies thereto belonging, and if these
Ceremonies were essential to the right keeping of the Sabbath: And again, if
these Ceremonies were given to Israel only, excluding all but such as were
their Proselytes, then this Sabbath was given to them as excluding the Gentiles
as such. But if it had been Moral, the Gentiles could as soon have been deprived
of their Nature as of a Seventh-day Sabbath, though the Jews should have
appropriated it unto themselves only.

Again, to say that God gave this Seventh-day Sabbath to the Gentiles, as such,
(and yet so he must, if it be of the moral Law) is as much as to say, that God
has ordained that that Sabbath should be kept by the Gentiles without; but by
the Jews, not without her Ceremonies. And what Conclusion will follow from
hence, but that God did at one and the same time set up two sorts of acceptable
Worships in the world: one among the Jews, another among the Gentiles? But how
ridiculous such a thought would be, and how repugnant to the wisdom of God, you
may easily perceive.

Yea, what a diminution would this be to Gods Church that then was, for one to
say, the Gentiles were to serve God with more liberty than the Jew! For the Law
was a Yoke, and yet the Gentile is called the Dog, and said to be without God
in the world, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Matthew. 15. 26. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.

Thirdly, When the Gentiles at the Jews return from Babylon, came and offered
their Wares to sell to the Children of Israel at Jerusalem on this Sabbath;
yea, and sold them to them too: yet not they, but the Jews, were rebuked as the
only breakers of that Sabbath. Nay, there dwelt then at Jerusalem men of Tire,
that on this Sabbath sold their Commodities to the Jews, and men of Judah: yet
not they, but the men of Judah, were contended with, as the breakers of this
Sabbath.

True, good Nehemiah did threaten the Gentiles that were Merchants, for lying
then about the Walls of the City, for that by that means they were a temptation
to the Jews to break their Sabbath; but still he charged the breach thereof
only upon his own people, Neh. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

But can it be imagined, had the Gentiles now been concerned with this Sabbath
by Law divine, that so holy a man as Nehemiah would have let them escape
without a rebuke for so notorious a transgression thereof; especially
considering, that now also they were upon Gods ground, to wit, within and
without the Walls of Jerusalem?

Fourthly, Wherefore he says to Israel again, Verily my Sabbaths [ye] shall
keep. And again, [ye] shall keep my Sabbaths. And again, The children of Israel
shall keep my Sabbaths to observe my Sabbaths thoroughout [their] generations,
Exodus 16. 29. chapter 31. 14, 15, 16.

What can be more plain, these things thus standing in the Testament of God,
than that the Seventh-day Sabbath as such, was given to Israel, to Israel
only; and that the Gentiles, as such, were not concerned therein!

Fifthly, The very reason also of Gods giving of the Seventh-day Sabbath to the
Jews, does exclude the Gentiles, as such, from having any concern therein. For
it was given to the Jews, as was said before, as they were considered Gods
Church, and for a sign and token by which they should know that he had chosen
and sanctified them to himself for a peculiar people, Exodus 31. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 13. And a great token and sign it was that he had so chosen
them: For in that he had given to them this Sabbath, he had given to them (his
own Rest) a Figure and Pledge of his sending his Son into the world to redeem
them from the Bondage and Slavery of the Devil: of whom indeed this Sabbath was
a shadow or type, Coloss. 2. 16, 17.

Thus have I concluded my ground for this third Question: I shall therefore now
propound another.

QUEST. IV. Whether the Seventh day-Sabbath did not fall, as such, with the
rest of the Jewish Rites and Ceremonies? Or whether that day, as a Sabbath, was
afterward by the Apostles imposed upon the Churches of the Gentiles?
I Would now also, before I show the grounds of my proposing this Question,
premise what is necessary thereunto; to wit* That Time and Day were both fixed
upon by Law, for the solemn performance of Divine Worship among the Jews; And
that Time and Day is also by Law fixed, for the solemnizing of Divine Worship
to God in the Churches of the Gentiles: But that the Seventh-day Sabbath, as
such, is that Time, that Day, that still I question.

Now before I show the grounds of my questioning of it, I shall enquire into
the nature of that ministration in the bowels of which this Seventh-day Sabbath
is placed. And

First, I say, as to that, the nature of that Law is moral, but the
ministration, and Circumstances thereunto belonging, are shadowish and
figurative.

By the nature of it, I mean the matter thereof: By the Ministration and
Circumstances thereto belonging, I do mean the giving of it by such hands, at
such a Place and time, in such a Mode, as when 'twas given to Israel in the
Wilderness.

The matter therefore, to wit, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength,
and thy neighbor as thy self, is everlasting, ( Mark 12. 29, 30, 31.) and is
not from Sinai, nor from the two Tables of stone, but in Nature; for this Law
commenced and took being and place that day in which man was created: Yea, it
was concreate with him, and without it he cannot be a rational creature, as he
was in the day in which God created him. But for the ministration of it from
Sinai, with the Circumstances belonging to that ministration, they are not
Moral, not Everlasting, but Shadowish and Figurative only.

That Ministration cannot be Moral for three Reasons.

1. It commenced not when Morality commenced, but two thousand years after. 2.
It was not universal as the Law, as moral is, 'twas given only to the Church
of the Jews in those Tables. 3. Its end is past as such a ministration, though
the same Law as to the morality thereof abides. Where are the Tables of Stone
and this Law as therein contained? We only, as to that, have the notice of
such a ministration, and a rehearsal of the Law, with that mode of giving of
it, in the testament of God.
But to come to Particulars.

1. The very Preface to that Ministration carries in it a type of our
deliverance from the Bondage of Sin, the Devil, and Hell. Pharaoh, and Egypt,
and Isreal's bondage there, being a type of these. 2. The very Stones in which
this Law was engraven, was a figure of the Tables of the Heart. The first two
were a figure of the Heart carnal, by which the Law was broken: The last two,
of the Heart spiritual, in which the new Law, the Law of Grace is written and
preserved, Exodus 34. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 3. 3. The very Mount on which this
Ministration was given, was typical of Mount Zion: See Heb. 12. where they are
compared, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 4. Yea, the very Church to whom that
Ministration was given, was a figure of the Church of the Gospel that is on
Mount Zion: See the same Scripture, and compare it with Acts 7. 38. Revel. 14.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 5. That Ministration was given in the hand and by the
disposition of Angels, to prefigure how the new Law or Ministration of the
Spirit was to be given afterward to the Churches under the New Testament by
the hands of the Angel of Gods everlasting Covenant of Grace, who is his only
begotten Son, Isai. 63. 9. Matthew. 3. 1. Acts 3. 22, 23. 6. It was given to
Israel also in the hand of Moses, as Mediator, to show or typisie out, that the
Law of Grace was in aftertimes to come to the Church of Christ by the hand and
mediation of Jesus our Lord, Gal. 3. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 5. Heb. 8. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Heb. 9. 15. chapter 12. 24. 7. As to this Ministration, it was to continue but till
the Seed should come; and then must, as such, give place to a better
Ministration, Gal. 3. 19. A better Covenant, established upon better promises,
Heb. 8. 6.
From all this therefore I conclude, that there is a difference to be put
between the morality of the Law, and the ministration of it upon Sinai. The
Law, as to its morality, was before; but as to this ministration, 'twas not
till the Church was with Moses, and he with the Angels on Mount Sinai in the
Wilderness.

Now in the Law as moral, we conclude a time propounded, but no
Seventh-day Sabbath enjoined: But in that Law, as thus ministered, which
Ministration is already out of doors, we find a seventh day; that seventh day
on which God rested, on which God rested from all his works, enjoined. What is
it then? why the whole Ministration as written and engraven in stones being
removed, the Seventh-day Sabbath must also be removed; for that the time, nor
yet the day, was as to our holy Sabbath, or rest, moral; but imposed with that
whole Ministration, as such, upon the Church, until the time of Reformation:
Which time being come, this Ministration, as I said, as such, cease; and the
whole Law, as to the morality of it, is delivered into the hand of Christ, who
imposes it now also; but not as a Law of Works, nor as that Ministration
written and engraven in Stones, but as a Rule of life to those that have
believed in him, 1 Cor. 9. 21.

So then that Law is still moral, and still supposes, since it teaches that
there is a God, that time must be set apart for his Church to worship him in,
according to that will of his that he has revealed in his Word. But though by
that Law time is required; yet by that, as moral, the time never was prefixed.
The time then of old was appointed by such a ministration of that Law as we
have been now discoursing of; and when that Ministration ceased, that time did
also vanish with it. And now by our new Lawgiver, the Son of God, he being
Lord also of the Sabbath Day, we have a time prefixed, as the Law of Nature
requires, a new day, by him who is the Lord of it; I say, appointed, wherein
we may worship, not in the oldness of that Letter written and engraven in
Stones, but according to, and most agreeing with, his new and holy Testament.
And this I confirm further by those reasons that now shall follow.

First, Because we find not from the resurrection of Christ to the end of the
Bible, any thing written by which is imposed that Seventhday-Sabbath upon the
Churches. Time, as I said, the Law as moral requires; but that time we find no
longer imposed: And in all duties pertaining to God and his true Worship in his
Churches, we must be guided by his Laws and Testaments: By his old Laws, when
his old Worship was in force; and by his new Laws, when his new Worship is in
force. And he has verily now said, Behold, I make all things new.

Secondly, I find, as I have showed, that this Seventh-day Sabbath is confined,
not to the Law of Nature as such, but to that ministration of it which was
given on Sinai: which Ministration as it is come to an end as such, so it is
rejected by Paul as a Ministration no ways capable of abiding in the Church
now, since the ministration of the Spirit also has taken its place, (2 Cor.
3.) Wherefore instead of propounding it to the Churches with Arguments tending
to its reception, he seeks by degrading it of its old luster and glory, to wean
the Churches from any likement thereof;

1. By calling of it the ministration of Death, of the Letter, and of
Condemnation, a term most frightful, but no ways alluring to the godly. 2. By
calling it a Ministration that now has NO glory, by reason of the exceeding
glory of that Ministration under which by the holy Spirit the New
Testament-Churches are: And these are weaning Considerations, 2 Cor. 3. 3. By
telling of them it is a Ministration that tends to blind the Mind, and to
veil the Heart as to the knowledge of their Christ: So that they cannot, while
under that, behold his beauteous face, but as their heart shall turn from it to
him, 2 Cor. 3. 4. And that they might not be left in the dark, but perfectly
know what Ministration it is that he means, he says expressly, it is that
written and engraven in stones. See again 2 Cor. 3. And in that Ministration it
is that this Seventh-daysabbath is found.
But shall we think that the Apostles speaks any thing of all here said, to
wean Saints off from the Law of Nature as such! No verily, that he retains in
the Church, as being managed there by Christ: But THIS Ministration is
dangerous now, because it cannot be maintained in the Church, but in a way of
contempt to the Ministration of the Spirit, and is derogatory to the glory of
that.

Now these, as I said, are weaning Considerations. No man, I do think, that
knows himself, or the glory of a Gospel-ministration, can, if he understands
what Paul says here, desire that such a Ministration should be retained in the
Churches.

Fourthly, This Seventh-day Sabbath has lost its ceremonies (those unto which
before you are cited by the Texts) which was with it imposed upon the old
Church for her due performance of Worship to God thereon: How then can this
Sabbath now he kept? Kept, I say, according to Law. For it the Church on which
it was at first imposed, was not to keep it, yea, could not keep it legally
without the practicing of those Ceremonies: And if those Ceremonies are long
ago dead and gone, how will those that pretend to a belief of a continuation of
the Sanction thereof, keep it, I say, according as it is written?

If they say, they retain the day, but change their manner of observation
thereof; I ask, Who has commanded them so to do? This is one of the Laws of
this Sabbath: Thou shall take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two
tenth deals shall be in one cake. And thou shall set them in two rows, six on a
row, upon the pure Table before the Lord. And thou shall put pure frankincense
upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering
made by fire unto the Lord. Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the
Lord continually, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting
covenant, Levit. 24. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. You may see also other places, as Numb. 28.
9, 10. Neh. 13. 22. and Ezekiel. 46. 4.

Now if these be the Laws of the Sabbath, this Seventh-day Sabbath; And if God
did never command that this Sabbath should by his Church be sanctified without
them* And, as was said before, if these Ceremonies have been long since dead
and buried, how must this Sabbath be kept?

Let men take heed, lest while they plead for Law, and pretend themselves to be
the only doers of Gods will, they be not found the biggest transgressors
thereof. And why can they not as well keep the other Sabbaths, as the Sabbaths
of Months, of Years, and the Jubilee? For this, as I have showed, is no moral
Precept, it is only a branch of the ministration of Death and Condemnation.

Fifthly, The Seventh-day Sabbath, as such, was a sign and shadow of things to
come; and a sign cannot be the thing signified and substance too: Wherefore
when the thing signified, or substance, is come, the sign or thing shadowing
cease. And, I say, the Seventh-day Sabbath being so, as a Seventh-day Sabbath
it cease also. See again, Exodus 31. 13, 14. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 21. Coloss. 2. 14.

Nor do I find that our Protestant Writers, notwithstanding their reverence of
the Sabbath, do conclude otherwise; but that though time, as to worshipping
God, must needs be contained in the bowels of the moral Law, as moral; yet they
for good reasons forbear to affix the seventh day as that time there too. They
do it, I say, for good reasons, reasons drawn from the Scripture; or rather,
for that the Scripture draws them so to conclude: yet they cast not away the
morality of a Sabbath of rest to the Church. It is to be granted then, that
time for Gods Worship abides for ever, but the seventh day vanishes as a
shadow and sign; because such indeed it was, as the Scripture above cited
declares as to the Sanction thereof as a Sabbath.

The Law of Nature then calls for Time; but the God of Nature assigns it, and
has given power to his Son to continue SUCH time as himself shall by his
eternal Wisdom judge most meet for the Churches of the Gentiles to solemnize
Worship to God by him in. Hence he is said to be Lord even of the sabbath day,
Matthew. 12. 9.

Sixthly, I find by reading Gods Word, that Paul by Authority Apostolical,
takes away the Sanctions of all the Jews Festivals and Sabbaths.

This is manifest, for that he leaves the observation or non-observation of
them, as things indifferent to the Mind and Discretion of the Believers. One
man esteems one day above another: another esteems every day alike. Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Romans 14. 5.

By this last clause of the Verse, [ Let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind] he does plainly declare, that such days are now stripped of their
Sanction: For none of Gods Laws, while they retain their Sanction, are left to
the will and mind of the believers, as to whether they will observe them or no.
Men, I say, are not left to their liberty in such a case; for when a stamp of
Divine Authority is upon a Law, and abides, so long we are bound, not to our
mind, but to that Law: But when a thing, once sacred, has lost its sanction,
then it falls, as to Faith and Conscience, among other common or indifferent
things. And so the Seventh-day Sabbath did. Again.

Seventhly, Thus Paul writes to the Church of Coloss. Let no man judge you in
meat, or in drink, or in respect of any holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbath: which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ, Coloss.
2. 16, 17. Here also, as he serves other Holy Days, he serves the Sabbath: He
gives a liberty to believers to refuse the observation of it, and commands that
no man should judge against them for their so doing. And as you read, the
reason of his so doing is, because the body, the substance is come: Christ,
says he, is the Body, or that which these things were a shadow or figure of.
The Body is Christ.

Nor has the Apostle, since he says [or of the Sabbath] one would th(...)
left any hole, out at which men's inventions could get: but man has sought out
many; and, so, many he will use.

But again, That the Apostle by this word Sabbath intends the
Seventh-day Sabbath, is clear; for that it is by Moses himself counted for a
sign, as we have showed: and for that none of the other Sabbaths were a more
clear shadow of the Lord Jesus Christ than this. For that, and that alone, is
called the Rest of God: in it God rested from all his works. Hence he calls it
by way of eminency MY Sabbath, and MY Holy Day, Isai. 58. 13.

Yet could that Rest be nothing else but typical; for God, never since the
world began, really rested, but in his Son: This is he, says God, in whom I am
well pleased. This Sabbath then, was Gods Rest typically, and was given to
Israel as a sign of his Grace toward them in Christ: Wherefore when Christ was
risen, it ceased, and was no longer of obligation to bind the Conscience to the
observation thereof. [Or of the Sabbath] He distinctly singleth out THIS
Seventh day, as that which was a most noble shadow, a most exact shadow. And
then puts that with the other together; saying, they are a shadow of things to
come; and that Christ has answered them all. The body is Christ.

Eighthly, No man will, I think, deny, but that Heb. 4. 4. intends the
Seventh-day Sabbath, on which God rested from all his works; for the Text does
plainly say so: Yet may the observing Reader easily perceive, that both it, and
the Rest of Canaan also, made mention of verse. 5. were typical, as to a day
made mention of verse. 7, and 8. which day he calls another. He would not
afterward have made mention of another day. If Joshuah had given them rest, he
would not. Now if they had not that Rest in Joshuah's days, be sure they had it
not by Moses; for he was still before.

All the Rests therefore that Moses gave them, and that Joshua gave them too,
were but typical of another day, in which God would give them rest, verse. 9,
10. And whether the day to come, was Christ, or Heaven, it makes no matter:
It Is enough that they before did fail, as always Shadows do, and that therefore
mention by David is, and that afterward, made of another day. There remains
therefore a rest to the people of God. A Rest to come, of which the Seventh day
in which God rested, and the Land of Canaan, was a type; which Rest begins in
Christ now, and shall be consummated in glory.

And in that he says, There remains a Rest, referring to that of David, What
is it, if it signifies not, that the other Rests remain not? There remains
therefore a Rest; a Rest prefigured by the Seventh day, and by the Rest of
Canaan, though they are fled and gone.

There remains a Rest; a Rest which stands not now in signs or shadows, in the
Seventh day, or Canaan; but in the Son of God, and his Kingdom, to whom, and to
which the weary are invited to come for rest. Isai. 28. 12. Matthew. 11. 28. Heb.
4. 11.

Yet this casts not out the Christians Holy Day or Sabbath: For that was not
ordained to be a Type or Shadow of things to come, but to sanctify the Name of
their God in, and to perform that worship to him which was also in a shadow
signified by the ceremonies of the Law, as the Epistle to the Hebrews does
plentifully declare.

And I say again, the Seventh-daysabbath cannot be it, for the reasons showed
before.

Ninthly, Especially if you add to all this, that nothing of the ministration
of Death written and engraven in stones, is brought by Jesus, or by his
Apostles into the Kingdom of Christ, as a part of his instituted Worship. Hence
it is said of that Ministration in the bowels of which this Seventh-day Sabbath
is sound, that it has now NO glory; that its glory is done away, in or by
Christ, and so is laid aside, the ministration of the Spirit that excels in
glory, being come in the room thereof.

I will read the Text to you.

But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was
glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face
of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away.
(It was given at first with this Proviso, that it should not always retain its
glory, that Sanction, as a Ministration) How shall not the ministration of the
Spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation be glory,
much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that
which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory
that excelieth. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that
which remains is glorious. 2 Cor. 3.

What can be more plain? The Text says expressly, that this ministration does
NOT remain; yea, and insinuates, that in its first institution it was ordained
with this Proviso, It was to be done away. Now if in its first institution upon
Sinai it was thus ordained; and if by the coming in of the ministration of the
Spirit, this Ordination is now executed; that is, if by it, and the Apostle
says it, it is done away by a ministration that remains: then where is that
Seventh-day Sabbath?

Thus therefore I have discoursed upon this fourth Question: And having showed
by this Discourse, that the old Seventh-day Sabbath is abolished and done away,
and that it has nothing to do with the Churches of the Gentiles; I am next to
show what day it is that must abide, that must abide as holy to the Christians,
and for them to perform their New Testament-church-service in. Take the
Question thus.

QUEST. V. Since it is denied that the Seventh-day Sabbath is moral, and is
found it is not to abide as a Sabbath for ever in the Church, What time is to
be fixed on for New Testament-Saints to perform together, Divine Worship to God
by Christ in?
UPon this Question hangs the stress of all, as to the Subject now under
consideration: But before I can speak distinctly to it, I must premise, as I
have in order to my speaking to the Questions before, something for the better
clearing of our way.

1. Then, we are not now speaking of all manner of worshipping God, nor of all
times in which all manner of worship is to be performed; but of that Worship,
which is Church-worship, or Worship that is to be performed by the Assembly of
Saints, when by the will of God they in all parts of his Dominion assemble
together to worship him; which Worship has a prefixed time allotted to, or for
its performance, and without which it cannot, according to the mind of God, be
done. This is the time, I say, that we are to discourse of, and not of ALL time
appointed for all manner of Worship.

I do not question but that Worship by the godly is performed to God every day
of the week; yea, and every night too, and that time is appointed or allowed of
God for the performance of such Worship. But this time is not fixed to the same
moment or ho^^ universally, but is left to the discretion of the Believers, as
their frame of Spirit, or Occasions, or Exigencies, or Tenptations, or Duty
shall require.

We meddle then only with that time that the Worship aforesaid is to be
performed in; which time the Law of Nature as such supposes, but the God of
Nature chooses. And this time as to the Churches of the Gentiles, we have proved
is not that time which was assigned to the Jews, to wit, THAT Seventh day which
was imposed upon them by the ministration of death; for, as we have showed
already, that Ministration indeed is done away by a better and more glorious
Ministration, the Ministration of the Spirit; which Ministration surely would
be much more inferior than that which has now no glory, was it defective as to
this. That is, if it imposed a Gospel-service, but appointed not time to
perform that Worship in: or if notwithstanding all its commendation, it should
be forced to borrow of a Ministration inferior to it self; that, to wit, the
time without which by no means its most solemn worship can be performed.

This then is the Conclusion, that TIME to worship God in is required by the
Law of Nature; but that the Law of Nature does, as such, fix it on the Seventh
day from the Creation of the World, that I utterly deny, by what I have said
already, and have yet to say on that behalf: Yea, I hope to make it manifest,
as I have, that this Seventh day is removed; that God, by the ministration of
the Spirit, has changed the time to another day, to wit, The first day of the
week. Therefore we conclude the time is fixed for the worship of the New
Testament-Christians, or Churches of the Gentiles, unto that day.

Now in my discourse upon this Subject I shall,

1. Touch upon those Texts that are more close, yet have a divine intimation of
this thing in them. 2. And then I shall come to Texts more express.
First, for those Texts that are more close, yet have a divine intimation of
this thing in them.

First, The comparison that the Holy Ghost makes between the Rest of God from
his Works, and the Rest of Christ from his, does intimate such a thing: He that
has entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works as God did
from his, Heb. 4. 10.

Now God rested from his Works, and sanctified a day of rest to himself, as a
signal of that Rest; which day he also gave to his Church as a day of holy rest
likewise. And if Christ thus rested from his own Works, (and the Holy Ghost
says he did thus rest) he also has sanctified a day to himself, as that in
which he has finished his Work, and given it also to his Church to be an
everlasting Memento of his so doing, and that they should keep it holy for his
sake.

And see! as the Fathers work was first, so his day went before; and as the
Sons work came after, so his day accordingly succeeded. The Fathers day was on
the Seventh day from the Creation, the Sons the First day following.

Nor may this be slighted, because the Text says, as God finished his Work, so
Christ finished his; He also has ceased from his own works as God did from
his. He rested, I say, as God did; but God rested on his resting day, and
therefore so did Christ. Not that he rested on the Fathers resting day; for
it is evident, that then he had great part of his work to do; for he had not as
then got his conquest over Death, but the next day he also entered into his
Rest, having by his rising again, finished his Work, viz. made a Conquest over
the Powers of darkness, and brought Life and Immortality to light through his
so doing.

So then, that being the day of the Rest of the Son of God, it must needs be
the day of the Rest of his Churches also. For God gave his resting day to his
Church to be a Sabbath; and Christ rested from his own works as God did from
his, therefore he also gave the day in which he rested from his Works, a
Sabbath to the Churches, as did the Father. Not that there are TWO Sabbaths at
once: The Fathers was imposed for a time, even until the Son's should come;
yea, as I have showed you, even in the very time of its imposing it was also
ordained to be done away. Hence he says, that Ministration was to be done
away, 2 Cor. 3. Therefore we plead not for two Sabbaths to be at one time, but
that a succession of time was ordained to the New Testament-Saints, or Churches
of the Gentiles, to worship God in; which time is that in which the Son rested
from his own Works as God did from his.

Secondly, Hence he calls himself, The Lord even of the Sabbath day, as Luke 5.
Matthew. 12. shows. Now to be a LORD, is to have Dominion, Dominion over a thing,
and so power to alter or change it according to that power; and where is he
that dares say Christ has not this absolutely?

We will therefore conclude, that it is granted on all hands he has. The
Question then is, Whether he he has exercised that power to the demolishing or
removing of the Jews Seventh day, and establishing another in its room? The
which I think is easily answered, in that he did not rest from his own Works
therein; but chose, for his own Rest, to himself another day.

Surely, had the Lord Jesus intended to have established the Seventh day to the
Churches of the Gentiles, he would himself in the first place have rested from
his own Works therein; but since he passed by that day, and took no notice of
it, as to the finishing of his own Works, as God took notice of it when he had
finished his; it remains that he fixed upon another day, even the First of the
Week; on which, by his rising again, and showing himself to his Disciples
before his Passion, he made it manifest that he had chosen, as Lord of the
Sabbath, that day for his own Rest. Consequently, and for the Rest of his
Churches, and for his Worship to be solemnized in.

Thirdly, And on THIS day some of the Saints that slept arose, and began their
eternal Sabbath, Matthew. 27. 52, 53. See how the Lord Jesus had glorified this
day! Never was such a stamp of divine Honor put upon any other day, no not
since the world began. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints
which slept arose and came out of their graves after his resurrection, etc.
That is, they rose as soon as he was risen: But why was not all this done on
the Seventh day? No, that day was set apart that Saints might adore God for the
works of Creation, and that Saints thorough that might look for Redemption by
Christ: But now a work more glorious than that is to be done, and therefore
another day is assigned for the doing of it in. A work, I say, of Redemption
completed, a day therefore by it self must be assigned for this; and some of
the Saints to begin their eternal Sabbath with God in Heaven, therefore a day
by it self must be appointed for this. Yea, and that this day might not want
that glory that might attract the most dim-sighted Christian to a desire after
the sanction of it, the Resurrection of Christ, and also of those Saints met
together on it: Yea, they both did begin their eternal rest thereon.

Fourthly, The Psalmist speaks of a day that the Lord Jehovah, the Son of God,
has made; and says, We will rejoice and be glad in it. But what day is this?
Why the day in which Christ was made the head of the corner, which must be
applied to the day in which he was raised from the dead, which is the first of
the Week.

Hence Peter says to the Jews, when he treats of Christ before them, and
particularly of his Resurrection, This is the stone which [was] set at naught
of you builders which [is] become the head of the corner. He was set at naught
b^ them, the whole course of his Ministry unto his death, and was mad the head
of the Corner by God that day he rose from the dead. This day therefore is the
day that the Lord Jehovah has made a day o^ rejoicing to the Church of Christ
and we will rejoice and be glad i^ it.

For can it be imagined, that the Spirit by the Prophet should thus signalize
this day for nothing; saying, This is the day which the Lord has made, to no
purpose? Yes, you may say, for the resurrection of his Son.

But I add, that that is not all, it is a day that the Lord has both made for
that, and that we might rejoice and be glad in it. Rejoice, that is, before the
Lord while solemn divine Worship is performed on it, by all the people that
shall partake of the Redemption accomplished then.

Fifthly, God the Father again leaves such another stamp of divine note and
honor upon this day as he never before did leave upon any; where he says to
our Lord, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Acts 13. 33. still, I
say, having respect to the first day of the week; for that, and no other, is
the day here intended by the Apostle. This day, says God, is the day: And as
concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to
corruption, he says on this wise, I will give thee the sure mercies of David:
wherefore he says in another Psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. Wherefore the day in which God did this work, is greater than
that in which he finished the work of Creation for his making of the Creation
saved it not from corruption, but now he has done a work which corruption
cannot touch, wherefore the day on which he did this, ha^ this note from his
own mouth This day, as a day that does transcend.

And, as I said, this day is the Fir^^ of the Week; for 'twas in that da^ that
God begat his beloved So from the dead. This first day o^ the week therefore on
it God foun^ that pleasure which he found not i^ the Seventh day from the World
Creation, for that in it his Son did live again to him.

Now shall not Christians, when they do read that God says, This day, and that
too with reference to a work done on it by him, so full of delight to him, and
so full of life and Heaven to them, set also a remark upon it, saying, This was
the day of Gods pleasure, for that his Son did rise thereon; and shall it not
be the day of my delight in him! This is the day in which his Son was both
begotten, and born, and became the First Fruits to God of them that sleep; yea,
and in which also he was made by him the chief, and head of the corner; and
shall not we rejoice in it? Acts 13. 33. Heb. 1. 5. Coloss. 1. 18. Revel. 1. 5.

Shall Kings, and Princes, and Great men set a remark upon the day of their
Birth and Coronation, and expect that both Subjects and Servants should do them
high honor on that day! and shall the day in which Christ was both begotten
and born, be a day contemned by Christians! and his Name not be, but of a
common regard on that day?

I say again, Shall God, as with his finger, point, and that in the face of the
world, at this day, saying, Thou art my Son, this day, etc. and shall not
Christians fear, and awake from their employments, to worship the Lord on this
day!

If God remembers it, well may I! If God says, and that with all gladness of
heart, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee! may not! ought not I
also to set this day apart to sing the songs of my Redemption in?

This day my Redemption was finished.

This day my dear Jesus revived.

This day he was declared to be the Son of God with power.

Yea, this is the day in which the Lord Jesus finished a greater work than ever
yet was done in the world: yea, a work in which the Father himself was more
delighted than he was in making of Heaven and Earth: And shall Darkness and the
shadow of Death stain this day! Or shall a Cloud dwell on this day! Shall God
regard this day from above! and shall not his Light shine upon this day! What
shall be done to them that curse this day, and would not that the Stars should
give their light thereon? This day! after this day was come, God never, that we
read of, made mention with delight, of the old Seventh-day Sabbath more.

Sixthly, Nor is that altogether to be slighted, when he says, When he
brings his first - begotten into the world, Let all the Angels of God worship
him, to wit, at that very time and day, Heb. 1. 6.

I know not what our Expositors say of this Text, but to me it seems to be
meant of his Resurrection from the dead, both because the Apostle is speaking
of that, verse. 5. and closes that Argument with this Text, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. And again, I will be his Father, and he shall be
my Son. And again, when he brings his first-begotten into the world, he
says, And let all the Angels of God worship him.

So then, for Gods bringing of his first-begotten now into the world, was by
his raising him again from the dead after they by crucifying of him had turned
him out of the same.

Thus then God brought him into the world, never by them to be hurried out of
it again: For Christ being now raised from the dead, dies no more* death has
no more dominion over him.

Now, says the Text, when he brings him thus into the world, he requires
that worship be done unto HIM: When? that very day, and that by all the Angels
of God. And if by ALL, then Ministers are not excluded; and if not Ministers*
then not Churches. for what is said to the Angel, is said to the Church it
self, Rev. 2. 1, 7. chapter 2. 8, 11. chapter 2. 12, 17. chapter 2. 18, 29. chapter 3. 1, 6.
chapter 3. 7, 13. chapter 3. 14, and 22.

So then, if the Question be asked, when they must worship him: the Answer is,
When he brought him into the world, which was on the first day of the week; for
then he brings him again from the dead, and gave the whole World and the
Government thereof into his holy hand. This Text therefore is of weight as to
what we have now under consideration, to wit, that the First day of the Week,
the day in which God brought his First-begotten into the world, should be the
day of worshipping him by all the Angels of God.

Seventhly, Hence this day is called the Lords day, as John says, I was in the
spirit on the Lords day: the day in which he rose from the dead, Rev. 1. 10.

The Lords day: Every day, say some, is the Lords day. Indeed this for
discourse-sake may be granted* but strictly, no day can so properly by called
the Lords day, as this First day of the week; for that no day of the Week or of
the Year has those badges of the Lords glory upon it, nor such divine Grace put
upon it us has the First day of the Week. This we have already made appear in
part, and shall make appear much more before we have done therewith.

There is nothing, as I know of, that bears this title but the Lords Supper,
and this day, 1 Cor. 11, 20. Rev. 1. 10. And since Christians count it an abuse
to allegorize the first, let them also be ashamed to santasticalize the last:
The Lords day is doubtless the day in which he rose from the dead. To be sure
it is not the old Seventh day; for from the day that he arose, to the end of
the Bible, we find not that he did hang so much as one twist of glory upon
that; but this day is beautified with glory upon glory, and that both by the
Father and the Son; by the Prophets and those that were raised from the dead
thereon; therefore THIS day must be more than the rest.

But we are as yet but upon divine Intimations, drawn from such Texts which, if
heartily considered, do very much smile upon this great truth; namely, that the
First day of the week is to be accounted the Christian Sabbath, or Holy day for
Divine Worship in the Churches of the Saints. And now I come to the Texts that
are more express.

Secondly then,

First, This was the day in the which he did use to show himself to his people,
and to congregate with them after he rose from the dead. On the first first
day, even on the day on which he rose from the dead, he visited his people,
both when together and apart, over, and over, and over, as both Luke and John
do testify, ( Luke 24. Joh. 2.) And preached such sermons of his resurrection,
and gave unto them; yea, and gave them such demonstration of the truth of-all,
as was never given them from the foundation of the world. Showing, he showed
them his risen body; opening, he opened their Understandings; and dissipating,
he so scattered their Unbelief on THIS day, as he never had done before: And
this continued one way or another even from before day until the evening.

Secondly, On the next first day following the Church was within again; that
is, congregated to wait upon their Lord. And John so relates the matter, as to
give us to understand that they were not so assembled together again till then:
After eight days, says he, again the Disciples were within; clearly
concluding, that they were not so on the days that were between, no not on the
old Seventh day.

Now why should the Holy Ghost thus precisely speak of their assembling
together upon the first day, if not to confirm us in this, that the Lord had
chosen that day for the new Sabbath of his Church? Surely the Apostles knew
what they did in their meeting together upon that day; yea, and the Lord Jesus
also; for that he used SO to visit them when SO assembled, made his practice a
Law unto them: For Practice is enough for us New Testament Saints, specially
when the Lord Jesus himself is in the head of that practice, and that after he
rose from the dead.

Perhaps some may stumble at the word [after] after eight days; but the meaning
is, at the conclusion of the eighth day, or when they had spent in a manner the
whole of their Sabbath in waiting upon their Lord, then in comes their Lord,
and finisheth that their days service to him with confirming of Thomas's faith,
and by letting drop other most heavenly treasure among them. Christ said, he
must lie three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth, yet it is
evident, that he rose the third day, 1 Cor. 15. 4.

We must take then a part for the whole, and conclude, that from the time that
the Lord Jesus rose from the dead, to the time that he showed his Hands and his
Side to Thomas, eight days were almost expired; that is, he had sanctified unto
them two first days, and had accepted that service they had performed to him
therein, as he testified by giving of them so blessed a farewell at the
conclusion of both those days.

Hence now we conclude, that this was the custom of the Church at this day* to
wit, upon the first day of the week to meet together, and to wait upon their
Lord therein. For the Holy Ghost counts it needless to make a continued
repetition of things; it is enough therefore if we have now and then mention
made thereof.

Obj. But Christ showed himself alive to them at other times also, as in Joh.
21, etc.

Answ. The names of all those days in which he so did are obliterate and
blotted out, that they might not be idolized; for Christ did not set them apart
for worship, but this day, the first day of the Week, by its name is kept alive
in the Church, the Holy Ghost surely signifying thus much, that how hidden
soever other days were, Christ would have his day, the first day had in
everlasting remembrance among Saints.

Churches also meet together now on the Weekdays, and have the presence of
Christ with them too in their employments; but that takes not off from them the
sanction of the first day of the Week, no more than it would take away the
sanction of the old Seventh day, had it still continued holy to them: wherefore
this is no let or objection to hinder our sanctifying of the first day of the
Week to our God. But

Thirdly, Add to this, that upon Pentecost, which was the first day of the
Week, mention is made of their being together again: For Pentecost was always
the morrow after the Sabbath, the old Seventh-day Sabbath. Upon this day, I
say, the Holy Ghost says, they were again with one accord together in one
place.

But oh! the glory that then attended them, by the presence of the Holy Ghost
among them: Never was such a thing done as was done on that first day till
then. We will read the Text; And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they
were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from
Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, as of fire: And it sat
upon each of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 1, 2,
3, 4.

Here Is a first day glorified! Here Is a countenance given to the day of their
Christian assembling. But we will note a few things upon it.

First, The Church was now, as on other, first days, all with one accord in one
place. We read not that they came together by virtue of any precedent
Revelation, nor by Accident, but contrariwise by Agreement; they was to gather
with one accord, or by appointment, in pursuance of their duty, setting apart
that day, as they had done the first days before, to the holy service of their
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, We read that this meeting of theirs was not begun on the old
Sabbath, but when Pentecost was fully come: the Holy Ghost intimating, that
they had left now, and begun to leave, the Seventh-day Sabbath to the
unbelieving Jews.

Thirdly, Nor did the Holy Ghost come down upon them till every moment of the
old Sabbath was past, Pentecost, as was said, was FULLY come first: And when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one
place, and then, etc.

And why was not this done on the Seventh-day Sabbath? but, possibly, to show,
that the Ministration of Death and Condemnation was not that by or thorough
which Christ the Lord would communicate so good a gift unto his Churches, Gal.
3. 1, 2, 3, 4.

This Gift must be referred to the Lords day, the first day of the week, to
fulfill the Scripture, and to sanctify yet further this holy day unto the use
of all New Testament Churches of the Saints. For since on the first day of the
week our Lord did rise from the dead, and by his special presence, I mean his
personal, did accompany his Church therein, and SO preach as he did, his holy
truths unto them, it was most meet that they on the same day also should
receive the first fruits of their eternal Life most gloriously.

And, I say again, since from the resurrection of Christ to this day, the
Church then did receive upon the first day, (but as we read, upon no other)
such glorious things as we have mentioned, it is enough to beget in the hearts
of them that love the Son of God, a high esteem of the first day of the week.
But how much more, when there shall be joined to these, proof that it was the
custom of the first Gospel Church, the Church of Christ at Jerusalem, after our
Lord was risen; to assemble together to wait upon God on the first day of the
Week with their Lord as leader.

To say little more to this head, but only to repeat what is written of this
day of old, to wit, that it should be proclaimed the self same day, to wit, the
morrow after the Sabbath, which is the first day of the Week, that it may be an
holy convocation unto you: you shall do no servile work therein: it shall be a
statute for ever in all your dwellings, Levit. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

This Ceremony was about the Sheaf that was to be waved, and Bread of
First Fruits, which was a type of Christ; for he is unto God the first fruits
of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20.

This Sheaf, or Bread, must not be waved on the old Seventh day, but on the
morrow after, which is the first day of the Week, the day in which Christ rose
from the dead and waved himself as the First Fruits of the Elect unto God. Now
from this day they were to count seven Sabbaths complete, and on the morrow
after the seventh Sabbath, which was the first day of the week again; and this
Pentecost upon which we now are, then they was to have a new Meat Offering,
with Meatofferings and Drink Offerings, etc.

And on the self same day they, were to proclaim that that first day, should be
a holy Convocation unto them. The which the Apostles did, and grounded that
their Proclamation so on the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, not on Ceremonies,
that at the same day they brought three thousand Souls* to God, Acts 2. 41.

Now what another signal was here put upon the first day of the week! the day
in which our Lord rose from the dead, assembled with his Disciples, poured out
so abundantly of the Spirit, and gathered even by the first draught, that his
Fishermen made by the Gospel, such a number of Souls to God.

Thus then they proclaimed, and thus they gathered sinners on the first First
day that they preached; for though they had assembled together over and over
with their Lord before therein, yet they began not jointly to preach until this
first day Pentecost.

Now, after this the Apostles to the Churches did never make mention of a
Seventh-day Sabbath. For as the Wave-sheaf and the Bread of First Fruits were a
figure of the Lord Jesus, and the waving, of his life from the dead: So that
morrow after the Sabbath on which the Jews waved their Sheaf, was a figure of
that in which our Lord did rise; consequently, when their morrow after the
Sabbath ceased, our morrow after that began, and so has continued a blessed
morrow after their Sabbath, as a holy Sabbath to Christians from that time ever
since.

Fourthly, We come yet more close to the custom of Churches; I mean, to the
custom of the Churches of the Gentiles; for as yet we have spoken but of the
practice of the Church of God which was at Jerusalem; only we will add, that
the Customs that were laudable and binding with the Church at Jerusalem, were
with reverence to be imitated by the Churches of the Gentiles; for there was
but one Law of Christ for them both to worship by.

Now then, to come to the point, to wit, that it was the custom of the Churches
of the Gentiles, on the first day of the week, but upon no other that we read
of, to come together to perform divine Worship to their Lord.

Hence it is said, And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples were
come together to break bread, etc. Acts 20. 7. This is a Text, that as to
matter of fact, cannot be contradicted by any, for the Text says plainly they
did so, the Disciples then came together to break bread, the Disciples among
the Gentiles did so.

Thus you see that the solemnizing of a first day to holy uses was not limited
to, though first preached by the Church that was at Jerusalem. The Church at
Jerusalem was the Mother Church, and not that at. Rome, as some falsely
imagine; for from this Church went out the Law and the holy Word of God to the
Gentiles. Wherefore it must be supposed that this meeting of the Gentiles on
the first day of the Week to break bread, came to them by holy tradition from
the Church at Jerusalem, since they were the first that kept the first day as
holy unto the Lord their God.

And indeed, they had the best advantage to do it; for they had their Lord in
the head of them to back them to it by his presence and preaching thereon.

But we will a little comment upon the Text. Upon the [first day] of the Week.
Thus you see the day is nominated, and so is kept alive among the Churches: For
in that the day is nominated on which this religious Exercise was performed, it
is to be supposed that the Holy Ghost would have it live, and be taken notice
of by the Churches that succeed.

It also may be nominated to show, that both the Church at Jerusalem, and those
of the Gentiles did harmonize in their Sabbath, jointly concluding to solemnize
Worship on a day. And then again to show, that they all had left the old
Sabbath to the unbelievers, and jointly chose to sanctify the day of the
rising of their Lord, to this work.

They came together [to break bread] to partake of the Supper of the Lord. And
what day so fit as the Lords day for this? This was to be the work of that day,
to wit, to solemnize that Ordinance among themselves, adjoining other solemn
Worship thereto, to fill up the day, as the following part of the verse shows.
This day therefore was designed for this work, the whole day, for the Text
declares it: The first day of the week was set, by them, apart for this work.

Upon [the] first day; not upon A first day, or upon ONE first day, or upon
SUCH a first day; for had he said so, we had had from thence not so strong an
argument for our purpose: But when he says, upon the first day of the week
they did it, he insinuates, It was their custom: (also upon one of these, Paul
being among them, preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow.) Upon the
first day: what, or which first day of this, or that, of the third or fourth
week of the month? No, but upon the first day, every first day; for so the Text
admits us to judge.

Upon the first day of the Week, [when] the Disciples were come together,
supposes a Custom [ when] or as they were wont to come together to perform such
service among themselves to God: then Paul preached to them, etc.

It is a Text also that supposes an agreement among themselves as to this
thing. They came together then TO break bread; they had appointed to do it
then, for that then was the day of their Lords Resurrection, and that in which
he himself congregated after he revived, with the first Gospel Church, the
Church at Jerusalem.

Thus you see, breaking of bread, was the work, the work that by general
consent was agreed to be by the Churches of the Gentiles, performed upon the
first day of the week. I say, by the Churches; for I doubt not but that the
practice here, was also the practice of the rest of the Gentile-Churches* even
as it had been before the practice of the Church at Jerusalem: For this
practice now did become universal, and so this Text implies; for he speaks here
universally of the practice of all Disciples as such, though he limits Paul
preaching to that Church with whom he at present personally was. Upon the first
day of the week, when the Disciples were come together to break bread, Paul
being at that time at Troas, preached to them on that day.

Thus then you see how the Gentile-Churches did use to break bread, not on the
old Sabbath, but on the first day of the week. And, I say, they had it from the
Church of Jerusalem, where the Apostles were first seated, and beheld the way
of their Lord with their eyes.

Now, I say, since we have so ample an example, not only of the Church at
Jerusalem, but also of the Churches of the Gentiles, for the keeping of the
first day to the Lord, and that as countenanced by Christ and his Apostles, we
should not be afraid to tread in their steps, for their practice is the same
with Law and Commandment. But

Fifthly, We will add to this another Text: Now, says Paul, concerning the
collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him
as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come, 1 Cor. 16.
1, 2.

This Text some have greatly sought to evade, counting the duty here, on this
day to be done, a duty too inferior for the sanction of an old
Seventh-day Sabbath; when yet to show mercy to an Ass on the old Sabbath, was a
work which our Lord no ways condemns, Luke 13. 15. chapter 14. 15.

But to pursue our design, we have a Duty enjoined, and that of no inferior
sort: If charity be indeed, as it is, the very bond of perfectness: and if
without it ALL our doings, yea and sufferings too, are not worth so much as a
rush, 1 Cor. 13. Coloss. 3. 14.

We have here a Duty, I say, that a Seventh-day Sabbath, when enforce was not
too big for it to be performed in.

The work now to be done, was, as you see, to bestow their charity upon the
Poor; yea, to provide for time to come: And I say, it must be collected upon
the first day of the week. Upon THE first day; not A first day, as signifying
one or two, but upon THE first day, even every first day; for so your ancient
Bibles have it; also our later must be so understood, or else Paul had left
them to whom he did write, utterly at a loss. For if he intended not every
first day, and yet did not specify a particular one, it could hardly even a
been understood which first day he meant: But we need not stand upon this: This
work was a work for A first day, for EVERY first day of the week.

Note again that we have this duty here commanded and enforced by an
Apostolical Order: I have given order, says Paul, for this; and his Orders, as
he says in another place, are the commandments of the Lord: you have it in the
same Epistle, chap. 14. verse. 37.

Whence it follows, that there was given even by the Apostles themselves, a
holy respect to the first day of the week above all the days of the week; yea,
or of the Year besides.

Further, I find also by this Text, that this Order is universal. I have, says
he, given this order not only to you, but to the Churches in Galatia:
Consequently to all other that were concerned in this Collection, 2 Cor. 8. and
9. chap. etc.

Now this, whatever others may think, puts yet more glory upon the first day of
the week: For in that all the Churches are commanded, as to make their
Collections, so to make them on THIS day: what is it, but that this day, by
reason of the Sanction that Christ put upon it, was of virtue to sanctify the
Offering thorough and by Christ Jesus, as the Altar and Temple before, did
sanctify the Gift and Gold that was, and was offered on them. The Proverb is,
The better Day, the better Deed. And I believe, that things done on the Lords
day, are better done, than on other days of the week, in his Worship.

Obj. But yet, say some, here are no Orders to keep this first day holy to the
Lord.

Answ. 1. That is supplied; for that by this very Text this day is appointed,
above all the days of the week, to do this holy duty in.

2. You must understand that this Order is but additional, and now enjoined to
fill up that which was begun as to holy Exercise of religious Worship by the
Churches long before.

3. The universality of the duty being enjoined to this day, supposes that this
day was universally kept by the Churches as holy already.

4. And let him that scrupleth this, show me, if he can, that God by the mouth
of his Apostles did ever command that all the Churches should be confined to
this or that duty on such a day, and yet put no Sanction upon that day; or that
he has commanded that this work should be done on the first day of the week,
and yet has reserved other Church-Ordinances as a public solemnization of
Worship to him, to be done of another day, as of a day more fit, more holy.

5. If Charity, if a general Collection for the Saints in the Churches is
commanded on this day, and on no other day but this day; for Church-collection
is commanded on no other, there must be a reason for it: And if that reason had
not respect to the sanction of the day, I know not why the duty should be so
strictly confined to it.

6. But for the Apostle now to give with this a particular command to the
Churches to sanctify that day as holy unto the Lord, had been utterly
superfluous; for that they already, and that by the countenance of their Lord
and his Church at Jerusalem, had done.

Before now, I say, it was become a custom, as by what has been said already
is manifest: wherefore what need that their so solemn a practice be imposed
again upon the Brethren? An intimation now of a continued respect thereto, by
the very naming of the day, is enough to keep the Sanctity thereof on foot in
the Churches: How much more then, when the Lord is still adding holy duty to
holy duty, to be performed upon that day. So then, in that the Apostle writes
to the Churches to do this holy duty on the first day of the week, he puts them
in mind of the Sanction of the day, and insinuates, that he would still have
them have a due respect thereto.

Quest. But is there yet another reason why this holy duty should, in special
as it is, be commanded to be performed on the first day of the week?

Answ. Yes: For that now the Churches were come together in their respective
places, the better to agree about Collections, and to gather them. You know
Churchworship is a duty so long as we are in the world, and so long also is
this of making Collections for the Saints. And for as much as the Apostle
speaks here, as I have hinted before, of a Church-collection, When is it more
fit to be done, than when the Church is come together upon the first day of the
Week to worship God?

2. This part of Worship is most comely to be done upon the first day of the
week, and that at the close of that days work: For thereby the Church shows,
not only her thankfulness to God for a Sabbath Days mercy, but also returns
him, by giving to the Poor, that Sacrifice for their benefit that is most
behoveful to make manifest their professed subjection to Christ, Prove. 19. 17.
2 Cor. 9. 12, 13, 14, 15.

It is therefore necessary, that this work be done on the first day of the
week, for a comely close of the worship that we perform to the Lord our God on
that day.

3. On the first day of the week, when the Church is performing of holy worship
unto God, then that of Collection for the Saints is most meet to be performed;
because then, in all likelihood, our hearts will be most warm with the divine
Presence; consequently most open and free to contribute to the necessity of the
Saints. You know, that a man when his heart is open, is taken with some
excellent thing; then, if at all, it is most free to do something for the
promoting thereof.

Why, waiting upon God in the way of his appointments, opens, and makes fre^,
the heart to the Poor: And because the first day of the week was it in which
now such solemn Service to him was done, therefore also the Apostle commanded,
that upon the same day also, as on a day most fit, this duty of collecting for
the Poor should be done: For the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 6, 7.

Wherefore the Apostle by this, takes the Churches as it were at the advantage,
and as we say, while the Iron is hot, to the intent he might, what in him lay,
make their Gollections, not sparing nor of a grudging mind, but to flow from
cheerfulness. And the first day of the week, though its institution was set
aside, does most naturally tend to this; because it is the day, the only day,
in which we received such blessings from God, Acts 3. 26.

This is the day on which, at first, it rained Manna all day long from Heaven
upon the New Testament-Church, and so continues to do this day. Oh! the
resurrection of Christ, which was on this day, and the riches that we receive
thereby: Though it should be, and is, I hope, thought on every day; yet when
the First of the week is fully come! Then To day! This day! This is the day to
be warmed; this day he was begotten from the dead.

The thought of this, will do much with an honest mind: This is the day, I say,
that the first Saints DID find, and that after-Saints DO find the blessings of
God come down upon them; and therefore this is the day here commanded to be set
apart for holy Duties.

And although what I have said may be but little set by of some; yet, for a
closing word as to this, I do think, could but half so much be produced from
the day Christ rose from the dead quite down, for the sanction of a
Seventh-day Sabbath, in the Churches of the Gentiles, it would much sway with
me. But the truth is, neither does the Apostle Paul, nor any of his fellows, so
much as once speak one word to the Churches that shows the least regard, as to
conscience to God, of a Seventh-day Sabbath more. No, the first day, the first
day, the first day, is now all the cry in the Churches by the Apostles, for the
performing Church-worship in to God. Christ began it on THAT day: Then the Holy
Ghost seconded it on THAT day: Then the Churches practiced it on THAT day. And
to conclude, the Apostle by the command now under consideration, continues the
sanction of THAT day to the Churches to the end of the world.

But as to the old Seventh-day Sabbath, as has been said before in this
Treatise, Paul, who is the Apostle of the Gentiles, has so taken away that
whole Ministration in the bowels of which it is; yea, and has so stripped it of
its Old Testament-grandeur, both by Terms and Arguments, that it is strange to
me it should by any be still kept up in the Churches; specially, since the same
Apostle, and that at the same time, has put a better Ministration in its place,
2 Cor. 3.

But when the Consciences of good men are captivated with an error, none can
stop them from a prosecution thereof, as if it were it self of the best of
truths.

Obj. But Paul preached frequently on the old Sabbath, and that after the
Resurrection of Christ.

Answ. To the unbelieving Jews and their Proselytes, I grant he did. But we
read not that he did it to any New Testament-Church on that day: nor did he
celebrate the instituted worship of Christ in the Churches on that day. For
Paul, who had before cast out the Ministration of death; as that which had no
glory, would not now take thereof any part for New Testament instituted
worship; for he knew that that would veil the Heart, and blind the Mind from
that, which yet instituted Worship was ordained to discover.

He preached then on the Seventhday-sabbath, of a divine and crafty love to the
salvation of the unbelieving Jews.

I say, he preached now on that day to them and their Proselytes, because that
day was theirs by their estimation: He did it, I say, of great love to their
Souls, that if possible, he might save some of them.

Wherefore, it you observe, you shall still find, that where it is said that he
preached on that day, it was to that people, not to the Churches of Christ. See
Acts 9. 20. chapter 13. 14, 15, 16. chapter 16. 13. chapter 17. 1, 2, 3. chapter 18. 4.

Thus, though he had put away ^e sanction of that day as to himself, and had
left the Christians that were weak to their liberty as to conscience to it, yet
he takes occasion upon it to preach to the Jews that still were wedded to it,
the Faith, that they might be saved by Grace.

Paul did also many other things that were Jewish and Ceremonial, for which he
had, as then, no conscience at all, as to any Sanction that he believed was in
them.

As his Circumcising of Timothy.

His Shaving of his Head.

His submitting to Jewish Purifications.

His acknowledging of himself a Pharisee.

His implicit owning of Ananias for High Priest after Christ was risen from
the dead, Acts 16. 1, 2, 3. chap. 18. 18. chap. 21. 24, 25, 26. chap. 23. 6.
chap. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

He tells us also, that to the Jew he became as a Jew, that he might save the
Jew. And without Law, to them that were without Law, that also he might gain
them: Yea, he became, as he says, all things to all men, that he might gain
the more, as it is, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

But these things, as I said, he did not of Conscience to the things; for he
knew that their sanction was gone: Nor would he suffer them to be imposed upon
the Churches directly or indirectly; no, not by Peter himself, Gal. 2.

Were I in Turkey with a Church of Jesus Christ, I would keep the first day of
the week to God, and for the edification of his people: And would also preach
the Word to the Infidels on their Sabbath day, which is our Friday; and be glad
too, if I might have such opportunity to try to persuade them to a love of
their own salvation.

Obj. But if the Seventh-day Sabbath is, as you say, to be laid aside by the
Churches of the Gentiles, Why does Christ say to his, Pray that your flight be
not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day? For, say some, by this saying it
appears, that the old Seventh-day Sabbath, as you have-called it, will as to
the Sanction of it, abide in force after Christ is ascended into heaven.

Answ. I say first, These words was spoken to the Jewish Christians, not to the
Gentile-churches: And the reason of this first hint, you will see clearer
afterward.

The Jews had several Sabbaths; as their Seventh-day Sabbath, their Monthly
Sabbaths, their Sabbath of Years, and their Jubilee, (Levit. 25.) Now if he
means their ordinary Sabbaths, or that called the Seventhday-sabbath, why does
he join the Winter thereto? for in that he joyneth the Winter with that Sabbath
that he exhorts them to pray their flight might not be in, it should seem
that the means rather their Sabbath of Years, or their Jubilee, which did
better answer one to another than one day and a winter could.

And I say again, that Christ should suppose that their flight should, or might
last some considerable part of a Winter, and yet that then they should have
their rest on those Seventh-day-sabbaths, is a little besides my reason, if it
be considered again, that the Gentiles before whom they were then to fly, were
Enemies to their Sabbath, and consequently would take opportunity at their
Sabbaths to afflict them so much the more. Wherefore, I would that they who
plead for a continuation of the Seventh-daysabbath from this Text, would both
better consider LT, and the incoherence that seems to be betwixt such a Sabbath
and a Winter.

But again, were it granted that it is the Seventh-day Sabbath that Christ here
intends; yet, since, as we have proved, the Sanction before this was taken
away; I mean, before this flight should be, he did not press them to pray thus
because by any Law of Heaven they should then be commanded to keep it holy; but
because some would, thorough their weakness, have conscience of it till then.
And such would, if their flight should happen thereon, be as much grieved and
perplexed, as if it yet stood obligatory to them by a Law.

This seems to have some truth in it, because among the Jews that believed,
there continued a long time many that were wedded yet to the Law, to the
ceremonial part thereof, and was not so clearly Evangelized as the Churches of
the Gentiles was. Thou see Brother, said James to Paul, how many thousands of
the Jews there are that believe, and they are all zealous of the Law, Acts 15.
5. chapter 21. 20.

Of these, and such weak unbelieving Jews, perhaps Christ speaks, when he gives
this exhortation to them to pray thus; whose Consciences he knew would be weak,
and being so, would bind when they were entangled with an error, as fast as if
it bound by a Law indeed.

Again, though the Seventh-daysabbath and Ceremonies lost their Sanction at the
resurrection of Christ, yet they retained some kind of being in the Church of
the Jews, until the desolation spoken of by Daniel should be.

Hence it is said, that then the Oblation and Sacrifices shall cease, Dan. 9.
27. And hence it is, that Jerusalem and the Temple are still called the holy
place, even until this flight should be, Matthew. 24. 15.

Now if Jerusalem and the Temple are still called holy, even after the Body and
Substance, of which they were shadows, was come; then no marvel though some to
that day that believed were entangled therewith, etc. For it may very well be
supposed that all Conscience of them would not be quite taken away, until all
reason for that Conscience should be taken away also. But when Jerusalem, and
the Temple, and the Jews Worship, by the Gentiles was quite extinct by ruins,
then in reason that Conscience did cease. And it seems by some Texts, that all
Conscience to them was not taken away till then.

Quest. But what kind of being had the Seventh-day Sabbath, and other Jewish
Rites and Ceremonies, that by Christ's Resurrection was taken away?

Answ. These things had a vertual and a nominal being: As to their vertual
being, that died that day Christ did rise from the dead, they being crucified
with him on the Cross, Coloss. 2.

But now, when the vertual being was gone, they still with the weak retained
their name, (among many of the Jews that believed) until the abomination that
makes desolate stood in the holy place: for in Paul's time they were, as to
that, but ready to vanish away.

Now, I say, they still retaining their nominal grandeur, though not by virtue
of a Law, they could not, till Time and Dispensation came, be swept out of the
way. We will make what has been said, as to this, out by a familiar similitude.

There is a Lord or great man dies; now being dead, he has lost his vertual
life. He has now no relation to a Wife, to Children, vertually; yet his Name
still abides, and that in that Family, to which otherwise he is dead. Wherefore
they embalm him, and also keep him above ground for many days. Yea, he is still
reverenced by those of the family, and that in several respects. Nor does any
thing but time and dispensation wear this name away.

Thus then the Old Testament-signs and shadows went off the stage in the Church
of Christ among the Jews. They lost their virtue and signification when Christ
nailed them to his Cross, Coloss. 2. But as to their Name, and the Grandeur
that attended that, it continued with many that were weak, and vanished not,
but when the abomination that made them desolate came.

The sum then and conclusion of the matter is this; the Seventh-day Sabbath
lost its glory when that Ministration in which it was, lost its: But yet the
name thereof might abide a long time with the Jowish legal Christians, and so
might become obligatory still, though not by the Law, to their Conscience, even
as Circumcision and other Ceremonies did: and to them it would be as grievous
to fly on that day, as if by Law it was still in force.

For, I say, to a weak Conscience, that Law which has lost its life, may yet
thorough their ignorance, be as binding as if it stood still upon the authority
of God.

Things then become obligatory these two ways.

1. By an Institution of God. 2. By the overruling power of a man's misinformed
Conscience. And although by virtue of an institution Divine Worship is
acceptable to God by Christ, yet Conscience will make that a man shall have but
little ease if such rules and dictates as it imposes be not observed by him.
This is my answer, upon a supposition that the Seventh-day Sabbath is in this
Text intended: and the answer, I think, stands firm and good.

Also, there remains, notwithstanding this Objection, no divine Sanction in, or
upon the old Seventh-day Sabbath.

Some indeed will urge, that Christ here meant the first day of the week, which
here he puts under the term of Sabbath. But this is foreign to me, so I wave it
till I receive more satisfaction in the thing.

Quest. But if indeed the first day of the week be the new Christian Sabbath,
why is there no more spoken of its iustitution in the Testament of Christ?

Answ. No more! What need is there of more than enough! yea, there is a great
deal found in the Testament of the Lord Jesus to prove its Authority Divine.

1. For we have showed from sundry Scriptures, that from the very day our Lord
did rise from the dead, the Church at Jerusalem, in which the Twelve Apostles
were, did meet together on that day, and had the Lord himself for their
Preacher, while they were auditors; and thus the day began.

2. We have showed that the Holy Ghost, the Third person in the Trinity, did
second this of Christ, in coming down from Heaven upon this day to manage the
Apostles in their preaching; and in that very day so managed them in that work,
that by his help they then did bring Three thousand Souls to God.

3. We have showed also, that after this the Gentile-Churches did solemnize
this day for holy Worship, and that they had from Paul both Countenance and
Order so to do.

And now I will add, that more need not be spoken: For the practice of the
first Church, with their Lord in the head of them to manage them in that
practice, is as good as many Commands. What then shall we say, when we see a
first Practice turned into holy Custom?

I say moreover, that though a Seventh-day Sabbath is not natural to man as
man, yet our Christian Holy day is natural to us as Saints, if our Consciences
are not clogged before with some old Fables, or Jewish Customs.

But if an old Religion shall get footing and rooting in us, though the grounds
thereof be vanished away, yet the man concerned will be hard put to it, should
he be saved, to get clear of his clouds, and devote himself to that service of
God which is of his own prescribing.

Luther himself, though he saw many things were without ground which he had
received for truth, had yet work hard enough, as himself intimates, to get his
Conscience clear from all those roots and strings of inbred error.

But, I say, to an untainted and well-bred Christian, we have good measure,
shaken together, and running over, for our Christian Lords day. And I say
again, that the first day of the week, and the spirit of such a Christian, suit
one another, as nature suteth nature; for there is as it were a natural
instinct in Christians, as such, when they understand what in a first day was
brought forth, to fall in therewith to keep it holy to their Lord.

1. The first day of the week why it was the day of our life. After two days he
will revive us, and in the third day we shall live in his sight. After two
days, there is the Jews preparation, and Seventh-day Sabbath, quite passed
over; and in the third day, that is the first day of the week, which is the day
our Lord did rise from the dead, we began to live by him in the sight of God,
Hos. 6. 2. Joh. 20. 1. 1 Cor. 15. 4.

2. The first day of the week! That Is the day in which, as I hinted before, our
Lord was wont to preach to his Disciples after he rose from the dead; in which
also he did use to show them his Hands and his Feet, ( Luke 24. 38, 39. Joh.
20. 25.) to the end they might be confirmed in the truth of his victory over
Death and the Grave for them. The day in which he made himself known to them in
breaking bread: The day in which he so plentifully poured out the Holy Ghost
upon them: The day in which the Church both at Jerusalem, and those of the
Gentiles, did use to perform to God Divine Worship: all which has before been
sufficiently proved. And shall we not imitate our Lord, nor the Church that was
immediately acted by him in this, and the Churches their fellows? Shall, I say,
the Lord Jesus do all this in his Church, and they together with him! Shall the
Churches of the Gentiles also fall in with their Lord and with their Mother at
Jerusalem herein! And again, shall all this be so punctually committed to
sacred Story, with the day in which these things were done, under denomination,
over and over, saying, These things were done on the first day, on the first
day, on the first day of the week, while all other days are, as to name,
buried, in everlasting oblivion! and shall we not take that notice thereof as
to follow the Lord Jesus and the Churches herein? oh stupidity!

3. This day of the week! They that make but observation of what the Lord did
of old, to a many siuners, and with his Churches on this day, must needs
conclude, that in this day the Treasures of Heaven were broken up, and the
richest things therein communicated to his Church. Shall the children of this
world be, as to this also, wiser in their generations than the children of
Light, and former Saints, upon whose shoulders we pretend to stand, go beyond
us here also.

Jacob could by observation gather that the place where he lay down to sleep
was no other but the House of God, and the very Gate of Heaven, ( Genesis 28. 17.)

Laban could gather by observation, that the Lord blessed him for Jacob's sake,
( Genesis 30. 27.)

David could gather by what he met with upon Mount Moriah, that that was the
place where God would have the Temple builded, therefore he sacrificed there (1
Chro. 21. 26, 27, 28. chapter 22. 1, 2. 2 Chr. 3. 1.

Ruth was to mark the place where Baaz lay down to sleep, and shall not
Christians also mark the day in which our Lord rose from the dead, Ruth 3. 4.

I say, shall we not mark it, when so many memorable things was done on it for,
and LO, and IN the Churches of God! Let Saints be ashamed to think that such a
day should be looked over, or counted common (when tempted to it by Satan) when
kept to religious Service of old, and when beautifled with so many divine
Characters of sanctity as we have proved, by Christ, his Church, the Holy
Ghost, and the command of Apostolical Authority it was.

But why, I say, is this day, on which our Lord rose from the dead, Nominated
as it is? Why was it not sufficient to say he rose again; or, be rose again the
third day? without a specification of the very name of the day* For, as was
said before. Christ appeared to his Disciples* after his resurrection, on other
days also; yea* and thereon did Miracles too: Why then did not these days live?
why was their name, for all that, blotted out, and this day only kept alive in
the Churches?

The day on which Christ was born of a Virgin; the day of his Circumcision, the
day of his Baptism, and Transfiguration, are not by their names committed by
the Holy Ghost to holy Writ to be kept alive in the world* nor yet such days in
which he did many great and wonderful thing: But THIS day* this day is still
nominated, the first day of the week is the day. I say, why are things thus
left with us? but because we, as Saints of old, should gather, and separate,
what is of divine Authority from the rest. For in that this day is so often
nominated while all other days lie dead in their Graves, it is as much as if God
should say, Remember the First day of the week to keep it holy to the Lord your
God.

And set this aside, and I know not what reason can be rendered, or what
Prophecy should be fulfilled by the bare naming of the day.

When God, of old, did sanctify for the use of his Church a day, as he did
many, he always called them either by the name of the day of the Month, or of
the Week, or by some other signal by which they might be certainly known. Why
should it not then be concluded, that for this very reason the first day of the
week is thus often nominated by the Holy Ghost in the Testament of Christ?

Moreover, he that takes away the first day, as to this Service, leaves us now
NO day, as sanctified of God, for his solemn Worship to be by his Churches
performed in. As for the Seventh-day Sabbath, that as we see, is gone to its
grave with the Signs and Shadows of the Old Testament.

Yea, and has such a dash left upon it by Apostolical Authority, that it is
enough to make a Christian fly from it for ever, (2 Cor. 3.)*

Now, I say; since that is removed by God: If we should suffer the first day
also to be taken away by man, What day that has a divine stamp upon it, would
be left for us to worship God in?

Alas! the first day of the week is the Christians Market Day, that which they
so solemnly trade in for sole provision for all the week following. This is the
day that they gather Manna in. To be sure the Seventh-day Sabbath is not that:
For of old the people of God could never find Manna on that day. On the seventh
day, said Moses, which is the Sabbath, in it there shall be none, Exodus 16. 26.

Any day of the week Manna could be found, but on that day it was not to be
found upon the face of the ground. But now our first day is the Manna-day; the
only day that the Churches of the New Testament, even of old, did gather Manna
in. But more of this anon.

Nor will it out of my mind but that it is a very high piece of ingratitude,
and of uncomly behavior, to deny the Son of God his day, the Lords day, the
day that he has made: And as we have showed already, this first day of the week
is it; yea, and a great piece of unmannerliness is it too, for any,
notwithstanding the old Seventh day is so degraded as it is, to attempt to
impose it on the Son of God. To impose a day upon him which yet Paul denies to
be a branch of the Ministration of the Spirit, and of righteousness. Yea, to
impose a part of that Ministration which HE says plamly, Was to be done away;
for that a better Ministration stripped it of its glory, is a high attempt
indeed, 2 Cor. 3.

Yet again, the Apostle finites the teachers of the Law upon the mouth, saying,
They understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm, (1 Timothy 1. 7.)

The Seventh-day Sabbath was indeed Gods Rest from the works of Creation; but
yet the Rest that he found in what the first day of the week did produce* for
Christ was born from the dead in it, more pleased him than did all the Seventh
days that ever the world brought forth; wherefore, as I said before, it cannot
be but that the well-bred Christian must set apart this day for solemn Worship
to God, and to sanctify his name therein.

Must the Church of old be bound to remember that might in which they did come
out of Egypt! must Jeptha's daughter have four days for the Virgins of Israel
yearly to lament her hard case in! Yea, must two days be kept by the Church of
old, yearly, for their being delivered from Hamon's fury! And must not one to
the worlds end be kept by the Saints for the Son of God their Redeemer, for all
he has delivered them from a worse than Pharaob or Haman, even from the Devil,
and Death, and Sin, and Hell! oh stupidity! Exodus 12. 24. Judge. 11. 39, 40.
Esth. 9. 26. -- 32.

A day! say some, God forbid but he should have a day. But what day? oh! the
old day comprised within the bounds and bowels of the Ministration of death.

And is this the love that thou have to thy Redeemer, to keep that day to him
for all the service that has done for thee, which has a natural tendancy in it
to draw thee off from the consideration of the works of thy redemption, to the
creation of the world! oh stupidity!

But why must he be imposed upon? has he chosen that day? did he finish HIS
work thereon? Is there in all the New Testament of our Lord, from the day he
rose from the dead, to the end of his holy Book, one syllable that signifies in
the least the tenth part of such a thing? Where is the Scripture that says
that this Lord of the Sabbath commanded his Church, from that time, to do any
part of Churchservice thereon? Where do we find the Churches to gather together
thereon?

But why the Seventh day? What is it? Take but the shadow thereof away: Or what
shadow now is left in it since its institution as to Divine Service is taken
long since from it?

Is there any thing in the works that was done in that day, more than shadow,
or that in the least tends otherwise to put us in mind of Christ; and he being
come, what need have we of that shadow? And I say again, since that day was to
be observed by a ceremonial method, and no way else, as we find; and since
Ceremonies are ceased, what way by divine appointment is there left to keep
that old Sabbath by Christians in?

If they say, Ceremonies are ceased. By the same Argument, so is the sanction
of the day in which they were to be performed. I would gradly see the place, if
it is to be found, where it is said, That day retains its sanction, which yet
has lost that method of service which was of God appointed for the performance
of worship to him thereon.

When Canaan-worship fell, the Sanction of Canaan fell. When Temple-worship,
and Altar-worship, and the Sacrifices of the Levitical Priesthood fell, down
also came the things themselves! Likewise so, when the service or shadow and
ceremonies of the Seventh-day Sabbath fell, the Seventh-day Sabbath fell
likewise.

On the Seventh-day Sabbath, as I told you, Manna was not to be found. But why
for that that day was of Moses and of the Ministration of death. But Manna was
was not of him: Moses, says Christ, gave you not that bread from Heaven, Joh.
6. 31, 32. Moses, as was said, *gave that Sabbath in Tables of stone, and God
gave that Manna from Heaven. Christ, nor his Father, gives grace by the Law, no
not by that Law in which is contained the old Seventhday-sabbath it self.

The Law is not of Faith, why then should Grace be by Christians expected by
observation of the Law? The Law, even the Law written and engraven in stones
enjoins perfect obedience thereto on pain of the curse of God. Nor can that
part of it now under consideration, according as is required, be fulfilled by
any man, was the Ceremony thereto belonging, allowed to be laid aside, Isai.
58. 13. Never man yet did keep it perfectly, except he whose name is Jesus
Christ: in him therefore we have kept it, and by him are set free from that
Law, and brought under the ministration of the Spirit.

But why should we be bound to seek Manna on that day, on which God says, None
shall be found.

Perhaps, it will said, that the sanction of THAT day would not admit that
Manna should be gathered on it.

But that was not all, for* on that day there was none to be found. And might I
choose., I had rather sanctific that day to. God on which I might gather this
bread, of God all day long, than set my mind at all upon that in which no such
bread was to be had.

The Lords day, as was said, is to the Christians the principal Mannaday.

On this day, even on it Manna in the morning very early gathered was by the
Disciples of our Lord, as newly springing out of the ground. The true bread of
God: The sheaf of First Fruits, which is Christ from the dead, was ordained to
be waved before the Lord on the morrow after the Sabbath, the day on which our
Lord ceased from his own OWN Work as God did from HIS, Levit. 23.

Now* therefore the Disciples found their green Ears of Corn indeed! Now they
read life, both IN and OUT of the Sepulcher in which the Lord was laid. Now
they could not come together nor speak one to another, but either their Lord
was with them, or they had heart-enflaming tidings from him. Now cries one and
says, The Lord is risen: And then another and says, He has appeared to such
and such.

Now comes tidings to the Eleven that their women was early at the Sepulcher,
where they had a Vision of Angels that told them their Lord was risen: Then
comes another and says, The Lord is risen indeed. Two also comes from Emmaus,
and cries, We have seen the Lord: and by and by, while they yet were speaking,
their Lord shows himself in the midst of them.

Now he calls to their mind some of the eminent passages of his life, and eats
and drinks in their presence, and opens the Scriptures to them: Yea, and opens
their Understanding too, that their hearing might not be unprofitable to them;
all which continued from early in the morning till late at night: Oh! what a
Manna-day was this to the Church. And more than all this you will find, if you
read but the four Evangelists upon this Subject.

Thus began the day after the Sabbath, and thus it has continued thorough all
Ages to this very day. Never did the Seventh-day Sabbath yield Manna to
Christians. A new world was now begun with the poor Church of God; for so said
the Lord of the Sabbath, Behold, I make all things new. A new Covenant, and why
not then a new resting-day to the Church? or why must the old Sabbath be joined
to this new Ministration? let him that can show a reason for it.

Christians, if I have not been so large upon things as some might expect;
know, that my brevity on this Subject is, from consideration that much needs
not be spoken thereto, and because I may have occalion to write a second Part.

Christians, beware of being entangled with Old Testament - Miniserations, left
'by' one you be brought into many Inconveniences.

I have observed, that though the Jewish Rites have lost their Sanction, yet
some that are weak in Judgment, do bring themselves into bondage by them. Yea,
so high have some been carried as to a pretended Conscience to these, that they
have at last proceeded to Circumcision, to many Wives; and the observation of
many bad things besides.

Yea, I have talked with some pretending to Christianity, who have said, and
affirmed, as well as they could, that the Jewish Sacrifices must up again.

But do you give no heed to these Jewish Fables That turn from the truth ( Tit.
1. 14.) Do you, I say, that love the Lord Jesus, keep close to his Testament,
his Word, his Gospel, and observe HIS Holy Day.

And this Caution in conclusion I would give, to put stop to this Jewish
Ceremony, to wit, That a Seventh-day Sabbath pursued according to its
imposition by Law, (and I know not that it is imposed by the Apostles.) leads
to blood and stoning to death those that do but gather Sticks thereon ( Numb.
15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.) A thing which no way becomes the Gospel, that
Ministration of the Spirit and of Righteousness (2 Cor. 3.) nor yet the
professors thereof ( Luke 9. 54, 55, 56.)

Nor can it with fairness be said, that that Sabbath day remains, though the
Law thereof is repealed. For consident I am, that there is no more ground to
make such a conclusion, than there is to say, that Circumcision is still of
force, though the Law for cutting of the uncircumcised is by the Gospel made
null and void.

I told you also in the Epistle, That if the Fifth Commandment was the first
that was with promise; then it follows, that the Fourth, or that
Seventh-day Sabbath, had no promise intailed to it. Whence it follows, that
where you read in the Prophet of a Promise annexed to a Sabbath, it is best to
understand it of our Gospel-Sabbath, Isai. 56.

Now if it be asked, What Promise is intailed to our First-day-sabbath? I
answer, The bigest of Promises. For

First, The Resurrection of Christ was tied by Promise to this day, and to none
other. He rose the Third day after his death, and that was the First day of the
week, according to what was fore-promised in the Scriptures, Hos. 6. 1, 2. 1
Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6.

Second, That we should live before God by him, is a Promise to be fulfilled on
this day; After two days he will revive us, and in the third day we shall live
in his sight, Hos. 6. 2. See also Isai. 26. 19. and compare them again with 1
Cor. 15. 4.

Third, The great promise of the New Testament, to wit, the pouring out of the
Spirit, fixes upon these days; and so he began in the most wonderful effusion
of it upon Pentecost, which was the first day of the week, that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled, Acts 2. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Nor could these three Promises be fulfilled upon any other days, for that the
Scripture had fixed them to the First day of the Week.

I am of opinion that these things, though but briefly touched upon, cannot be
fairly objected against, however they may be disrelished by some.

Nor can I believe, that any part of our Religion, as we are Christians, stands
in not kindling of fires, and not seething of Victuals, or in binding of men
not to stir out of those places on the Seventh day, in which at the dawning
thereof they were found: And yet these are Ordinances belonging to that
Seventhday-Sabbath, Exodus 16. 23, 29.

Certainly it must needs be an error to impose these things by Divine
Authority upon New Testament-Believers, our Worship standing now in things more
weighty, spiritual, and heavenly.

Nor can it be proved, as I have hinted before, that this day was, or is to be
imposed without those Ordinances, with others in other places mentioned and
adjoined, for the sanction of that day, they being made necessary parts of that
worship that was to be performed thereon.

I have charity for those that abuse themselves and their Lord, by their
preposterous zeal and affection for the continuing of this day in the Churches.
For I conclude, that if they did either believe, or think of the incoherence
that this day with its Rites and Ceremonies has with the Ministration of the
Spirit our New Testament-Ministration, they would not so stand in their own
light as they do, nor so stiffly plead for a place for it in the Churches of the
Gentiles. But as Paul insinuates in other cases, there is an aptness in men to
be under the law because they do not hear it, Gal. 4.

Nor will it out of my mind, but if the Seventh-day Sabbath was by Divine
Authority, and to be kept holy by the Churches of the Gentiles, it should not
have so remained among the Jews, Christ's deadliest Enemies, and a been kept so
much hid from the Believers, his best Friends. For who has retained the
pretended sanction of that day from Christ's time quite down, in the world, but
the Jews; and a few Jewish Gentiles (I will except some.) But, I say, since a
Sabbath is that without which the great Worship of God under the Gospel cannot
be well performed: How can it be thought, that it should, as to the knowledge
of it, be confined to so blasphemous a generation of the Jews, with whom that
worship it not?

I will rather conclude, that those Gentile-professors that adhere thereto, are
Jewifi'd, Legaliz'd, and so far gone back from the authority of God, who from
such bondages has set his Churches free.

I do at this time but hint upon things, reserving a fuller Argument upon them
for a time and place more fit; where, and when, I may perhaps also show, some
other wild notions of those that so stiffly cleave to this.

Mean time, I entreat those who are captivated with this opinion, not to take
it ill at my hand that I thus freely speak my mind. I entreat them also to
peruse my Book without prejudice to my person. The truth is, one thing that has
moved me to this work, is the shame that has covered the face of my Soul, when
I have thought of the Fictions and Fancies that are growing among Professors:
And while I see each Fiction turn it self to a Faction, to the loss of that
good spirit of Love, and that oneness that formerly was with good men.

I doubt not but some unto whom this Book may come, have had seal from God,
that the first day of the week is to be sanctified by the Church to Jesus
Christ: Not only from his testimony, which is, and should be, the ground of
our Practice; but also, for that the first conviction that the Holy Ghost made
upon their Consciences, to make them know that they were sinners, began with
them for breaking this Sabbath day; which day, by that same Spirit, was told
them, was that now called the first day, and not the day before, (and the Holy
Ghost does not use to begin this work with a lie) which first conviction the
Spirit has followed so close, with other things tending to complete the same
work, that the Soul from so good a beginning could not res^ until it found rest
in Christ. (...) this then to such be a second token that the Lords day is by
them to be kept in commemoration of their Lord and his Resurrection, and o^
what he did on this day for their Salvation.

Amen.
FINIS.

