Differences in Judgment ABOUT VVater-Baptism, No Bar to Communion: OR, To
Communicate with Saints, as Saints, proved lawful.

In ANSWER to a Book written by the Baptists, and published by Mr. T. P. and
Mr. W. K. entitled, Some serious Reflections on that part of Mr. Bunyan's
Confession of Faith, touching Church Communion with Unbaptized Believers.

Wherein, Their Objections and Arguments are Answered, and the Doctrine of
Communion still Asserted and Vindicated.

Here is also Mr. Henry Jesse's Judgment in the Case, fully declaring the
Doctrine I have Asserted.

By John Bunyan.

Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk
be justified? Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest,
shall no man make thee an answer? Job 11. 2, 3. I am for Peace, but when I
speak they are for War. Psalm. 120. 7. London, Printed for John Wilkins, and are
to be sold at his Shop in Exchange-Alley, next door to the
Exchange-Coffee-House, over against the Royal Exchange, 1673.

Courteous READER,
BE entreated to believe me, I had not set Pen to Paper about this
Controversis, had we been let alone at quiet in our Christian Communion. But
being assaulted for more than sixteen*years; wherein the Brethren of the
Baptized-way (as they had their opportunity) have sought to break us in pieces,
merely because we are not in their way all baptized first: I could not, I durst
not, forbear to do a little, if it might be, to settle the Brethren, and to arm
them against the attempts, which also of late they begin to revive upon us.
That I deny the Ordinance of Baptism, or that I have placed one piece of an
Argument against it, (though they feign it) is quite without color of truth.
All I say, is, That the Church of Christ has not Warrant to keep out of their
Communion the Christian that is discovered to be a visible Saint by the Word,
the Christian that walks according to his Light with God. I will not make
Reflections upon those unhandsom brands that my Brethren have laid upon me for
this, as that I am a Machivilian, a man devilish, proud, insolent,
presumptuous, and the like; neither will I say as they, The Lord rebuke thee;
words futer to be spoke to the Devil, then a Brother. But Reader, read and
compare, lay aside Prejudice and Judge. What Mr. Kiffin has done in the matter
I forgive, and love him never the worse, but must stand by my Principles
because they are peaceable, godly, profitable, and such as tend to the
Edification of my Brother, and as I believe will be justified in the day of
Judgment.

I have also here presented thee with the Opinion of Mr. Henry Jesse, in the
Case, which providentially I met with, as I was coming to London to put my
Papers to the Press, and that it was his Judgment is Asserted to me, known many
years since to some of the Baptists, to whom it was sent, but never yet
Answered; and will yet be Attested if need shall require. Farewell.

Thine in all Christian Service, according to my Light and Power, John Bunyan.

Differences in Judgment about Water Baptism no Bar to Communion.
SIR,
YOur seemingly serious reflections upon that part of my plain-hearted
Confession of Faith, which renders a Reason of my freedom to Communicate with
those of the Saints and Faithful, who differ from me about Water Baptism, I
have read, and considered, and have weighed them so well as my rank and
abilities will admit me to do. But finding yours (if I mistake not) far short
of a candid Replication; I thought convenient, not only to tell you of those
impertinencies everywhere scattered up and down in your Book; but also, that in
my simple opinion, your rigid and Churchdisquieting-Principles are not fit for
any Age and state of the Church.

But before I enter the body of your Book, give me leave a little to discourse
you about your Preamble to the same, wherein are two miscarriages unworthy your
pretended seriousness, because void of love, and humility.

The first is, In that you closely disdain my Person, because of my low descent
among men, stigmatizing me for a Person of THAT Rank, that need not to be
heeded, or attended unto, Page 1.

Answ. What it is that gives a man reverence with you, I know not; but for
certain, He that despises the Poor, reproacheth his Maker: yet a poor man is
better than a liar. To have gay-cloathing, or gold-rings, or the Persons that
wear them in admiration; or to be partial in your judgment, or respects, for
the sake, or upon the account of flesh and blood, doubtless convicteth you to
be of the Law a transgressor, and not without partiality, etc. in the midst of
your seeming sanctity.

Again you say: I had not meddled with the Controversy at all, had I found any
of parts that would divert themselves to take notice of YOU. page 2.

A. What need you, before you have showed one syllable of a reasonable Argument
in opposition to what I Assert, thus trample my Person, my Gifts, and Grace
(have I any) so disdainfully under your feet? What a kind of a YOU am I? And
why is MY Read Psalm. 1. 1, 2
Rank so mean, that the most gracious and godly among you, may not duly and
soberly consider of what I have said? Was it not the art of the false Apostles
of old to say thus? to bespatter a man, that his Doctrine might be disregarded.
Is not this the Carpenter? 1 Cor. 10. 10.
and, His bodily presence is weak and contemptible, did not use to be in the
months of the Saints; for they knew the Wind blew Joh. 3. 8.
where it listed. Neither is it high birth, worldly breeding, or wealth; but
electing Jam. 3. 17.
love, grace, and the wisdom that comes from Heaven, that those who strive for
strictness of order in the things, and Kingdom of Christ, should have in
regard, and esteem. Need I read you a Lecture? Has not God chosen 1 Cor. 1.
27, 28.
the foolish, the weak, the base, yea and even things that are not, to bring to
naught things that are? Why then do you despise my rank, my state, and quality
in the World?

As for my Confession of Faith, which you also secretly despise, page 1. If it
be good, and godly, why may it not be accepted? If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? If you, and the Brethren
of your way, did think it convenient to show to the World what you held; if
perhaps by that means you might escape the Prison: why might not I, after above
11 years indurance there, give the World a view of my Faith and Practice; if
peradventure, wrong Thoughts, and false Judgments of me, might by that means be
abated, and removed.

But you suggest; I did it, because I was so willing to be known in the World
by my SINGULAR Faith, and Practice.

How singular my Faith and Practice is, may be better known to you hereafter:
but that I did it for a popular applause and fame, as your words seem to bear
(for they proceed from a taunting Spirit) that will be known to you better in
the day of God, when your evil surmizes of your Brother, and my designs in
writing my Book, will be published Luke 12. 1, 2, 3, 4.
upon the house-tops.

And even now, before I go any further, I will give you aetouch of the Reason
of my publishing that part thereof which you so hotly oppose.

It was because of those continual Assaults that the rigid Brethren of your
way, made, not only upon this Congregation, to rent it; but also upon many
others about us: if peradventure they might break us in pieces, and draw from
us Disciples after them.

Assaults (I say) upon this Congregation by times, for no less than these
sixteen or eighteen years: Yea, my self they have sent for, and endeavored to
persuade me to break Communion with my Brethren; also with many others they
have often tampered, if happily their seeds of Division might take. Neither did
they altogether fail of their purpose, for some they did rent and dismember
from us; but none but those, of whom now they begin to be ashamed. The Judgment
of God so following their design, that the Persons which then they prevailed
upon, are now a stink, and reproach to Religion. Neither were these Spirits
content with that discord they did sow among us, but they proceeded to seize
upon others. But to pass these: The wild, and unsound Positions they have urged
to maintain their Practice, would be too large here to insert.

Now, Sir, to settle the Brethren (the Brethren of our Community) and to
prevent such disorders among others, was the cause of my publishing my Papers:
and considering my Concern in the House of God, I could do no less than to give
them warning, That every man might deliver his Soul.

You proceed, saying, It is my liberty, as well as others into whose hands it
falls, to weigh what you have said in Truths balance, and if it be found too
light, to reject it whether you will or no.

Answ. Do but grant me, without mocking of me, the liberty you desire to take,
and God helping me, I desire no more to shift for my self among you.

As to your saying, that I proudly and imperiously insult, because I say they
are Babes and Carnal, that attempt to break the Peace and Communion of
Churches, though upon better pretenses than Water. You must know I am still of
that mind, and shall be so long as I see the Effects that follow, viz. The
breach of Love, taking off Christians from the more weighty things of God; and
to make them quarrel and have heart-burnings one against another.

Where you are pleased to charge me with Raging, for laying those Eighteen
particular Crimes to the charge of SUCH who exclude Christians from
Church Communion, and debar them their Heaven-born Privileges, for the want of
that, which yet God never made, the Wall of Division between us. (page 116.)

I say, when you can prove, That God has made Water Baptism that Wall, and
that the stress of the after Eighteen Charges lie wholly and only in that; then
you may time enough call my language such as wants Charity: but I question
though that was granted, whether your saying, I RAGE, will be justified in the
day of Judgment.

My great noise (as you call it) about an initiating Ordinance, you say, you
shall take no notice of. page 3.

Answ. 1. Although you do not, I must: For if Baptism be not that, but another;
and if visible Saints may enter into Fellowship by that other, and are no where
forbidden so to do, because they have not light into Water Baptism: it is of
weight to be considered by me; yea, and of others too who are unprejudiced.

2. How ignorant you are of such as hold it the initiating Ordinance I know
not: nor how long you have been of that persuasion I know not. This I know,
that men of your own Party, as serious, godly, and it may be more learned than
your self, have within less than this twelvemonth urged it. Mr. D. in my
hearing, did from Romans 6. 1, 2. in the Meeting in Lothbury affirm it: Also my
much esteemed Friend Mr. D. A. did twice in a Conference with me Assert it.

3. But whatever you say, whether for, or against, 'tls no matter; for while
you deny it to be the entering Ordinance, you account it the Wall, Bar, Bolt,
and Door; even that which must separate between the righteous and the
righteous; nay, you make want of Light therein, a ground to exclude the most
Godly your Communion, when every Novice in Religion shall be received into your
bosom, and be of esteem with you because he has (and from what ground God
knows) submitted to Water Baptism.

I am glad that in page 4. you conclude with me what is the initiating
Ordinance: but withal, give me leave to correct, as I think, one extravagant
expression of yours.

You say, It Is CONSENT on all hands and NOTHING else, that makes them Members
of particular Churches, and not Faith and Baptism. page 4.

You might have stopped at [and nothing else] you need not in particular have
rejected Faith: your first Error was bad enough, what? NOTHING else but
Consent? What? not so much as a respect to the matter or end? Why then are not
all the Communities of all the High-way-men in the Land, truly Constituted
Churches of Christ; unless you can prove that they hold together, but not by
consent.

What? Consent and nothing else? But why do YOU throw out FAITH? why, I throw
out Baptism; which because you cannot as to the case in hand fetch in again,
therefore OUT must Faith go too. Your action is much like that Harlots, that
stood to 1 King. 3.
be judged by Solomon, who because her own Child was dead, would have her
Neighbors killed also. Faith (Sir) both in the Profession and Confession of
it, is of immediate and also absolute concern, even in the very act of the
Churches reception, of this or another Member. Throw out Faith, and there is no
such thing as a Christian, neither visible nor invisible: You ought to receive
no man, but upon a comfortable satisfaction to the Church, that you are now
receiving a Believer. Faith, whether it be savingly there or no, is the great
Argument with the Church in receiving any: we receive not men as men, but the
man immediately under that supposition; He has Faith, he is a Christian. Sir,
Consent, simply without Faith, makes no man a Member of the Church of God;
because then would a Church not cease to be a Church, whoever they received
among them. Yea, by this Assertion you have justified the Church of Rome it
self, to be to this day both good, and godly, unless you can prove that they
did at first, and do now receive their unbelieving Members, without their own
Consent.

The Church has no such Liberty to receive men without respect to Faith; yea
Faith and Holiness, must be the Essentials, or Basis, upon, and for the sake of
which you receive them: Hoiness (I say) yet not such as is circumstantial, but
that which is such in the very heart of it: Pray you in your next therefore
word it better, lest while you slight and trample upon me, you stand before all
blameworthy your self.

The Scriptures you speak of, I did not in my first ( page 68.) produce to show
persons unbaptized might hold Communion with the Church (though I am fully
convinced they may) but to show, that knowledge of those Persons, of their
Faith and Holiness in general, ought first to be showed to the Church, before
she can lawfully receive them, Acts 9. 25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 16. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 23.

As to my Answer to a Question ( page 70.) which you have at page 5. of yours
corrupted, and then abused: I tell you again, That a discovery of the Faith and
Holiness, and a Declaration of the willingness of a Person to subject himself
to the Laws and Government of Christ in his Church, is a ground sufficient to
receive such a Member.

But you descant; Is Baptism none of the Laws of Christ?

Answ. It is none of those Laws, neither any part of them, that the Church, as
a Church, should show her Obedience by. For albeit that Baptism be given by
Christ our Lord to the Church, yet not for them to worship him by as a Church.
Show me what Church-Ordinance it is; and when, or where the Church, as a Church
is to practice it, as one of those Laws and Appointments that he has commanded
his Church to show to him her Obedience by.

Again, That submitting to Water Baptism, is a sign or note, that was ever
required by any of the Primitive Churches, of him that would hold Fellowship
with them; or that it infuseth such Grace and Holiness into those that submit
thereto, as to capacitate them for such a Privilege; or that they did
acknowledge it a sign thereof, I find not in all the Bible.

I find not (as I told you in my first) that Baptism is a sign to any, but the
Person that is baptized. The Church has her satisfaction of the Person, from
better proof, Col. 2. 12. Romans 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 29. Acts 2. 38. and
22. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

I told you also, That Baptism makes thee no Member of the Church, neither does
it make thee a visible Saint; It gives thee, therefore, neither right to, nor
being of Membership at all. Why, Sir, did you not Answer these things? but slip
them with others, as if you were unconcerned; troubling your Reader with such
kind of insinuations, as must needs be unsavory to godly ears.

You make the Moral Law none of Christ's, but Moses's; not the Sons, but the
Servants: and tell me, because I plead for Faith, and Holiness, according to
Moral Duties Gospellized (they are my words, page 79.) whereby we ought to
judge of the fitness of Members; that therefore Moses is more beholding to me
than Christ. page 6.

Sir, Know you not yet, that a difference is to be put betwixt those Rules that
discover the Essentials of Holiness, and those that in themselves are not such;
and that that of Faith and the Moral Law is the one, and Baptism, etc. the
other?

Is not Love to God, abhorrence of Idols, to forbear Blaspheming, to honor our
Parents, to do no Murder, to forbear Theft, not to bear False witness, nor
Covet, etc. are not (I say) these the Precepts of the Lord Jesus, because
delivered by Moses? Or, are these such as may better be broken, than for want
of light to forbear Baptism with Water? Or, does a man while he lives in the
neglect of these, and in the mean time bustle about those you call
Gospel-Commands, most honor Christ, or best fit himself for Fellowship with
the Saints? Need I tell you, That the Faith of Christ, with the Ten
Commandments, are as much now Gospel-Commands as Baptism; and ought to be in as
much, and far more respect with the holy ones than that, or other the like.

Yea, shall I tell you; That Baptism will neither admit a man into Fellowship,
nor keep him there, if he be a transgressor of a Moral Precept; and that a man
who believes in Jesus, and fulfilleth the Royal Law, does more glorify God,
and honor Religion in the World, than he that keeps (if there were so many)
ten thousand figurative Laws.

As to those Commands that respect God's Instituted Worship in a Church, as a
Church, I have told you that Baptism is none of them, and you have been driven
to confess it: The Page 40. of your Book.
Church then must first look to Faith, then to good Living according to the Ten
Commandments; after that she must respect those Appointments of our Lord Jesus,
that respects her outward order and discipline, and then she walks as becomes
her, sinning if she neglects either; sinning if she over-valueth either.

But why did you not Answer those Texts I produced for the strengthening of my
Argument, viz. Romans 14. 18. Deuteronomy. 23. 47. Jam. 2. 8. - 12. 1 Cor. 9. 21. and 5.
9, 10, 11. Gal. 6. 15, 16. Phil. 3. 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10, 11. Acts 20. 28, 32. Romans
13. 13. Jam. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 12.

Deal fairly; Answer those Texts, with the Argument made upon them; and when
you have after a godly manner done that, you may the more boldly condemn.

You tell me, That in page 93 of mine, I say, None ever received Baptism
without light therein.

What if I did? (as I did not but you grant it; And now I will ask you, and
pray deal fairly in your Answer, May man be a visible Saint without light
therein; May he have a good Conscience without light therein? And seeing that
Baptism is none of the worship that Christ Instituted in his Church for them to
practice as a Church, must he be kept dark about all other things concerning
the Worship of God in his Church, until he receive light therein?

You have answered already, page 7. That they ought to be ashamed, and to
repent of that abomination (their sprinkling) BEFORE they come to have a sight
of the pattern of the House of God, the goings in and the comings ^n thereof,
Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11.

But, Sir, where do you find that want of Light in Water Baptism, or because a
man has been Sprinkled, that he is to be kept dark in all other
Temple-Institutions, till he be ashamed and repent of that? Pray produce the
Texts, for Ezekiel helps you nothing: He speaks only of the Pattern of the
HOUSE, the goings out, and comings in thereof. As for the coming IN, you have
already confessed, That Baptism is not the entering. Ordinance. And as for the
Worship that Christ has Instituted in his Church, as a Church, I say (and you
also have said it page 40) Baptism is none of the Forms thereof, none of the
Ordinances thereof, none of the Laws thereof: for Baptism is, as to the
Practice of it, that which is without the Church, without the House of God:
Then by your own Text, if a man do repent him of his Christening in his
Childhood, he may be received into Fellowship without submitting to Baptism:
but I will not strain you too far.

You add, Is it a Persons Light that gives being to a Precept?

Answ. Who said it? Yet it is his Light and Faith about it, that can make him to
do it acceptably.

You ask again, Suppose men plead want of Light in other Commands?

Answ. If they be not such, the forbearance of which, discapaciates him of
Membership, he may yet be received to Fellowship.

But what if a man want Light in the Supper? page 7.

Answ. There is more to be said in that case than in the other; for that is a
part of that Worship which Christ has Instituted for his Church, to be
Conversant in as a Church; presenting them as such, with their Communion with
their Head, and with one another as Members of him. The Cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one
Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 16,
17. Wherefore this being a Duty incumbent on the Church, as a Church; and on
every Member of that Body as such, they are obliged in that case more closely
to deal with the Members, than in that wherein they are not SO concerned; and
with which as such, they have NOTHING to do. No man baptizeth by virtue of his
Office in the Church; no man is baptized by virtue of his Membership there.

But what if a man want Light in his Duty to the Poor? page 8.

Answ. If he does, God must give it him; I mean to know his Duty as a
Churchmember. Now I will add, But what if he that can give a shilling, gives
nothing? I suppose all that the Church can do in that case, is but to warn, to
exhort, and charge him, and to show him his Duty; and if he neglect, to show
him, That he that sows sparingly, shall not reap plentifully, 1 Cor. 9. 6.
But to cut a man off for this, as you forwardly urge, page 8. would argue that
Church (at least I think so) a little too bold with so high and weighty a
censure. I plead not here for the Churl, but seek to allay your heat: And
should it be granted that such deserve as you would have it, this makes no
matter to the case in hand.

Now whereas you suggest, That Moral Evils are but sins against men, page 8.
You are too much unadvised; The Moral Evil (as you call it) whether you respect
the breach of the first or second Table, is first and immediately a sin against
God; and more insufferable, yea and damnable, than for a man for want of Light
to forbear either Baptism or the Lord's Supper.

But say you, We have now found an Advocate for Sin against GOD, in the breach
of one of HIS holy Commands?

Answ. As if none of the Moral Precepts were HIS. But, Sir, who have I pleaded
for, in the denial of any one Ordinance of God? Yea, or for their neglect of it
either? What I say, is but that men must have Light, that they may not do in
darkness, or Papistlike, live by an implicit Faith.

But I see you put no difference, between an open breach of the Law, and a
forbearing that which to him is doubtful. But I will suppose a case; There is a
man wants Light in Baptism, yet by his Neighbor is pressed to it: he says he
sees it not to be his Duty; the other says, he sins if he does it not: Now
seeing whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; Romans 14.
what should this man do? If you say, Let him use the means: I say so too. But
what, if when he has used it, he still continues dark about it; what will you
advise him now? If you bid him wait, do you not encourage him to live in sin,
as much as I do? Nay, and seeing you will not let him for want of Light in
that, obey God in other his Institutions, what is it, but to say, Seeing you
live for want of Light in the neglect of Baptism, we will make you, while you
continue so, live (though quite against your Light) in the breach of all the
rest; And where you are Commanded thus, you may show the place when you find it.

Now where you urge, that you are one of them that say, The Epistles were writ
to particular-Churches, and so serve nothing at all for our kind of Communion:
Urging further, That it will be difficult for me to prove, that Page 9.
they were also directed to particular Saints.

Answ. I wish there were nothing harder that were good for me to do.

But what should be the reason that our Author, with others of his Opinion,
should stickle so hard to prove all the Epistles were wrote to particular
Churches? Why, because those Members were, as they think, every one baptized;
and so the Epistles from which we fetch our Arguments for the Love and Concord
of Saints, to be only proper to themselves. But if this be true, there is
virtue indeed, and more than ever I dreamed of, in partaking of Water Baptism:
For if that shall take away the Epistles, and consequently the whole Bible,
from all that are not baptized; then are the other Churches, and also
particular Saints, in a very deplorable condition. For he asks me very
devoutly, Whether any unbaptized Persons were concerned in these Epistles? page
9. But why would they take from us the Holy Scriptures? Verily, that we might
have naught to justify our practice withal: For if the Scriptures belong only
to baptized Believers, they then belong not to the rest; and in truth, if they
could persuade us to yield them this grant, we should but sorrily justify our
practice. But I would ask these men, If the Word of God came out from them? or
if Joh 17. 14 1 Cor. 14. 36.
it came to them only? Or, whether Christ has not given his whole Word to
every one that believes, whether they be baptized, or in, or out of
Church Fellowship? Joh. 17. Or, whether every Saint in some sort, has not the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, which are the Scriptures and their Power?

Would to God they had learnt more modesty, than thus to take from all others,
and appropriate to themselves, and that for the sake of their observing a
Circumstance in Religion, so high, and glorious a Privilege.

But we will come a little to proof: What Church will this Author find in Rome,
that time the Epistle was sent to the Brethren there, Romans 16. 5, etc.
besides that Church that was in Aquila's house, although many more Saints were
then in the City? Yea, the Apostle in his salutation at the beginning,
imbraceth them only as Brethren, without the least intimation of their being
gathered into Fellowship; To all that be at Rome, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, Grace to you, etc. Chap. 1. 7. To all there, to all in that City,
beloved of God, and that are Converted to the Lord Jesus Christ. A Church there
was in Aquila's house, and that there were many more Saints besides is (and
that by the Text) as manifest. Besides, considering the Rules that are given
them in the 14 and 15 Chapters about their receiving one another, does yet
strongly suggest to me, that they were not yet in fellowship, but as it were
now about it, when Paul wrote his Epistle to them.

The first Epistle written to Corinth, was also wrote to all them that in every
place called upon the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Chap. 1. 2. But it will be
hard work for our Author to make it manifest, that none in those days did call
on the Name of our Lord, but those that were first baptized.

The second Epistle also, was, not only written to the Church at Corinth, but
also to all the Saints which were in all Achaia. To 2 Cor. 1. 1.
the Galatians and Thessalonians indeed, his salutation was only to the
Churches there: but the three Epistles before were as well to all other; as
also that to the Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, in which the Faithful,
and Saints in Christ Jesus were also every one comprehended. Besides, To what
particular Church was the Epistle to the Hebrews wrote? or the Epistle of
James? both those of Peter, and the first of John? Nay, that of John was wrote
to some at that time out of Fellowship, that they might have fellowship with
the Church, Chap. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. So that these Brethren must not have all the
Scriptures: we have then a like privilege with all Saints, to use the
Scriptures for our godly edifying, and to defend our selves thereby, from the
assaults of those that would make spoil of us. But to pass this, and come to
the next.

You object for that I said, If Water Baptism (as the Circumstances with which
the Church was pestred of old) trouble the Peace, and wound the Consciences of
the Godly, dismember and break their Fellowships; it is, although an Ordinance,
for the present prudently to be shunned. (page 86.)

At this (as I said) you object ( page 10, 11.) and say, Did I ever find
Baptism a Pest or Plague to Churches? And did ever God send an Ordinance to be
a Pest and Plague to his People?

I Answer; I said not that God did send it for any such end at all: God's
Ordinances are none of this, in themselves; nor if used as, and for the end for
which God sent them. But yet both Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, have (by
being wrested out of their place) been a great affliction to the Godly both in
this and other Ages. What say you to breaking of Bread, which the Devil, by
abusing, made an Engine in the hand of Papists to burn, starve, hang-and-draw
thousands? What say you to John of Leyden? What work did he make by the abuse
of the Ordinance of Water Baptism? And I wish this Age had not given cause,
through the Church-renting-Spirits that some are possessed with, to make
complaint of this matter; who have also had for their Engine the Baptism with
Water: Yea, your self Sir, so far as I can perceive, could you get but the
opportunity; your self (I say) under pretense of this innocent Ordinance, as
you term it, would not stick to make in-roads, and outroads too, in all the
Churches, that suit not your fancy, in the Land. For you have already been bold
to affirm, That all those that have baptized Infants, ought to be ashamed and
repent, before they be showed the Pattern of the House: And what is this but to
threaten, that could you have your will of them, you would quickly take from
them their present Church Priviledges, and let them see nothing thereof, till
those qualifications, especially subjection to Water Baptism, was found to
attend each of them.

As to the Persons you speak of, Who have rent Churches in pieces, by making
Preaching by Method, Doctrine, Reason and Use, to be Antichristian; Or, because
they could not have other Ministrations performed after their fancies ( page
11, 12.) the imprudence of such with your selves, has been heartbreaking to
many a gracious Soul; an high occasion of stumbling to the weak, and a reproach
to the ways of the Lord. That it may be prudently shunned, I referred you then
for proof, to what should be offered after: but at this you cry out, and so
pass it.

And now Reader, although this Author has thus objected against some passages
in this my first Argument for Communion with Persons unbaptized; yet the body
of my Argument he misseth, and passes over, as a thing not worth the
Answering; whether because he forgot; or because he was conscious to himself,
that he knew not what to do therewith, I will not now determine.

1. I effectually prove, That Baptism is not the initiating Ordinance. page 71.
- 75. 2. I prove, That though it was, yet the case may so fall out, that
Members might be received without it. page 82, 83. 3. I prove, That Baptism
makes no man a visible Saint, nor gives any a right to Church Fellowship. page
76. 4. I prove, That Faith, and a Life becoming the Law of the Ten
Commandments, should be the chief and most solid Argument with true Churches to
receive Saints to Fellowship. 5. I prove, That Circumcision in the Flesh, which
was the entering Ordinance of old, was a Type of Circumcision in the heart, etc.
p. 79, 80.
These things, with others, our Author lets pass; although in the proof of
them abides the strength of this first Argument; to which I must entreat him
in his next, to cast his eye, and give fair Answer; as also to the Scriptures
on which each are built, or he must suffer me to say, I am abused. Further, I
make a question upon three Scriptures, Whether all the Saints, even in the
Primitive times, were baptized with Water? to which also he answers nothing;
whereas he ought to have done it, if he will take in hand to Confute. (The
Scriptures are, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15, 16. Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27.) Yet were they
effectually answered, my Argument is Nothing weakened.

You come to my second Argument, drawn from Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. Upon which a
little more now to enlarge, and then to take notice of your Objection.

The Apostle then in that Fourth of the Ephesians, exhorts the Church there
with all lowliness, and meekness, with long-suffering, and forbearing one
another, to ENDEAVOR to keep the Unity of the SPIRIT in the bond of PEACE,
verse. 2, 3. This done, he presents them with such Arguments, as might fasten
his Exhortation to purpose upon them.

The first is, Because the Body is ONE; There is one Body; therefore they
should not 1 Cor. 12. 22, 23, 24. 25, 26.
divide: For if the Church of Christ be a Body, there ought not to be a rent or
Schism among them.

2. His second Argument is, There is one Spirit, or one quickening Principle by
which the Body is made to live: for having Asserted before that Christ has
indeed a Body, it was meet that he showed also, that this Body has life, and
motion. Now that life, being none other, than that nourishment, or Spirit of
life, from which the whole Body fuly joined together, and compact, by that
which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working of the measure
in every part, makes increase of the body, to the edifying of it self in love,
Ephesians. 4. 16. Now this Spirit, being first, and chiefly, in the Head, therefore
none other but those that hold the Head can have this nourishment ministered to
them: Besides, This is the Spirit that knits the Body together, and makes it
increase with the increase of God, Col. 2. 16. This is the Unity of the Spirit
which he before exhorts them to keep.

3. The third Argument is, Because their Hope is also but one. Even as you are
called (says he) in one Hope of your calling: As who should say, My Brethren,
if you are called with one calling, if your Hope, both as to the Grace of Hope,
and also the Object, be but one: if you hope for one Heaven, and for one
Eternal Life; then maintain that Unity of the Spirit, and Hope, while here, in
love, and the bond of peace.

4. The fourth Argument is, There is one Lord, or Husband, or Prince, to whom
this Church belongs: Therefore if we have Husbands but one, Lord, and Prince
but one, let us not rent into many Parties, as if we had many Husbands, Lords,
and Princes, to govern us, as his Wife, his House, and Kingdom. Is Christ
divided? 1 Cor. 1.


5. The fifth Argument is, There is one Faith, by which we all stand justified
by one Lord Jesus Christ; one Faith by which we escape the Wrath of God; one
Faith by which only they that have it are blessed; yea, seeing there is but one
Faith, by which we are all put into one way of Salvation, let us hold together
as such.

6. The sixth Argument, There is one Baptism.

Now we are come to the pinch, viz. Whether it be that of Water, or no? which I
must positively deny.

1. Because Water Baptism has nothing to do in a Church, as a Church; it
neither brings us into the Church, nor is any part of our Worship when we
come there; how then can the Peace and Unity of the Church depend upon
Water Baptism? Besides, he says expressly, It is the Unity of the Spirit, (not
Water), that is here intended: and the Arguments brought to enforce it, are
such as wholly and immediately relate to the Duty of the Church, as a Church.

2. Further, That other Text, that treats of our being baptized into a body,
says expressly it is done by the Spirit; For by one 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 16. Here is the Church
presented as under the notion of a Body; here is a Baptism mentioned, by which
they are brought, or initiated into this Body: Now that this is the Baptism of
Water, is utterly against the words of the Text; For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body: besides, if the Baptism here be of Water, then is it
the initiating Ordinance; but the contrary I have proved, and this Author
stands by my Doctrine. So then, the Baptism here, respecting the Church as a
Body, and Water having nothing to do to enter men into the Church, nor to
command them to practice it as a Church, in order to their Peace, or Communion,
or respecting the Worship of God as such: And (I say again) the Baptism in the
sixth Argument, being urged precisely for no other purpose, but with respect to
the Churches peace as a Body; it must needs be THAT Baptism, by virtue of
which, they were initiated, and joined together in one: and that Baptism being
only that which the Spirit executes; this therefore is that one Baptism.

7. The other Argument is also effectual; There is one God and Father of all,
who is above Verse. 6.
all, and through all, and in you all. If we are one Body; if to it there be
but one Spirit; if we have but one Hope, one Faith, and be all baptized by one
Spirit into that one Body; and if we have but one Lord, one God, and he in
every one of us; let us be also one: and let them that are thus qualified, both
join together, and hold in one.

But our Author against this, objecteth, That, now I employ my Pen against
every man; and give the lie to all Expositors, for they hold this one Baptism,
to be none other than that of Water. page 13.

Answ. What if I should also send you to Answer those Expositors that expound
certain Scriptures for Infant Baptism, and that by them brand us for
Anabaptists; must this drive you from your belief of the Truth? Expositors I
reverence, but must live by mine own Faith: God has no where bound himself
Hab. 2. 4.
to them more than to others, with respect to the revelation of his Mind in his
Word.

But it becomes not you to run thus to Expositors, who are, as to your notions
in many things, but of yesterday: To the Law, and Isa. 8. 20. Psalm. 8. 2.
to the Testimony: For out of the mouth of Babes the Lord has ordained
strength.

But you bid me tell you, What I mean by Spirit-Baptism?

Answ. Sir, you mistake me, I treat not here of our being baptized with the
Spirit, with respect to its coming from Heaven into us; but of that act of the
Spirit, when come, which baptizeth us into a Body, or Church: It is one thing
to be baptized with the Spirit in the first sense; and another to be baptized
by it in the sense I treat of: for the Spirit to come upon me, is one thing;
and for that when come, to implant, imbody, or baptize me into the body of
Christ, is another.

Your Question therefore is grounded on a a mistake, both of my Judgment, and
the words of the Apostle. Wherefore thus I soon put an end to your Objections (
page 14.) For the Spirit to come down upon me is one thing; and for the Spirit
to baptize, or implant me into the Church, is another: for to be possessed with
the Spirit, is one thing; and to be led by that Spirit, is another. I conclude
then; Seeing the Argument taken from that one Baptism, respects
Church Fellowship properly; and seeing Water Baptism medleth not with it as
such; it is the other, even, that in 1 Cor. 12. 16. that is here intended, and
no other.

But you add, If nothing but extraordinary Gifts are called the baptism of the
Spirit in a strict sense; then that baptism, 1 Cor. 12. must be Water Baptism,
as well as that in the Ephesians.

Hold: You make your Conclusions before you have cause; First prove that in the
Ephesians to be meant of Water Baptism, and that the Baptism in 1 Cor. 12. 16.
is the Baptism you would have it; and then conclude my Argument void.

That it is the Baptism of the Holy Ghost according to the common notion, I say
not; for you to assert it is the Baptism of Water, gives the lie to the Text:
But that it is an act of the Holy Ghost, baptizing the Saints into a Body, or
Church, you will hardly be able to make the contrary appear to be truth.

But behold, while here you would have this to be Baptism with Water, how you
contradict and condemn your own Notion: You say Water Baptism is not the
entering Ordinance; yet the Baptism here is such as baptizeth us into a Body:
Wherefore before you say next time that this in 1 Cor. 12. 16. is meant of
Water Baptism; affirm, that Waterbaptism is the initiating or entering
Ordinance, that your Opinion and Doctrine may hang better together.

We come to my third Argument; Which is to prove, It is lawful to hold
Church Communion with the godly sincere Believer, though he has not been
baptized with Water, because he has the DOCTRINE of Baptisms, Heb. 6. Which
Doctrine I distinguish from the Practice of it; the Doctrine being that which
by the outward-sign is presented to us; or which by the outward-circumstance of
the act is preached to the Believer, viz. the Death of Christ, my death with
Christ; also his Resurrection from the dead, and mine with him to newness of
life. This our Author calls one of the strangest Paradoxes that he has
LIGHTLY observed.

Answ. How light he is in his Observation of things, I know not: This I am
sure, the Apostle makes mention of the Doctrine of Baptism; Now that the
Doctrine of a man, or Ordinance, is the signification of what is Preached, is
apparent to very sense. What is Christ's Doctrine, Paul's Doctrine,
Scripture-Doctrine, but the Truth couched under the words that are spoken? So
the Doctrine of Baptism, yea and the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper, are those
Truths or Mysteries that such Ordinances preach unto ns. And that the Doctrine
of Baptism in this sense, is the great end for which that, and the Lord's
Supper was instituted, is apparent from all the Scriptures: it is that which
the Apostle seeks for in that eminent sixth of the Romans, Know you not that
so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death?
Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism, that like as Christ was raised
from the Dead by the Glory of the Father; so we should walk in newness of Life.
For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his Death, we shall be
also in the likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. What is here
discoursed, but the Doctrine of, or that which Baptism teaches; with an
intimation, that that was the chief, for the sake of which that Shadow was
Instituted; as also that they that have the Doctrine, or that which is
signified thereby, they only must reign with Christ.

Again, This is that which he seeks for among the Corinthians; If the dead
rise not at all, says he, why then were you baptized for the dead? 1. Cor. 15.
22. Why then were you baptized? what did Baptism teach you? What Doctrine did
it preach to you? Further, Baried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are
risen again with him, through the Faith of the operation of God, who raised him
from the dead. What is here in chief asserted, but the Doctrine only which
Water Baptism preaches? with an intimation, that they, and they only, are the
saved of the Lord, that have heard, received, and that live in this Doctrine,
Col. 2. 12, 13.

The same may be said of the Lord's Supper, it also has its Doctrine. But
against this our Author objecteth, saying, That this is called the Doctrine of
Baptism, I am yet to learn.

Answ. Your ignorance of the Truth makes it not an Error: But I pray you, what
is the Doctrine of Baptism, if not that which Baptism teaches, even that which
is signified thereby? As that is the Doctrine of Christ, and the Scriptures;
which he and they teach as the mind of God.

But you say, I took the Doctrine of Baptism to be the Command that a Believer
should be baptized, for such ends as the Gospel expresses.

Answ. To assert that a figurative Ordinance of God, is one thing; but the
Doctrinal signification of that Ordinance is another: A man may preach the
Command, yet none of the Doctrine which Baptism preaches. The Doctrine lies
not in the Command, but the mystery discovered to Faith, by the act.

You object, If the Resurrection be the Doctrine of Baptism, why does the
Apostle make that, and the Doctrine of Baptism, things distinct, in Heb. 6.

Answ. The Resurrection simply considered, is not the Doctrine of Baptism, but
Christ's, and mine by him. Besides, there is more in it than the Mystery of
this Resurrection; there is my death first, and then my rising with him.

But you add, Under the Law, all the Sacrifices of that Dispensation, with
their Sabbaths, were Types of that Christ, who was the substance of all those
Ceremonies. If any of them then that professed Faith in the Messiah to come,
should upon scruples, or want of pretended Light, neglect the whole, or part of
that Typical Worship; why may not a man say of them, as this Advocate of the
Practice under Debate, they had the richer and better Sacrifice.

Answ. First, That the Brethren which refuse to be baptized, as you and I would
have them, refuse it for want of pretended Light, becomes you not to imagine,
unless your boldness will lead you to judge, that all men want sincerity, that
come not up to our judgment. Their Conscience may be better than either yours
or mine; yet God, for purposes best known to himself, may forbear to give them
conviction of their Duty in this particular. But what? Because they are not
baptized; have they not Jesus Christ? Or, must we now be afraid to say Christ
is better than Water Baptism? Yea, God himself for the sake of this better
thing, has suffered in his Church a suspension of some of his Ordinances, yet
owned them for his truly Constituted Congregation. What say you to the Church
in the Wilderness? I touched you with it in my first, but perceive you listed
not to meddle therewith. That Church received Members, the way which was not
prescribed by, but directly against the revealed Mind of God; yet stood a true
Church, their Members true Members; also that Church in that state, was such
before whom, among whom, and to whom God continually made known himself to be
their God, and owned them for his peculiar treasure.

And now I am fallen upon it, let me a little enlarge: This Church, according to
the then Instituted Worship of God, had Circumcision for their
entering-Ordinance, Genesis 17. 13, 14. without which it was unlawful to receive
any into Fellowship with them: yea, he that without it was received, was to be
cut off, and cast out again. Further; As to the Passover, the Uncircumcized
was utterly forbidden to eat it, Exodus 12. Now if our Brethren had as express
prohibition to justify their groundless Opinion, as here is to exclude the
Uncircumcised from the Communion of the Church and the Passover; (I say) if
they could find it written, No Unbaptized Person shall enter, no Unbaptized
Person shall eat of the Supper; what a noise would they make about it? But yet
let the Reader observe, that although Circumcision was the entering-Ordinance,
and our Author says Baptism is not; yea, though this Church was expressly
forbidden to receive the Uncircumcised (and we have not a syllable now to
forbid the Unbaptized) yet this Church received Members without, and otherwise
than by this entering-Ordinance. They also admitted them to the Passover; yea,
entertained, retained, and held Communion with them so long as forty years
without it. I say, again, That the number of this sort of Communicants was not
so few as six hundred thousand. Moreover, to these Uncircumcised was the Land
of Canaan given, yea, a possession of part thereof before they were
Circumcised; but the old Circumcised ones might not enter therein. I am the
larger in this, because our Author has overlooked my first mention thereof.
And now I ask, What was the reason that God continued his Presence with this
Church notwithstanding this transgression? Was it not because they had that
richer and better thing, the Lord Jesus Christ? For they did all eat of that
spiritual Bread, and drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that
Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. I confess I find them under rebukes and judgments
in the Wilderness, and that they were many times threatened to be destroyed; but
yet I find not so much as one check for their receiving of Members
Uncircumcised. Further, In the New Testament where we have a Catalogue of their
sins; and also of their punishment for them; we find not a word about
Circumcision, nor the smallest intimation of the least rebuke for neglecting
the entering-Ordinance, 1 Cor. 10. 5, 10. I will therefore say of them, as I
have also said of my Brethren, They had the richer and better thing.

But you object, That this puts the whole of God's Instituted Worship both
under the Law and Gospel, to the highest uncertainties, p. 17.

Answ. This puts our Opposers out of their road, and quenches the flame of
their unwarrantable zeal. For if the entering-Ordinance, if the Ordinance
without which no man might be added to the Church, was laid aside for forty
years; yea, if more than six hundred thousand did Communicate with them without
it: I say again, If they did it, and held Communion with God, that
notwithstanding; yea, and had not (that we read of) all that time, one small
check for so doing; why may not we now, enter Communion, hold Communion,
maintain Communion, Church Communion, without being judged, and condemned by
you? because we cannot for want of Light be all baptized before; especially
considering Baptism makes no man a Saint, is not the entering-Ordinance, is no
part of the Worship of God enjoined the Church as a Church. To conclude,
Although we receive Members unbaptized, we leave not God's Instituted Worship
at uncertainties, especially what he has commanded us as his Church; we only
profess our want of Light in some things; but see no Word to warrant the
forbearance of our Duty in all, for want of persuasion in one.

You object, I call Baptism a Circumstance, a show, an outward-shew, I
NICKNAME it.

Answ. Deep reproof! But why did you not show me my evil in thus calling it,
when opposed to the Substance, and the thing signified? Is it the Substance, is
it the thing signified? And why may not I give it the Name of a Show; when you
call it a symbol, and compare it to a Gentleman's Livery? page 52.

But you say, I call it an OUTWARD show.

Answ. Is it an Inward one? What is it?

It is a Command?

Answ. But does that install it in that place and dignity, that was never
intended for it?

You object further, They cannot have the Doctrine of Baptism that understand
not our way of administering it. page 18.

This is your mistake, both of the Doctrine and Thing it self. But if you will
not SCORN to take NOTICE of me, I advise you again to consider, That a man may
find Baptism to be Commanded, may be informed who ought to administer it: may
also know the proper Subject: and that the manner of baptizing is Dipping; and
may desire to practice it because it is Commanded, and yet know nothing of what
Water Baptism preaches; or of the Mystery baptism shows to Faith. But that
the Doctrine of Baptism is not the Practice of it, not the outward act, but the
thing signified; and that every Believer has that, must argue you more than
too bold to deny it.

But say you, Who taught you to divide betwixt Christ and his Precepts, that
you word it at such a rate? That he that has the one, etc.

Answ. To say nothing of Faith, and the Word: verily Reason it self teaches
it. For if Christ be my Righteousness, and not Water; if Christ be my Advocate,
and not Water; if there be that good and blessedness in Christ, that is not in
Water; then is Jesus Christ better than Water; and also in these to be
eternally divided from Water; unless we will make them Co-saviors,
Co-Advocates, and such as are equally good, and profitable to men.

But say you, I thought that he that has Christ, had an orderly right to all
Christ's Promises and Precepts; and that the Precepts of Christ, are part of
the riches that a Believer has in and by Christ.

Answ. A Believer has more in Christ, then either Promise or Precept; but all
Believers know not all things, that of God are given to them by Christ. But
must not they use, and enjoy what they know, because they know not all? Or must
they neglect the weightier matters, because they want Mint, and Annise, and
Commin? Your pretended orderly right is your fancy; there is not a syllable in
the whole Bible, that bids a Christian to forbear his Duty in other things,
because he wants (as you term it) the symbol, or Water Baptism.

But say you, He that despises his Birthright of Ordinances, our
Church Priviledges, will be found to be a profane Person, as Esau, in God's
account.

Baptism is not the Privilege of a Church, as such. But what? are they all
ESAU'S indeed? Must we go to Hell, and be damned for want of Faith in
Water Baptism? And take notice, I do not plead for a despising of Baptism, but
a bearing with our Brother, that cannot do it for want of Light. The best of
Baptism he has, viz. the signification thereof; he wants only the outward
show, which if he had, would not prove him a truly visible Saint; it would not
tell me he had the Grace of God in his heart; it is no Characteristical note to
another of my Sonship with God.

But why did you not Answer these parts of my Argument? Why did you only cavil
at words? which if they had been left out, the Argument yet stands good. He
that is not baptized, if yet a true Believer, has the Doctrine of Baptism;
yea, he ought to have it before he be Convicted, it is his duty to be baptized,
or else he plays the Hypocrite. There is therefore no difference between that
Believer that is, and he that is not yet baptized with Water; but only his
going down into the Water, there to perform an outward Ceremony of the
Substance which he has already; which yet he is not Commanded to do with
respect to Membership with the Church; but to obtain by that further
understanding of his Privilege by Christ, which before he made Profession of,
and that as a visible Believer.

But to come to my fourth Argument, which you so tenderly touch as if it burnt
your fingers: I am bold (say I) to have Communion with visible Saints as
before, because God has Communion with them, whose example in the case we are
strictly commanded to follow. Receive ye one another, as Christ Jesus has
received Romans 15. 7
you, to the glory of God. Yea, though they be Saints in Opinion contrary to
you, or I. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities Romans 15. 1.
of the weak, and not to please our selves. Infirmities that are Sinful: for
they that are Natural, are incident to all. Infirmities therefore they are,
that for want of Light, cause a Man to err in Circumstantials: And the reason
upon which Paul groundeth this admonition is; For Christ pleased not himself,
Verse. 3.
but as it is written, the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen
upon me.

You say to this, page 20. That it is Paul's direction to the Church at Rome
how to receive their Brethren Church Members, page 20.

I answer.

1. What? are not the poor Saints now in this City? are not they concerned in
these instructions? or is not the Church by these words at all directed how to
carry it to those that were not yet in fellowship? A bold Assertion! but
grounded upon nothing, but that you would have it so.

2. But how will you prove that there was a Church, a rightly constituted
Church at Rome, besides that in Aquila's house? Chap. 16. Neither does this
Epistle, nor any other in the whole Book of God affirm it. Besides, since Paul
in this last Chapter saluteth the Church, as in this Man's house, but the other
only as particular Saints, it gives farther ground of Conviction to you, that
those others were not as yet imbodyed in such a fellowship.

3. But suppose there was another Church besides; it does not therefore follow,
that the Apostle exhorts them only to receive persons already in fellowship;
but him, even Romans 14. 1
every him, that there was weak in the Faith, but not to doubtful disputations.

4. Suppose again, The receiving here exhorted to, be such as you would have
it; yet the Rule by which they are directed to do it, is that by which we
perceive that Christ has received them: But Christ did not receive them by
Baptism, but as given to him by the Father: Him therefore concerning whom we
are convinced, that he by the Father is given to Christ, Him should we receive.

5. But what need I grant you that which cannot be proved? yet if you could
prove it, it avails nothing at all; because you may not, cannot, ought not to
dare to limit the Exhortation to receiving of one another into each others
affections only; and not also receiving Saints into Communion.

But you object: To make God's receiving the Rule of our receiving, in all
cases will not hold. page 21.

Answ. Keep to the thing Man: If it hold in the case in hand, it is enough, the
which you have not denied. And that it holds thus, is plain, because commanded.
But let the Reader know, that your putting in that way of his receiving which
is invisible to us, is but an unhandsome stradling over my Argument, which
treats only of a visible receiving; such as is manifest to the Church: This
you knew, but sought by evading, to turn the Reader from considering the
strength of this my Argument. The receiving then (said I, p. 29.) because it is
set an example to the Church, is such as must needs be visible unto them; and
is best discovered by that word that describes the visible Saint: Whosoever then
you can judge a visible Saint, one that walks with God, you may, nay ought to
judge by the same Word, God has received him. Now him that God receives, him
should you receive. But will any object; they cannot believe that God receives
the unbaptized Saints? I will not suppose you so much stupefied, and therefore
shall make no answer. But you seem to be much offended, because I said, Vain
Man! Think not by the straightness of thine Order in outward, and bodily
conformity to outward and shadowish Circumstances, that thy peace is maintained
with God?

But why so much offended at this?

Because, you intend by this the Brethren of the Baptized way.

A. If they be vain Men, and set up their OWN Order; how straight soever they
make it, they are worthy to be reproved: If Jer. 8. 9.
they have rejected the Word of the Lord, what wisdom is in them. And as you
suggest the first, I affirm the second. But if you would be justified in
excluding those, with whom yet you see God has Communion, because they yet see
not a shadow with you; produce the Scripture for such Order, that we may
believe it is the Order of God: But deal fairly, left we show your nakedness,
and others see your shame.

You tell me of the Order of the Colossians, Chap. 2. 5. but if you can prove
that that Church refused to hold Communion with that Saint whom they knew to be
received by Christ, and held Communion with him, or that none but those that
are baptized are received by, and hold Communion with him, then you justify
your Order. In the mean while the whole of mine Argument stands firm against
you; You must have Communion with visible Saints, because God has Communion
with them, whose Example in the Case we are strictly Commanded to follow.

But you ask me, If outward and bodily Conformity be become a crime? page 23.

Answ. I no where said it: But know that to glorify God with our bodies,
respects chiefly far higher and more weighty things than that of
Water Baptism, Whatsoever is Romans 14.
not of Faith is sin; and to set up an Ordinance, though an Ordinance of God,
that by it the Churches may be pulled in pieces, or the truly visible Saints
excluded Communion with their Brethren; I say again, To make Water Baptism a
bar and division betwixt Saint and Saint, every-whit otherwise gracious and
holy alike: This is like fasting for strife, and debate, and to smite with the
fist of wickedness; and is not to be found within the whole Bible, but is
wholly an order of your own devising. As to the Peace you make an Objection
about ( page 23.) you have granted me what I intended; and now I add further,
That for Church-peace to be Ephesians. 4. 31, 32.
founded in Baptism, or any other external Rite, not having to do with the
Church as a Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3.
Church, is poor Peace indeed: Churchpeace is founded in blood; and love to
each other for Jesus sake; bearing with, and forbearing one another, in all
things Circumstantial, that concern not Church-worship as such: And in my other
I have proved that Baptism is not such, and therefore ought not to be urged to
make rents and divisions among Brethren.

But you ask, Is my peace maintained in a way of disobedience? and conclude if
it be, you fear it is false. page 24.

A. If the first were true, you need not to doubt of the second; but it may be
thought he has little to say in the Controversy, who is forced to stuff out
his Papers, with such needless prattles as these.

My fifth Argument is, That a failure in such a Circumstance as Water Baptism,
does not un-Christian us; This you are compelled to grant, page 25. And I
conclude with your words, Persons ought to be Christians before, visible
Christians; such as any Congregation in the Land may receive to Communion with
themselves, because God has showed us that he has received them. Receive him
to the Glory of God: [To the Glory of God] is put in on purpose, to show what
dishonor they bring to him, who despise to have Communion with such, whom they
know do maintain Communion with God. I say again, How does this Man, or that
Church glorify God, or count the Wisdom and Holiness of Heaven beyond them,
when they refuse Communion with them, concerning whom yet they are convinced,
that they have Communion with God.

But my Argument you have not denied; nor meddled with the Conclusion at all;
which is, That therefore, even because a failure here, does not un-Christian
us, does not make us insincere; and I add, Does not lay us open to any revealed
judgment or displeasure of God; (if it does, show where) therefore it should
not, it ought not to make us obnoxious to the displeasure of the Church of God.

But you say, I rank Gospel-Precepts, with Old Testament abrogated Ceremonies.
page 25.

Answ. You should have given your Reader my words, that he might have judged
from my own mouth: I said then (speaking before of Christianity it self, page
94.) that thousands of thousands that could not Consent to Water, as we, are
now with the innumerable company of Angels, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect. What was said of Eating, or the contrary, may as to this be said of
Waterbaptism; Neither if I be baptized, am I the better? neither if I be not,
am I the worse? not the better before God, not the worse before Men; still
meaning as Paul, Provided I walk according to my Light with God; otherwise it is
false. For if a man that sees it to be his Duty, shall despisingly neglect it;
or if he that has not Faith about it, shall foolishly take it up: both these,
are for this the worse; I mean, as to their own sense, being convicted in
themselves, as transgressors. He therefore that does it according to his Light,
does well; and he that does it not, for want of Light, does not ill; for he
approves his heart to be sincere with God, even by that his forbearance. And I
tell you again, It is no where recorded, that this man is under any revealed
threatening of God, for his not being baptized with Water, he not having Light
therein, but is admitted through his Grace to as many Promises as you. If
therefore he be not a partaker of that Circumstance, yet he is of that Liberty,
and Mercy, by which you stand with God.

But that I practice Instituted Worship, upon the same account as Paul did
Circumcision, and shaving, is too bold for you to presume to imagine. What?
Because I will not suffer Water to carry away the Epistles from the Christians;
and because I will not let Water Baptism be the Rule, the Door, the Bolt, the
Bar, the Wall of Division between the Righteous, and the Righteous; must I
therefore be judged to be a Man without Conscience to the Worship of Jesus
Christ? The Lord deliver me from Superstitious, and Idolatrous thoughts about
any the Ordinances of Christ, and of God. But my fifth Argument stands
against you untouched; you have not denied, much less confuted the least
syllable thereof.

You tell me my sixth Argument is, Edification.

A. If it be, why is it not embraced? But my own words are these;

I am for holding Communion thus; because the Edification of Souls in the
Faith, and holiness of the Gospel is of greater concern than an agreement in
outward things; I say, it is of greater concern with us, and of far more profit
to Brother, than our agreeing in, or contessing for Water Baptism, Joh. 16. 13.
1 Cor. 14. 12. 2 Cor. 10. 8. Chap. 12. 19. Ephesians. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Chap.
8. 1. Now why did you not take this Argument in pieces, and answer those
Scriptures, on which the strength thereof depends; But if to contest, and fall
out about Water Baptism, be better than to edify the House of God, produce the
Texts, that we may be informed. You say; Edification is the end of all
Communion, but all things must be done in Order, orderly, page 26.

Answ. When you have proved that there is no such thing as an orderly edifying
of the Church without Water Baptism, precede, then it will be time enough to
think you have said something.

You add; Edification as to Church Fellowship being a building up, does suppose
the being of a Church; but pray you show us a Chuh without Baptism. p. 26.

A. See here the spirit of these Men, who for the want of Water Baptism, have
at once un-Churched all such Congregations of God in the World; but against
this I have, and do urge, That Water Baptism gives neither being, nor
well-being to a Church, neither is any part of that Instituted Worship of God,
that the Church, as such, should be found in the Practice of. Therefore her
Edification as a Church may, yea and ought to be attained unto without it.

But you say, Show us a New-Testament-Church without Baptism. page 26.

A. What say you to the Church all a-long the Revelation quite through the
Reign of Antichrist? Was that a New-Testament-Church, or no?

Again, If Baptism be without the Church, as a Church, if it has nothing to do
in the Constituting of a Church; if it be not the door of entrance into the
Church, if it be no part of Church-worship as such; then, although all the
Members of that Church were baptized, yet the Church is a Church without
Water Baptism. But all the Churches in the New Testament were such: Therefore,
etc.

Again, If Baptism respect Believers, as particular Persons only; if it
respects their own Conscience only; if it make aman no visible Believer to me,
then it has nothing to do with Church Membership: Because, that which respects
my own Person only, my own Conscience only: that which is no Character of my
visible Saintship to the Church, cannot be an Argument unto them to receive me
into fellowship with themselves. But this is true, Therefore, etc.

You proceed, If by Edification, be meant the private increase of Grace, in one
another, in the use of private means, as private Christians in meeting
together; how does the Principle you oppose hinder that? Endeavor to make men
as holy as you can, that they may be futed for Church Fellowship, when God
shall show them the orderly way to it. page 26.

Answ. What a many private things have we now brought out to public view?
Private Christians, private Means, and a private increase of Grace. But, Sir,
Are none but those of your way the public Christians? Or, ought none but them
that are baptized to have the public means of Grace? Or, must their Graces be
increased by none but private means? Was you awake now? Or, are you become so
high in your own fantasies, that none have, or are to have but private means
of Grace? And, are there no public Christians, or public Christian-Meetings,
but them of your way? I did not think that all but Baptists, should only abide
in holes.

But you find fault because I said, Edification is greater than contesting
about Water Baptism. page 27.

A. If it be not, confute me; if it be, forbear to cavil. Water Baptism, and
all God's Ordinances, are to be used to Edification; not to beget heats and
contentions among the Godly, wherefore Edification is best.

Object. I had thought that the Preaching, and opening Baptism, might have been
reckoned a part of our Edification.

Answ. The act of Water Baptism has not place in Church-worship, neither in
whole nor in part; wherefore pressing it upon the Church is to no purpose at
all.

Object. Why may you not as well say that Edification is greater than breaking
of Bread. page 27.

Answ. So it is, else that should never have been Instituted to edify withal;
that which serves, is not greater than he that is served thereby. Baptism and
the Lord's Supper both, were made for us, not we for them; wherefore both were
made for our Edificatition, but no one for our destruction.

But again, The Lord's Supper, not Baptism, is for the Church, as a Church;
therefore as we will maintain the Church's edifying, that must be maintained in
it; yea, used often, to show the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 22, 26.

Besides, because it is a great part of Church-worship, as such, therefore it
is pronounced blessed, the Lord did openly bless it before he gave it; yea and
we ought to bless it also; (The Cup of blessing which we bless) not to say
more, Therefore your reasoning from the one to the other will not hold.

Object. How comes contesting for Waterbaptism to be so much against you?

Answ. First, because weak Brethren cannot bear it; whom yet we are commanded
to receive but not to doubtful disputation; doubtful to them, therefore for
their sakes, I must forbear it. Romans 14. 1.

Secondly, Because I have not seen any good effect, but the contrary,
wherever such hot Spirits have gone before me: For where Envy and Strife is,
there is Confusion (or Tumults) and every Evil-work. Jam. 3. 16, 17.

Thirdly, Because by the Example of the Lord, and Paul, we must consider the
present state of the Church, and not trouble them with what they cannot bear.
Joh. 16. 13. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3.

I conclude then, Edification in the Church is to be preferred above what the
Church, as a Church, has nothing to do withal. All things (dearly beloved) are
for our Edifying. 1 Cor. 14. 5. and 12. 26. 2 Cor. 12. 19. Epq. 4. 26. Romans 15.
2. 1 Cor. 14. 3. 2. Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10. Romans 14. 19. Before I wind up this
Argument, I present you with several Instances, showing that some of the brecah
of God's Precepts have been born with, when they come in competition with
Edification. As First, That of Aaron, who let the Offering for Sin be burnt,
that should have indeed been eaten, Levit. 10. Yet because he could not do it
to his Edification, Moses was content. But the Law was thereby transgressed,
Chap. 6. 26. The Priest that offers it for Sin, shall eat it.

To this you Reply, That was not a constant, continued, forbearing of God's
Worship, but a suspending of it for a season.

Answ. We also suspend it but for a season; when Persons can be baptized to
their Edification, they have the liberty.

But secondly, This was not a bare suspension, but a flat transgression of the
Law: Ye should indeed have eaten it: Yet Moses was content. Levit. 10. 16. - 20.

But say you, Perhaps it was suspended upon just and legal grounds, though not
expressed.

Answ. The express Rule was against it; Ye should indeed (said Moses) have
eaten it in the Holy place, as I commanded, verse. 18. But good Sir, are you now
for unwritten verities? for legal grounds, though not expressed? I will not
drive you further, here is Rome enough.

As for Eldad and Medad, it cannot be denied, but that their edifying of the
People, was preferred before their conforming to every Circumstance. Numb. 11.
16. - 26.

You add, That Paul for a seeming low thing did withstand Peter.

Sir, If you make but a seeming low thing of Dissembling, and teaching others
so to do (especially where the Doctrine of Justification Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13.
is endangered) I cannot expect much good Conscience from you.

As for your Answer to the case of Hezekiah, it is faulty in two respects:

1. For that you make the Passover a Type of the Lord's Supper, when it was
only a Type of the Body and Blood of the Lord: For even Christ our Passover is
Sacrifice for us. 1 Cor. 5. 7.

2. In that you make it an Example to you to admit Persons unprepared to the
Lord's Supper. page 29.

Answ. May you indeed receive Persons into the Church unprepared for the
Lord's Supper; yea, unprepared for that, with other solemn Appointments? For so
you word it, page 29. O what an Engine have you made of Water Baptism.

Thus, gentle Reader, while this Author teareth us in pieces for not making
Baptism the orderly Rule for receiving the Godly, and Conscientious into
Communion; he can receive Persons if baptized, though unprepared for the
Supper, and other solemn Appointments? I would have thee consult the place, and
see if it countenanceth such an act, That a man who pleads for Water Baptism
above the Peace and Edification of the Church, ought to be received (although
unprepared) into the Church to the Lord's Supper, and other solemn
Appointments, especially considering the Nature or right Church-Constitution,
and the severity of God toward those that came unprepared to his Table of old.
1 Cor. 11. 28, 29, 30. A Riddle indeed. That the Lord should, without a word,
so severely command, that all which want Light in Baptism, be excluded
Church Priviledges; and yet against his Word, admit of Persons unprepared, to
the Lord's Table, and other solemn Appointments.

But good Sir, why so short-winded? why could not you make the same work with
the other Scriptures, as you did with these? I must leave them upon you
unanswered; and standing by my Argument conclude, That if Laws and Ordinances
of old have been broken, and the breach of them born with (when yet the
Observation of outward things was more strictly Commanded than now) if the
Profit and Edification of the Church come in competition; how much more, may
not we have Communion, Church Communion, when no Law of God is transgressed
thereby. And note, That all this while I plead not (as you) for Persons
unprepared, but godly, and such as walk with God.

We come now to my seventh Argument, for Communion with the Godly, though
unbaptized Persons; which you say is Love. page 29.

My Argument is this; Therefore I am for Communion thus; because Love, which
above all things we are Commanded to put on, is of much more worth than to
break about Baptism. And let the Reader note, That of this Argument you deny
not so much as one syllable, but run to another story; but I will follow you.

I add further, That Love is more discovered when we receive for the sake of
Christ, than when we refuse his Children for want of Water: And tell you again,
That this Exhortation to Love is grounded not upon Baptism, but the putting on
of the new Creature, which has swallowed up all distinctions. Col. 3. 9.-14.
Yea, there are ten Arguments in this one, which you have not so much as
touched; but thus object, That man that makes Affection the Rule of his
walking, rather than judgment, it is no wonder if he go out of the way.

Answ. Love to them we are persuaded that God has received, is Love that is
guided by Judgment; and to receive them that are such, because God has bidden
us ( Romans 14.) is Judgment guided by Rule. My Argument therefore has
forestalled all your noise, and stands still on its legs against you.

As to the Duties of Piety, and Charity you boast of, page 30. found not a
Trumpet, tell not your left hand of it; we are talking now of Communion of
Saints, Church Communion, and I plead that to Love, and hold together as such,
is better than to break in pieces for want of Water Baptism. My Reason is,
because we are exhorted in all things to put on Love; the Love of
Church Communion: contrariwise you oppose, Above all things put on Water. For
the best Saint under Heaven that has not that, with him you refuse Communion.
Thus you make Baptism, though no Church-Ordinance, a bar to shut out the Godly,
and a Trap-door to let the unprepared into Churches, to the Lord's Supper, and
other solemn Appointments. page 29.

But you object, Must our Love to the unbaptized indulge them in an act of
disobedience? Cannot we love their Persons, Parts, Graces, but we must love
their Sins? page 30.

Answ. We plead not for indulging. But are there not with you, even with you
sins against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. But why can you indulge the
Baptists in many acts of disobedience? For to come unprepared into the Church,
is an act of disobedience: To come unprepared to the Supper is an act of
disobedience; and to come so also to other solemn Appointments, are acts of
disobedience.

But for these things, you say, you do not cast, nor keep any out of the Church.

Answ. But what acts of disobedience do we indulge them in?

In the Sin of Infant Baptism.

Answ. We indulge them not; but being Commanded to bear with the Infirmities of
each other, suffer it; it being indeed in our eyes such; but in theirs they say
a duty, till God shall otherwise persuade them. If you be without infirmity, do
you first throw a stone at them: They keep their Faith in that to themselves,
and trouble not their Brethren therewith: we believe that God has received
them; they do not want to us a proof of their Sonship with God; neither, has
he made Water a Wall of Division between us, and therefore we do receive them.

Obj. I take it to be the highest act of friendship to be faithful to these
Professors, and to tell them they want this one thing in Gospel Order, which
ought not to be left undon. page 30.

Answ. If it be the highest piece of Friendship, to preach Water Baptism to
unbaptized Believers, the lowest act thereof must needs be very low. But
contrariwise, I count it so far off from being any act of Friendship, to press
Baptism in our Notion on those that cannot bear it; that it is a great abuse of
the Peace of my Brother, the Law of Love, the Law of Christ, or the Society of
the Faithful. Love suffers long, and is kind, is not easily provoked: Let us
therefore follow after the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith one
may edify another: Let every one of us please his Neighbor, for his good to
Edification: Bear you one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. 1
Cor. 13. Romans 14. 19. Chap. 15. 2. Gal. 6. 2.

But say you, I doubt when this comes to be weighed in God's balance, it will
be found no less than flattery, for which you will be reproved. page 31.

Answ. It seems you do but doubt it, wherefore the Principle from which you
doubt it, of that methinks you should not be certain; but this is of little
weight to me; for he that will presume to appropriate the Epistles to himself
and fellows for the sake of Baptism, and that will condemn all the Churches of
Christ in the Land for want of Baptism and that will account his Brother as
profane Esau ( page 20.) and rejected, as Idolatrous Ephraim (page 32.)
because he wants his way of Water Baptism; he acts out of his wonted way of
rigidness, when he does but doubt, and not affirm his Brother to be a
flatterer. I leave therefore this your Doubt to be resolved at the Day of
Judgment, and in the mean time trample upon your harsh, and unchristian
surmises.

As to our Love to Christians in other cases, I hope we shall also endeavor to
follow the Law of the Lord; but because it respects not the matter in hand, it
concerns us not now to treat thereof.

My Argument treats of Church Communion; in the prosecution of which I prove,

1. That Love is grounded upon the new Creature, Col. 3. 9, etc.

2. Upon our fellowship with the Father and Son, 1 John 1. 2, 3.

3. That with respect to this, it is the fulfilling of the Royal Law, Jam. 4.
11. Romans 14. 21.

4. That it shows it self in acts of forbearing, rather than in publishing some
Truths: Communicating only what is profitable, forbearing to publishing what
cannot be born, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. Acts 20. 18, 19, 20. Joh. 16. 17.

5. I show further, That to have fellowship for, to make that the ground of, or
to receive one another chiefly upon the account of an outward Circumstance; to
make Baptism the including, and excluding Charter; the Bounds, Bar, and Rule of
Communion, when by the Word of the everlasting. Testament, there is no Word for
it; (to speak charitably) if it be not for want of Love, it is for want of
light in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ. Strange! Take two Christians
equal in all Points but this; nay, let one go beyond the other in Grace and
Goodness, as far as a Man is beyond a Babe, yet Water shall turn the Scale,
shall open the Door of Communion to the less; and command the other to stand
back: Yet is no proof to the Church of this Babes Faith and Hope, has nothing
to do with his entering into fellowship, is no part of the Worship of the
Church. These things should have been answered, seeing you will take upon you
so roundly to condemn our practice.

You come now to my eighth Argument; which you do not only render falsely, but
by so doing abuse your Reader. I said not that the Church of Corinth did shut
each other out of Communion; but, For God's People to divide into Parties, or
to shut each other from Church Communion, though for greater Points, and upon
higher Pretenses, than that of Water Baptism, has heretofore been counted
carnal, and the actors therein Babish-Christians; and then bring in the
Factions, that was in the Church at Corinth. But what* May not the evil of
denying Church Communion now, if proved naught by a less crime in the Church at
Corinth, be counted Carnal and Babish; but the breach of Communion must be
charged upon them at Corinth also?

That my Argument is good you grant, page 32. saying, The Divisions at the
Church at Corinth were about the highest Fundamental Principles, for which they
are often called carnal; yet you cavil at it. But if they were to be blamed for
dividing, though for the highest Points: Are not you much more for condemning
your Brethren to perpetual banishment from Church Communion, though sound in
all the great Points of the Gospel, and right in all Church-Ordinances also,
because for want of Light they fail only in the Point of Baptism?

As to your quibble about Paul and Apollo, whether they, or others, were the
Persons (though I am satisfied you are out) yet it weakeneth not my Argument;
For if they were blameworthy for dividing, though about the highest
Fundamental Principles (as you say) how ought you to blush for carrying it as
you do to Persons, perhaps, more godly than our selves, because they jump not
with you in a Circumstance?

That the divisions at Corinth were helped on by the abuse of Baptism, to me is
evident, from Paul's so often suggesting it; Were you baptized in the Name of
Paul? I thank God I baptized none of you, lest any should say, I had baptized
in my own Name.

I do not say, that they who baptized them designed this, or that Baptism in it
self effected it; nor yet (though our Author seigns it) that they were most of
them baptized by their Factious Leaders, page 55. But that they had their
Factious Leaders, is evident; and that these Leaders made use of the Names of
Paul, Apollo, and Christ, is as evident; for by these Names they were beguiled
by the help of abused Baptism.

But say you, Wherein lies the force of this man's Argument against Baptism as
to its place, worth, and continuance?

I answer; I have no Argument against its place, worth, or continuance,
although thus you seek to scandalize me. But this kind of sincerity of yours,
will never make me one of your Disciples.

Have not I told you even in this Argument, That I speak not as I do, to
persuade or teach men to break the least of God's Commandments; but that my
Brethren of the Baptized-way may not hold too much THEREUPON, may not make it
an Essential of the Gospel, nor yet of the Communion of Saints. Yet he feigns
that I urge two Arguments against it, p. 36. and 38. But Reader, thou may
know I have no such reason in my Book. Besides, I should be a Fool indeed, were
I against it, should I make use of such weak Arguments. My words then are these;

I thank God (said Paul) that I baptized none of you but Crispus, etc. Not but
that then it was an Ordinance, but they abused it in making Parties thereby, as
they abused also Paul, and Cephas. Besides (said he) I know not whether I
baptized any other. By this negligent relating who were baptized by him; he
shows that he made no such matter thereof, as some in these days do. Nay,
that he made no matter at all thereof with respect to a Church Communion. For
if he did not heed who himself had baptized, much less did he heed who were
baptized by others? But if Baptism had been the initiating-Ordinance, (and I
now add) Essential to Church Communion; then no doubt he had made more
Conscience of it, than thus lightly to pass it by.

I add further, where he says, He was not sent to baptize; that he spoke with
an holy Indignation against those that had abused that Ordinance. Baptism is an
Holy Ordinance, but when Satan abuses it, and wrencheth it out of its place,
making that which is Ordained of God, for the Edification of Believers, the
only Weapon to break in pieces the Love, Unity, and Concord of the Saints; than
as Paul 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7*
said of himself, and fellows, What is Baptism? Neither is Baptism any thing?
This is no new Doctrine, for God by the mouth of the Prophet Isa. 1. 11, 12*
13* 14, 15.
of old, cried out against his own Appointments, when abused by his own People,
because they used them for strife, and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness. But to forbear, to Isa. 58. 4.
take notice thus of these things, my Argument stands firm against you: For if
they at Corinth were blameworthy for dividing, though their divisions were (if
you say true) about the highest Fundamentals, you ought to be ashamed, thus to
banish your Brethren from the Privileges of Church Communion for ever, for the
want of so low a thing as Waterbaptism. I call it not low, with respect to Gods
appointment, though so, it is far from the highest place, but in comparison of
those Fundamentals, about which, you say, the Corinthians made their divisions.

You come next to my ninth Argument, and serve it as Hanun served David's
Servants, 2 Samuel 10. 4. you have cut off one half of its Beard, and its
Garments to its Buttocks, thinking to send it home with shame. You state it
thus;

That by denying communion with unbaptized* Believers, you take from them their
Privileges to which they are born, page 40.

Answ. Have I such an Argument in all my little Book? Are not my words verbatim
these? If we shall reject visible Saints by calling, Saints that have communion
with God; that have received the Law at the hand of Christ; that are of an holy
conversation among men, they desiring to have communion with us; as much as in
us lies, we take from them their very privileges, and the blessings to which
they were born of God.

This is mine Argument: now confute it.

Paul says, (1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. and 3. 22.) not only to the Gathered Church at
Corinth, but to all scattered Saints, that in every place call upon the Name of
the Lord, that Jesus Christ is theirs; that Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas* and
the World, and all things else was theirs.

But you answer* We take from them nothing, but we keep them from a disorderly
practice of Gospel Ordinances, we offer them their privileges, in the way of
Gospel Order.

Answ. Where have you one word of God, that forbids a person, so qualified,
as is signified in mine Argument, the best Communion of Saints for want of
Water? There is not a syllable for this in all the Book of God. So then, you in
this your plausible defense, do make your Scriptureless Light, which in very
deed is darkness, ( Isa. 8. 20, 21.) the Rule of your Brothers Faith; and how
well you will come off for this in the Day of God, you might, were you not
wedded to your wordless Opinion, soon begin to conceive.

I know your Reply, New Testament Saints were all baptized first.

Answ Suppose it granted; Were they baptized, that thereby they might be
qualified for their right to communion of Saints, so that without their
submitting to Water, they were to be denied the other? Further, Suppose I
should grant this groundless Notion, Were not the Jews in Old Testament times
to enter the Church by Circumcision? For that, Genesis 17.
though Water is not, was the very entering-Ordinance. Exodus 12.
Besides, as I said before, there was a full forbidding all that were not
circumcised from entering into fellowship, with a threatening to cut them off
from the Church if they entered in without it: Yet more than six hundred
thousand entered that Church without it. But how now, if such an one as you had
then stood up and objected, Sir Moses, What is the reason that you transgress
the Order of God, to receive Members without Circumcision? Is not that the very
entring-Ordinance? Are not you commanded to keep out of the Church all that are
not circumcised? Yea, and for all those that you thus received, are you not
commanded to cast them out again, to cut them off from among this people? (
Genesis 17. 13, 14. Exodus 12. 24, 25, 26.)

I say, Would not this man have had a far better Argument to have resisted
Moses, than you in your wordless Notion have to shut out men from the Church,
more holy than many of our selves? But do you think that Moses and Joshua, and
all the Elders of Israel, would have thanked this Fellow, or have concluded
that he spoke on God's behalf? Or, that they should then, for the sake of a
better than what you call Order, have set to the work that you would be doing,
even to break the Church in pieces for this?

But say you, If any will find or force another way into the Sheepfold, than
by the footsteps of the Flock, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God,
page 41.

Answ. What was done of old, I have showed you, that Christ, not Baptism, is
the way to the Sheepfold, is apparent: and that the person, in mine Argument,
is entitled to all these, to wit, Christ, Grace, and all the things of the
Kingdom of Christ in the Church, is, upon the Scriptures urged, as evident.

But you add, That according to mine old confidence, I affirm, That drink ye
all of this, is intailed to Faith, not Baptism: A thing, say you, soon said,
but yet never proved.

Answ. 1. That it is intailed to Faith, must be confessed of all hands. 2. That
it is the privilege of him that discerns the Lord's 1 Cor. 11. 29.
Body, and that no man is to deny him it, is also by the Text as evident, (and
so let him eat) because he is worthy. Wherefore he, and he only that discerns
the Lord's Body, he is the worthy Receiver, the worthy Receiver in God's
estimation; but that none discern the Lord's Body but the Baptized, is both
fond and ridiculous once to surmise.

Wherefore to exclude Christians, and to debar them their Heaven-born
Privileges, for want of that which yet God never made the Wall of Division
betwixt us: This looks too like a Spirit of Persecution, ( Job 19. 25, 26, 27,
28, etc.) and carries in it those eighteen absurdities which you have so hotly
cried out against. And I do still add, Is it not that which greatly prevailed
with God to bring down those Judgments, which at present we (the People of God)
groan under, I will dare to say, it was And so it was in my first Copy, but for
a, the Printer put in the.
A cause thereof: Yea, I will yet proceed; I fear, I strongly fear, that the
Rod of God is not yet to be taken from us; for what more provoking sin among
Christians, than to deny one another their Rights and Privileges to which they
are born of God? and then to Father these their doings upon God, when yet he
has not commanded it, neither in the New Testament nor the Old?

But, I may not lightly pass this by, for because I have gathered eighteen
absurdities from this abuse of God's Ordinances, or from the sin of binding the
Brethren to observe Order, not founded on the Command of God; (and I am sure
you have none to shut out men as good, as holy, and as sound in Faith as our
selves, from Communion). Therefore you call my Conclusion devilish, (page 43.)
Top-ful of ignorance, and prejudice, (p. 41.) and me, one of Machiavels
Scholars, (p. 42.) also proud, presumptious, impeaching the Judgment of God.

Answ. But what is there in my Proposition, that men, considerate, can be
offended at? These are my words; But to exclude Christians from
Church Communion, and to debar them their Heaven-born Privileges, for the want
of that which yet God never made a wall of division between us: This looks too
like a Spirit of Persecution: This respects more the form, than the spirit
and power of Godliness, etc. Shall I add, Is it not that which greatly
prevailed to bring down those Judgments which at present we feel and groan
under? I will dare to say, it was a cause thereof. (p. 116, 117.) A, was in my
Copy, instead whereof the Printer put in the; for this, although I speak only
the truth; I will not beg of you belief; besides, the Bookseller desired me,
because of the Printers haste, to leave the last sheet to be over-looked by
him, which was the cause it was not among the Errata's.

But, I say, wherein is the Proposition offensive? Is it not a wicked thing to
make bars to Communion, where God has made none? Is it not a wickedness, to
make that a Wall of Division betwixt us, which God never commanded to be so. If
it be not, justify your practice; if it be, take shame. Besides, the
Proposition is universal, why then should you be the chief intended? But you
have in this, done like to the Lawyers of old, who when Christ reproved the
Pharisees of wickedness before them, said, Master, thus saying thou reproachest
us also, Luke 11. 45.

But you feign, and would also that the World should believe, that the Eighteen
Absurdities which naturally flow from the Proposition, I make to be the Effects
of Baptism, saying to me, None but your self could find an innocent Truth big
with so many monstrous Absurdities. page 42.

I Answer; This is but speaking wickedly for God, or rather to justify your
wordless Practice. I say not that Baptism has any Absurdity in it, though your
abusing it, has them all, and many more, while you make it, without warrant
from the Word, as the flaming Sword, to keep the Brotherhood out of Communion,
because they after your manner cannot consent thereto.

And let no man be offended, for that I suggest that Baptism may be abused to
the breeding such monstrous Absurdities, for greater Truths than that have been
as much abused. What say you to, This is my Body? To instance no more, although
I could instance many, are not they the words of our Lord? are not they part of
the Scriptures of Truth? and yet behold, even with those words, the Devil by
abusing them, made an Engine to let out the heart-blood of thousands. Baptism
also may be abused, and is, when more is laid upon it by us, than is Commanded
by God. And that you do so, is manifest by what I have said already, and shall
yet say to your Fourteen Arguments.

My last Argument, you say is this;

The World may wonder at your carriage to those Unbaptized Persons, in keeping
them out of Communion?

Ans. You will yet set up your own words, and then fight against them: but my
words are these, What greater contempt can be thrown upon the Saints, than for
their Brethren to cut them off from, or to debar them Church Communion!

And now I add, Is not this to deliver them to the Devil, 1 Cor. 5. or to put
them to shame before all that see your acts? There is but one thing can hinder
this, and that is, bystanders see, that these your Brethren, that you thus
abuse, are as holy men as our selves. Do you more to the open Profane, yea, to
all Wizards and Witches in the Land? For all you can do to them (I speak now as
to Church-acts) is no other than debar them the Communion of Saints.

And now I say again, The World may well wonder, when they see you deny
holy-men of God that liberty of the Communion of Saints which you Monopolize to
your selves. And though they do not understand the grounds of Profession, or
Communion; yet they can both see, and say, these Holy-men of God, in all
visible acts of Holiness, are not one inch behind you. Yea, I will put it to
your selves, If those many, yea very many, who thus severely (but with how
little ground, is seen by men of God) you deny Communion with, are not of as
good, as holy, as unblameable in life, and as sound, if not sounder in the
Faith than many among our selves: Here only they make the stop, they cannot,
without Light, be driven into Water Baptism, I mean after our Notion of it: but
what if they were, 'twould be little sign to me that they were sincere with God.

To conclude this; when you have proved that Water Baptism (which you your self
have said is not a Church-Ordinance, p. 40.) is Essential to Church Communion,
and that the Church may, by the Word of God, bolt, bar, and for ever shut out
those, far better than our selves, that have not, according to our Notion, been
baptized with Water; then 'twill be time enough, to talk of ground for so
doing. In the mean time I must take leave to tell you, There is not in all the
Bible one syllable for such a Practice, wherefore your great cry about your
Order is wordless, and therefore faithless, and is a mere Humane Invention.

I come now to your Fourteen Arguments, and shall impartially consider them.
YOur first Argument to prove it lawful to reject the Unbaptized Saint, is,
Because the great Commission of Christ, Matthew. 28. from which all Persons have
their Authority for their Ministry, (if any Authority at all) does clearly
direct the contrary. By that Commission, Ministers are first to Disciple, and
then to Baptize them so made Disciples, and afterward to teach them to observe
all that Christ Commanded them, as to other Ordinances of Worship. If Ministers
have no other Authority to teach them other parts of Gospel Worship, before
they believe and are baptized; it may be strongly supposed, they are not to
admit them to other Ordinances before they have passed this first enjoined in
the Commission.

Answ. 1. That the Ministers are to Disciple and Baptize, is granted. But that
they are prohibited (by the Commission, Matthew. 28.) to Teach the Disciples
other parts of Gospel Worship, that have not Light in Baptism, remains for you
to prove. Shall I add, This Position is so absurd and void of truth, that none
that have ever read the Love of Christ, the Nature of Faith, the End of the
Gospel, or of the Reason of Instituted Worship (which is Edification) with
understanding, should so much as once imagine.

But where are they here forbidden to teach them other Truths, before they be
baptized? This Text as fairly denies to the unbaptized Believer, Heaven, and
Glory. Nay our Author in the midst of all his flutter about this 28th of
Matthew, dare venture to gather no more therefrom, but that it may be strongly
supposed. Behold therefore, gentle Reader, the ground on which these Brethren
lay the stress of their separation from their Fellows, is nothing else but a
supposition, without warrant, skrewed out of this blessed Word of God. Strongly
Supposed! but may it not be as strongly supposed, that the Presence and
Blessing of the Lord Jesus, with his Ministers, is laid upon the same ground
also? for thus he concludes the Text, And lo, I am with you always, even to
the end of the World. But would, I say, any man from these words, conclude,
That Christ Jesus has here promised his Presence only to them that after
discipling, baptize those that are so made; and that they that do not baptize,
shall neither have his Presence, nor his Blessing? I say again, Should any so
conclude hence, would not all Experience prove him void of Truth? The words
therefore must be left, by you, as you found them, they favor not at all your
groundless supposition.

To conclude, these words have not laid Baptism in the way to debar the Saint
from Fellowship of his Brethren, no more than to hinder his inheritance in Life
and Glory. Mark reads it thus; He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. letting
Baptism, which he mentioned in the promise, fall, when he came at the
threatening.

God also does thus with respect to his Worship in the Church, he commands all
and every whit of his will to be done, but bears with our coming short in
this, and that, and another Duty. But let us go on.

Your second Argument, is: That the Order of Christ's Commission, as well as
the matter therein contained to be observed, may easily be concluded, from
God's severity toward them that sought him not according to due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Was God so exact with his People then, that all things to a Pin
must be according to the Pattern in the Mount, Heb. 7. 16. and 9. 11. whose
Worship then comparatively, to the Gospel, was but after the Law of a Carnal
Commandment; and can it be supposed he should be so indifferent no^ to leave
men to their own liberty, to time and place his Appointments, contrary to what
he has given in express Rule, for in his Word as before? Ezekiel. 44. 7, 9, 10.
It was the Priest's Sin formerly to bring the uncircumcised in heart and flesh
into his house.

Answ. That there is no such Order in that Commission as you feign, I have
proved. As for your far-fetched Instance (1 Chronicles. 15.) it is quite besides your
purpose. The express Word was, That the Priest, not a Cart, should bear the Ark
of God: Also they were not to touch it, and yet Uzza did, Exodus 25. 14. 1 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13, 14, 15. Numb. 4. 15. 1 Chronicles. 13. Now, if you can make that
28th of Matthew say, Receive none that are not baptized first; or that Christ
would have them of his, that are not yet baptized, kept ignorant of all other
Truths that respect Church Communion; then you say something, else you do but
raise a mist before the simple Reader: but who so lists, may hang on your
sleeve.

As for the Pins and Tacks of the Tabernacle, they were expressly commanded; and
when you have proved by the Word of God, That you ought to shut Saints out of
your Communion for want of Baptism, then you may begin more justly to make your
Parallel. How fitly you have urged Ezekiel. 44. to insinuate that unbaptized
Believers are like the uncircumcised in heart and flesh, I leave it to all
Gospel-Novices to consider.

Your third Argument, is, The practice of the first Gospel Ministers, with them
that first trusted in Christ, discovers the truth of what I assert. Certainly,
they that lived at the springhead, or fountain of Truth, and had the Law from
Christ's own mouth, knew the meaning of his Commission better than we: but
their constant practice in conformity to that Commission, all along the Acts of
the Apostles, discovers that they never arrived to such a latitude as men plead
for now a-dayes. They that gladly received the Word were baptized, and they
(yea they only) were received into the Church.

Answ. How well you have proved what you have asserted, is manifest by my
Answer to the two former Arguments. I add, That the Ministers, and Servants of
Jesus Christ in the first Churches (for that you are to prove) were Commanded
to forbear to Preach other Truths to the Unbaptized Believers; or that they
were to keep them out of the Church: or that the Apostles, and first Fathers,
have given you to understand by their Example, that you ought to keep as good
out of Churches as your selves, has not yet been showed by the Authority of
the Word. The second of the Acts proves not, That the three thousand were
necessitated to be baptized in order to their Fellowship with the Church,
neither does it say THEY, yea they only, were received into the Church. But
suppose all this, as much was done at the first Institution of Circumcision,
etc. yet afterward thousands were received without it.

Your fourth Argument is, None of the Scripture-Saints ever attempted this
Church-priviledge without Baptism, (if they did, let it be shown). The Eunuch
first desired Baptism before any thing else; Paul was first baptized before he
did essay to join with the Church. Our Lord Christ, the great Example of the
New Testament, entered not upon his public Ministry, much less any other
Gospel-Ordinance of Worship, till he was Baptized.

Answ. That none of the Scripture-Saints (if there be any unscripture ones) so
much as attempted this Church-priviledge first, remains for you to prove. But
suppose they were all Baptized, because they had light therein, what then? Does
this prove that Baptism is essential to Church Communion? Or, that Christ
commanded in the 28th of Matthew, or gave his Ministers by that authority, not
to make known to Believers other parts of Gospel Worship, if they shall want
light in Baptism? The Eunuch, Paul, and our blessed Lord Jesus, did none of
them, by their Baptism, set themselves to us Examples how to enter into
Church Communion, what Church was the Eunuch Baptized into, or made a Member
of; but where is it said, that the unbaptized Believer, how excellent soever in
Faith and Holiness, must, for want of Water Baptism, be shut out from the
communion of Saints, or be debarred the Privilege of his Fathers House? This
you are to prove.

Your fifth Argument is, If Christ himself was made manifest to be the SENT of
God by Baptism, as appears Mark 1. 9, 10. Then why may not Baptism, as the
first Fruits of Faith, and the first step of Gospel-Obedience, as to Instituted
Worship, be a manifesting, discovering Ordinance upon others who thus follow
Christ's steps.

Answ. That Jesus Christ was manifested as the SENT of God by Baptism, or that
Baptism is the first Fruit of Faith, and the first step of Gospel-Obedience, as
to instituted Worship, is both without proof and truth; the Text says not, he
was manifest to be the sent of God by Baptism; nay it says not, that by that
he was manifest to others to be any thing thereby: you have therefore but
wronged the Text, to prove your wordless Practice by. Yea, John himself, though
he knew him before he was baptized, to be a Man of God, (for, says he, I have
need to be Baptized Mat. 3. 14.
of thee, and come thou to me) and knew him after to be the SENT of God; yet
not Joh. 1. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
in, or by, but after he was Baptized, to wit, by the descending of the Holy
Ghost, after he was come out of the Water, as he was in Prayer, for the Heavens
were opened to John, and he saw, and bare Record, because he saw the Spirit
descend from Heaven, and abide upon Jesus, after his Baptism, as he was in
Prayer, Mat. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. Luke 3. 21, 22. Thus we find him made known
before, and after, but not at all by Baptism, to be the SENT of God.

And that Baptism is the first fruits of Faith, or that Faith ought to be tied
to take its first step in Water Baptism, in the instituted Worship of God,
(this you must prove) is not found expressed within the whole Bible. Faith acts
according to its strength, and as it sees, it is not tied or bound to any
outward Circumstance; one believes he may, and another believes he may not,
either do this or that.

Your sixth Argument is, If Baptism be in any sense any part of the foundation
of a Church, as to order, Heb. 6. 1, 2. it must have place here or no where:
why are those things called first Principles, if not first to be believed, and
practiced? Why are they rendered by the learned the A. B. C. of a Christian, and
the beginning of Christianity, Milk for Babes, if it be no matter whether
Baptism be practiced or no? If it be said Water Baptism is not there intended,
let them show me how many Baptisms there are besides Water Baptism? Can you
build and leave out a stone in the Foundation? I intend not Baptism a
Foundation any other way, but in respect of order, and it is either intended
for that or nothing.

Answ. Baptism is in no sense the Foundation of a Church. I find no foundation
of a Church, but Jesus Christ himself, Mat. 16. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Yea, the
Foundation mentioned, Heb. 6. 1, 2. is nothing else but this very Christ. For
he is the Foundation, not only of the Church, but of all that good that at any
time is found in her. He is the Foundation OF our Repentance, and OF our Faith
toward God, verse. 1, 2. Further, Baptisms are not here mentioned, with respect
to the Act in Water, but of the Doctrine, that is, the signification thereof.
The Doctrine of Baptisms. And observe, neither Faith, nor Repentance, nor
Baptisms, are called here Foundations: Another thing, for a Foundation, is here
by the Holy Ghost intended, even a Foundation for them all; a Foundation OF
Faith, OF Repentance, OF the Doctrine of Baptisms, OF the Resurrection of the
Dead, and OF eternal Judgment. And this Foundation is Jesus Christ himself, and
these are the first Principles, the Milk, the A. B. C. and the beginning of
Christian Religion in the World.

I dare not say, No matter whether Water Baptism be practiced or no. But it is
not a stone in the Foundation of a Church, no not respecting order; it is not,
to another, a sign of my Sonship with God; it is not the door into Fellowship
with the Saints, it is no Church Ordinance, as you, your self have testified,
page 40. So then as to Church-work, it has no place at all therein.

Your seventh Argument is, If Paul knew the Galatians ONLY upon the account of
Charity, NO other ways to be the Sons of God by Faith; but by this part of
their Obedience, as he seems to import, then the same way we judge of the truth
of men's profession of Faith, when it shows it self by this self -- same
Obedience, Gal. 3. 26, 27. Baptism being an Obligation to all following Duties.

Answ. This your Argument, being builded upon no more than a SEEMING Import,
and having been above ten times overthrown already; I might leave still with
you, till your seeming Import is come to a real one, and both to a greater
persuasion upon your own Conscience. But verily Sir, you grossly abuse your
Reader; Must Imports, yea, must seeming Imports now stand for Arguments,
thereby to maintain your confident separation from your Brethren? Yea, must
such things as these, be the Basis on which you build those heavy Censures and
Condemnations you raise against your Brethren, that cannot comply with you,
because you want the word? A seeming Import. But are these words of Faith, or
do the Scriptures only help you to seeming Imports, and me-hap-soes for your
practice? No, nor yet to them neither, for I dare boldly affirm it, and demand,
if you can, to prove, that there is so much as a seeming IMPORT in all the Word
of God, that countenanceth your shutting men, better than our selves, from the
Things and Privileges of our Fathers House.

That to the Galatians, says not, that Paul knew them to be the Sons of God by
Faith, NO other way, but by THIS part of their Obedience; but puts them upon
concluding themselves the Sons of God, if they were baptized into the Lord
Jesus, which could not (ordinarily) be known but unto themselves alone;
because, being thus baptized, respects a special Act of Faith, which only
God, and him that has, and acts it, can be privy to. It is one thing for him
that administreth, to Baptize in the Name of Jesus, and another thing for him
that is the Subject, by that to be baptized INTO Jesus Christ: Baptizing INTO
Christ, is rather the Act of the Faith of him that is baptized, than his going
into Water and coming out again: But that Paul knew this to be the state of the
Galatians NO other way, but by their external Act of being baptized with Water,
is both wild and unsound, and a miserable IMPORT indeed.

Your eighth Argument is. If being baptized into Christ, be a putting on of
Christ, as Paul expresses, then they have not put on Christ, in that sense he
means, that are not baptized; if this putting on of Christ, does not respect
the visibility of Christianity; assign something else as its signification;
great men's Servants are known by their Masters Liveries, so are
Gospel-Believers by this Livery of Water Baptism, that all that first trusted
in Christ submitted unto; which is in it self is as much an Obligation to all
Gospel-Obedience, as Circumcision was to keep the whole Law.

Answ. For a reply to the first part of this Argument, go back to the Answer to
the seventh.

Now that none have put on Christ in Paul's sense; yea, in a saving, in the
best sense but them that have, as you would have them, gone into Water, will be
hard for you to prove, yea, is ungodly for you to assert.

Your comparing Water Baptism to a Gentleman's Livery, by which his Name is
known to be his, is fantastical.

Go you but ten doors from where men have knowledge of you, and see how many of
the World, or Christians, will know you by this goodly Livery, to be one that
has put on Christ. What I known by Water Baptism to be one that has put on
Christ, as a Gentleman's man is known to be his Masters Servant, by the gay
Garment his Master gave him. Away fond man, you do quite forget the Text. By
THIS shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another, John 13. 35.

That Baptism is in it SELF obliging, to speak properly, it is false, for set
it by it self, and it stands without the stamp of Heaven upon it, and without
its signification also: and how, as such, it should be obliging, I see not.

Where you insinuate, it comes in the room of, and obliges as Circumcision:
You say, Acts 15. 1, 2.
you know not what. Circumcision was the initiating Ordinance, but this you
have denied Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
to Baptism. Further, Circumcision THEN bound men to the whole Obedience of the
Law, when urged by the false Apostles, and received by an erroneous Conscience.
Would you thus urge Water Baptism! would you have men to receive it with such
Consciences? Romans 2. 28, 29.
Circumcision in the flesh, was a Type of Circumcision in the heart, and not of
Phil. 3. 3.
Water Baptism.

Your ninth Argument is, If it were commendable in the Thessalonians, that they
followed the footsteps of the Church of Judea, 1 These. 2. 24. who it appears
followed this order of adding Baptized-Believers unto the Church; Then they
that have found out another way of making Church Members, are not by that Rule
praiseworthy, but rather to be blamed; it was not what was since in corrupted
times, but that which was from the beginning: the first Churches were the
purest Pattern.

Answ. That the Text says there was a Church OF Judea, I find not, (1 Thessalonians.
2. 14.) And that the Thessalonians are commended for refusing to have communion
with the unbaptized Believers, (for that is our question) prove it by the word,
and then you do something. Again, that the commendations (1 Thessalonians. 2. 14.) do
chiefly, or at all, respect their being Baptized: Or, because they followed the
Churches of God, which in Judea were in Christ Jesus, in the Example of
Water Baptism is quite beside the word. The Verse runs thus, for the Brethren,
became followers of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in Christ Jesus,
for ye also have suffered like things of your own Contrymen, even as they
have of the Jews, etc. This Text then commends them, not for that they were
baptized with Water, but, for that they stood their ground, although baptized
with suffering, like them in Judea, for the Name of the Lord Jesus. For
suffering like things of their own Countrymen, as they did of the Jews. Will
you not yet leave off to abuse the Word of God, and forbear turning it out of
its place, to maintain your unchristian practice of rejecting the People of
God, and excluding them their blessed Privileges.

The unbaptized Believer; instead of taking shame for entering into fellowship
without it, will be ready, I doubt, to put you to shame for bringing.
Scriptures so much besides the purpose, and for stretching them so miserably to
uphold you in your fancies.

Your tenth Argument is, If so be, that any of the Members at Corinth, Galatia,
Coloss, Rome, or them that Peter wrote to, were not baptized, then Paul's
Arguments for the Resurrection to them, or to press them to holiness from that
ground (Romans 6. Col. 2. 1 Cor. 15.) was out of doors, and altogether needless,
yea, it bespeaks his ignorance, and throws contempt upon the Spirits Wisdom,
(Heb. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 12.) by which he wrote; if that must be asserted as a ground
to provoke them to such an end, which had no being; and if all the Members of
all those Churches were baptized, why should any plead for an exemption from
Baptism for any Churchmember now?

Answ. Suppose all, if all these Churches were baptized, what then? that
answers not our Question. We ask where you find it written, that those that
are baptized, should keep men as holy, and as much beloved of the Lord Jesus as
themselves, out of Church Communion, for want of light in Water Baptism.

Why we plead for their admission, though they see not yet, that that is their
Duty, is because we are not forbidden, but commanded to receive them, because
God and Christ has done it, Romans 14, and 15.

Your eleventh Argument is, If unbaptized Persons must be received into
Churches only, because they are Believers, though they deny Baptism; Then why
may not others plead for the like privilege, that are negligent in any other
Gospel-Ordinance of Worship, from the same ground of want of light, let it be
what it will. So then as the consequence of this Principle, Churches m^^ be
made up of visible sinners, instead of visible Saints.

Answ. I plead not for Believers simply because they are Believers, but for
such Believers of whom we are persuaded by the Word, that God has received
them.

2. There are some of the Ordinances that, be they neglected, the being of a
Church, as to her visible Gospel-Constitution, is taken quite away; but Baptism
is none of them, it being no Church-Ordinance as such, nor any part of Faith,
nor of that Holiness of heart, or life, that shows me to the Church to be
indeed a visible Saint. The Saint is a Saint before, and may walk with God, and
be faithful with the Saints, and to his own Light allo, though he never be
baptized. Therefore to plead for his admission, makes no way at all for the
admission of the open profane, or to receive, as YOU profess YOU do, Persons
unprepared to the Lord's Table, and other solemn Appointments. page 29.

Your twelfth Argument is, Why should Professors have more Light in breaking of
Bread, than Baptism? That this must be so urged for their excuse: Has God been
more sparing in making out his mind in the one, rather than the other? Is there
more Precepts or Precedents for the Supper, than Baptism? Has God been so
bountiful in making out himself about the Supper, that few or none, that own
Ordinances, scruple it: And must Baptism be such a rock of offense, to
Professors? That very few will inquire after it, or submit to it? Has not
man's wisdom interposed to darken this part of God's Counsel? By which
Professors seem widingly led, though against so many plain Commands and
Examples, written as with a Sunbeam, that he that runs may read? And must an
Advocate be entertained to plead for so gross a piece of ignorance, that the
meanest babes of the first Gospel Times were never guilty of?

Answ. Many words to little purpose:

1. Must God be called to an account by you, why he gives more Light about the
Supper, than Baptism? May he not show to, or conceal from this, or another of
his Servants, which of his Truths he pleases? Some of the Members of the
Church of Jerusalem had a greater Truth than this kept from them, for ought I
know, as long as they lived, ( Acts 11. 19.) yet God was not called in question
about it.

2. Breaking of Bread, not Baptism, being a Church-Ordinance, and that such
also, as must be often reiterated; yea, it being an Ordinance SO full of
blessedness, as lively to present Union and Communion with Christ to all the
Members that worthily eat thereof; I say, The Lord's Supper being such, that
while the Members sit at that feast, they show to each other the Death and
Blood of the Lord; as they ought to do, till he comes, (1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17.
and 11. 22, 23. 24, 25, 26.) the Church, as a Church, is much more concerned in
THAT, than in Water Baptism, both as to her Faith, and Comfort; both as to her
Union, and Communion.

3. Your supposition, That very few Professors will seriously enquire after
Waterbaptism, is too rude. What! must all the Children of God, that are not
baptized for want of Light, be still stigmatized, with want of ferious inquiry
after God's mind in it.

4. That I am an Advocate, entertained, to plead for so gross a piece of
ignorance, as want of Light in Baptism, is but like the rest of your jumbling.
I plead for Communion with men, godly and faithful, I plead that they may be
received, that God has showed us he has received, and commanded we should
receive them.

Your thirteenth Argument is, If Obedience must discover the truth of a man's
Faith to others, why must Baptism be shut out? as if it was no part of
Gospel-Obediance. Is there no Precept for this Practice, that it must be thus
despised? as a matter of little use, or shall one of Christ's precious Commands
be blotted out of a Christians Obedience, to make way for a Church Fellowship
of man's devising?

Answ. 1. This is but round, round, the same thing, over and over: That my
obedience to Water, is not a discovery of my Faith to others, is evident, from
the body of the Bible, we find nothing that affirms it.

And I will now add, That if a man cannot show himself a Christian without
Waterbaptism, He shall never show either Saint, or Sinner, that he is a
Christian by it.

2. Who they are that despise it, I know not but that Church Membership. may be
without it, (seeing, even you your self have conoluded, it is no
Church-Ordinance, p. 40. not the entering-Ordinance, p. 3, 4.) stands both
with Scripture and Reason, as mine Arguments make manifest. So that all your
Arguments prove no more but this, That you are so wedded to your wordless
Notions, that Charity can have no place with you. Have you all this while so
much as given me one small piece of a Text to prove it unlawful for the Church
to receive those whom she, by the Word, perceives the Lord God and her Christ
has received? No: and therefore you have said so much as amounts to nothing.

Your last Argument is, If the Baptism of John was so far honored, and
dignified, that they that did submit to it, are said to justify God; and those
that did it not, are said to reject his counsel against themselves: so that
their receiving, or rejecting the whole Doctrine of God, has its denomination
from this single Practice. And is there not as much to be said of the Baptism
of Christ, unless you will say, it is inferior to John's, in worth and use.

Answ. 1. That our denomination of Believers, and of our receiving the Doctrine
of the Lord Jesus, is not to be reckoned from our Baptism, is evident; Because
according to our Notion of it, they only that have before received the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and so show it us by their Confession of Faith, they only ought
to be baptized. This might serve for an Answer for all: But,

2. The Baptism of John was the Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of
Sins, of Matthew. 3. 4, 5, 6.
which Water was but an outward signification, Mark 1. 4. Now, what is the
Baptism Luke 3. 3.
of Repentance, but an unfeigned acknowledgment that they were Sinners, and so
stood in Chap. 7. 29, 30.
need of a Savior, Jesus Christ: This Baptism, or Baptism under this Notion,
the Pharisees Cha. 18 9.
would not receive, For they trusted to themselves Chap. 10. 29.
that they were righteous, that they were not as other men, that they had need
of NO repentance: Not, but that they would have Chap. 15. 7
been baptized with Water, might that have been without an acknowledgement that
they were Sinners: wherefore seeing the Counsel Mat. 3. 7.
of God respected, rather the Remission of sins by Jesus Christ, than the
outward act of Ephesians. 1. 7, 8, 11.
Water Baptism, ye ought not, as you do, by this your Reasoning, to make it
rather, at least in the revelation of it, to terminate in the outward act of
being baptized, but in unfeigned and sound Repentance, and the receiving of
Jesus Christ by Faith.

Further, A desire to submit to John's Water Baptism, or of being baptized by
him in Water, did not demonstrate by that SINGLE act, the receiving of the
whole Doctrine of God, as you suggest.

Why did John reject the Pharisees that would have been baptized? and Paul
examine them that were? Matthew. 3. 7. Acts 19. 2, 3.

If your Doctrine be true, why did they not rather say, Oh! seeing you desire
to be baptized, seeing you have been baptized, you need not to be questioned
any further your submitting to John's Water; to us is a sufficient testimony,
even that single act, that you have received the whole Doctrine of God.

But I say, why did John call them Vipers? and Paul asked them, Whether they
had yet received the Holy Ghost: Yea, it is evident, that a man may be desirous
of Water that a man may be baptized, and neither own the Doctrine of
Repentance, nor know on whom he should believe: evident, I say, and that by the
same Texts ( Matthew. 3. 7. Acts 19. 2, 3, 4.)

You have grounded therefore this your last Argument, as also all the rest,
upon an utter mistake of things.

I come now to your Questions; which although they be mixed with Gall, I will
with patience see if I can turn them into Food.
Your first Question is, I Ask your own heart, whether popularity and applause
of variety of Professors, be not in the bottom of what you have said; that has
been your snare to pervert the right ways of the Lord, and to lead others into
a path wherein we can find none of the footsteps of the Flock in the first
Ages?

Answ. Setting aside a retaliation, like your Question, I say, and God knows I
speak the truth, I have been tempted to do what I have done, by a provocation
of sixteen years long; tempted, I say, by the Brethren of your way: Who,
whenever they saw their opportunity, have made it their business to seek, to
rend us in pieces; mine own self they have endeavored to persuade to forsake
the Church; some they have rent quite off from us, others they have attempted,
and attempted to divide and break off from us, but by the mercy of God, have
been hitherto prevented.

A more large account you may have in my next, if you think good to demand it;
but I thank God that I have written what I have written.

Quest. 2. Have you dealt Brotherly, or like a Christian, to throw so much dirt
upon your Brethren, in print, in the face of the World, when you had
opportunity to converse with them of reputation amongst us, before printing,
being allowed the liberty by them, at the same time for you to speak among them?

Answ. I have thrown no dirt upon them, nor laid any thing to their charge, if
their Practice be warrantable by the Word; but you have not been offended at
the dirt, your selves have thrown at all the Godly in the Land that are not of
our Persuasion, in counting them unfit to be communicated with, or to be
accompanied with in the House of God. This dirt you never complained of, nor
would, I doubt, to this day, might you be still let alone to throw it. As to my
Book, it was Prineed before I spoke with any of you, or knew whether I might be
accepted of you. As to them of reputation among you, I know others not one
tittle inferior to them, and have my liberty to consult with who I like best.

Quest. 3. Does your carriage answer the Law of Love or Civility, when the
Brethren used means to send for you for a conference, and their Letter was
received by you, that you should go out again from the City after knowledge of
their desires, and not vouchsafe a meeting with them, when the glory of God,
and the vindication of so many Churches is concerned.

Answ. The reason why I came not amongst you, was partly because I consulted
mine own weakness, and counted not my self, being a dull-headed man, able to
engage so many of the chief of you, as I was then informed intended to meet me;
I also feared, in personal Disputes, heats and bitter contentions might arise,
a thing my Spirit has not pleasure in: I feared also, that both my self and
words would be misrepresented; and that not without cause, for if they that
Answer a Book will alter, and scrue Arguments out of their place, and make my
Sentences stand in their own words, not mine, when (I say) my words are in a
Book to be seen. What would you have done, had I in the least, either in matter
or manner, though but seemingly miscarried among you?

As for the many Churches which you say are concerned, as also the Glory of
God, I doubt not to say they are only your wordless Opinions that are
concerned; the Glory of God is vindicated: We receive him that God has
received, and that to the glory of God, Romans 15. 16.

Quest. 4. Is it not the Spirit of Diotrephes of old, in you, who loved to have
the pre-eminence, that you are so bold to keep out all the Brethren, that are
not of your mind in this matter, from having any entertainment in the Churches
or Meetings to which you belong, though you your self have not been denied the
like liberty, among them that are contraryminded to you? Is this the way of
your retaliation? Or are you afraid lest the Truth should invade your quarters?

Answ. I can say, I would not have the Spirit you talk of, what I have of it,
God take it from me. But what was the Spirit of Diotrephes? Why, not to receive
the Brethren into the Church, and to forbid them that would, (3 John 9, 10.)
This do not I; I am for Communion with Saints, because they are Saints* I shut
none of the Brethren out of the Churches, nor forbid them that would receive
them. I say again, show me the man that is a visible Believer, and that walks
with God; and though he differ with me about Baptism, the Doors of the Church
stand open for him, and all our Heaven-born Privileges he shall be admitted to
them. But how came Diotrephes so lately into our parts? Where was he in those
days that our Brethren of the Baptized-way, would neither receive into the
Church, nor pray with men as good as themselves, because they were not
baptized; but would either, like Quakers, stand with their Hats on their heads,
or else withdraw till we had done.

As to our not suffering those you plead for to preach in our Assemblies, the
Reason is, because we cannot yet prevail with them, to repent of their
Church-renting Principles. As to the Retaliation, mind the hand of God, and
remember Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7.

Let the Truth come into our quarters and Prove. 6. 19.
welcome, but sowers of Discord, because the Romans 16. 17, 13.
Lord hates it, we also our selves will avoid them.

Quest. 5. Is there no contempt cast upon the Brethren, who desired your
satisfaction, that at the same time, when you had opportunity to speak to them;
instead of that, you committed the Letters to others, by way of reflection upon
them?

Answ. It is no contempt at all to consult men more wise and judicious than him
that wrote, or my self either. But why not consult with others, is Wisdom to
die with you? Or do you count all that your selves have no hand in, done to
your disparagement?

Quest. 6. Did not your presumption prompt you to provoke THEM to printing, in
your Letter to them, when they desired to be found in no such practice, lest
the Enemies of Truth should take advantage by it?

Answ. What provoked you to Print, will be best known at the Day of Judgment,
whether your fear of losing your wordless Opinion, or my plain Answer to your
Letter: the words in my Letter are, As for my Book, never defer its Answer till
you speak with me, for I strive not for mastery but Truth. Though you did not
desire to write, yet with us there was continual labor to rend us to pieces,
and to prevent that, was my first Book written. And let who will take
advantage, so the Truth of God, and the edification of my Brother be promoted.

Quest. 7. Whether your Principle and Practice is not equally against others as
well as us, viz; Episcopal, Presbyterians, and Independents, who are also of
our side, for our practice, (though they differ with us about the subject of
Baptism) Do you delight to have your hand against every man?

Answ. I own Water Baptism to be God's Ordinance, but I make no Idol of it.
Where you call now the Episcopal to side with you, and also the Presbyterian,
etc. you will not find them easily persuaded to conclude with you against me.
They are against your manner of Dipping, as well as the Subject of
Water Baptism; neither do you, for all you flatter them, agree together in all
but the Subject. Do you allow their Sprinkling? Do you allow their signing with
the Cross? Why then have you so stoutly, an hundred times over, condemned these
things as Antichristian. I am not against every man, though by your abusive
language you would set every one against me, but am for Union, Concord, and
Communion with Saints, as Saints, and for that cause I wrote my Book.

To Conclude.
1. In ALL I have said, I put a difference between my Brethren of the
Baptized-way; I know some are more moderate than some. 2. When I plead for the
unbaptized, I chiefly intend those that are not SO baptized as my Brethren
judge right, according to the first pattern. 3. If any shall count my Papers
worth the scribbling against, let him deal with mine Arguments, and things
immediately depending upon them, and not conclude he has confuted a Book, when
he has only quarrelled at words. 4. I have done, when I have told you, that I
strive not for Mastery, nor to show my self singular; but, if it might be, for
Union and Communion among the godly. And count me not as an enemy, because I
tell you the Truth. 5. And now, dissenting Brethren, I commend you to God, who
can pardon your sin, and give you more grace, and an inheritance among them
that are sanctified by Faith in Jesus Christ.
Amen.
ERRATA.
Page 57, line 24, for in read above.

Page 58, line 17, leave out Answ.

Page 79, line 12, leave out thereby.

Here follows Mr. Henry Jessey's Judgment upon the same Argument.
Romans 14. 1. Such as are weak in the Faith, receive you, etc.
WHereas some suppose the receiving there mentioned, was but receiving into
brotherly Affection, such as were in Church Fellowship; but not a receiving of
such as were weak into the Church.

For answer unto which consider,

That in the Text are two things to be enquired into.

First, What weakness of Faith this is, that must not hinder receiving.

Secondly, By whom, and to what, he that is weak in the Faith, is to be
received?

To the First, What weakness of Faith this is that must not hinder receiving,
whether was it weakness in the Graces of Faith, or in the Doctrine of Faith?
It Is conceived the First is included, but the Second principally intended.

First, That some of the Lord's People are Mar. 9. 24.
weak in the Graces of Faith, will be confessed Luke 24. 25
by all, and that the Lord would have his Lambs fed as well as his Sheep, and
his Children as well as grown Men, and that he has given the right to
Gospel-priviledges, not to degrees of Grace, but to the Truth; Him that is weak
in the Faith, receive you: or UNTO you, as some GOOD Translations read it. Romans
14. 1.

Secondly, It Is supposed, this Command of receiving him that is weak in the
Faith, does principally intend, that is weak in the Doctrine of Faith, and that
not so much in the Doctrine of Justification, as in Gospel-Institutions, as
does appear by the second and sixth verses, which shows, that it was in matters
of Practice, wherein some were weak, and at which others were offended;
notwithstanding the Glorious Lord who bears all his Israel upon his heart
receives, verse. 3. and commands, him that is weak in the Faith receive you,
or unto you.

Therefore, here we are to enquire of the receiving in the Text, By whom and to
what, he that is weak in the Faith, should be received.

In which enquiry there are Two parts.

First, By whom?

Secondly, To what?

To the First. The Text makes answer, Him that is weak in the Faith, receive
you, or unto you; which must be the Church at Rome, to whom the Epistle was
writ, as also, to all beloved of God, called to be Saints, Romans 1. 7. And as to
them, so unto all Churches, and Saints, Beloved and called throughout the World.

Note, That Epistles are as well to direct how Churches are to carry things
toward Saints without, as to Saints within; and also toward all men so as to
give no offense to Jew or Gentile, nor to the Church of God. 1 Cor. 10. 32.

The second part of the Enquiry is, to what he that is weak in the Faith is to
be received? whether only unto mutual affection, as some affirm, as if he were
in Church Fellowship before, that were weak in the Faith? or whether the Text
does as well, if not rather intend, the receiving such as were, and are weak in
the Faith. Not only unto mutual affection if in the Church, but unto
Church Fellowship also, if they were out. For clearing of which, consider, To
whom the Epistle was written, Romans 1. 7. Not only to the Church there, but unto
all that were beloved of God, and called to be Saints in all Ages. And as at
Rome it is like there then were, and in other places now are Saint; weak in the
Faith, both in and out of Church Fellowship; And it is probable there then
were, and elsewhere now are those that will cast such out of their mutual
affection. And if they will cast such out of their mutual affection that are
within, do doubt, they will keep out of their Church Fellowship those that are
without.

Arg. 1. Whereas the Lord's care extends to all his, and if it were a good
Argument in the third verse, for them to receive those within, because God has
received them, it would be as good an Argument to receive in those without, for
God has received them also: unless it could be proved, that all that were and
are weak in the Faith, were and are in Church Fellowship, which is not likely;
For if they would cast such out of their Affection that are within, they would
upon the same account keep them out of Church Fellowship that were without:
Therefore as it is a Duty to receive those within unto mutual Affection, SO it
is no less a duty, by the Text, to receive such weak ones as are without, into
Church Fellowship.

Arg. 2. Is urged from the words themselves which are, Receive him that is weak
in the Faith, wherein the Lord puts NO limitation, in this Text or in any
other, and who is he then that can restrain it, unless he will limit the Holy
One of Israel? and how would such an interpretation, foolishly charge the Lord,
as if he took care ONLY of those within, but not LIKE care of those without?
whereas he commands them to receive them, and uses this Motive, he had
received them, and he receives those that are weak in the Faith, if without,
as well as those within.

From the Example, (to wit) That God had received them; whereas, had he been of
the Church, they would have been persuaded of that before the Motive was urged:
For no true Church of Christ's would take in, or keep in any, whom they judged
the Lord had not received, but those weak ones were such as they questioned
whether the Lord had received them, else the Text had not been an answer
sufficient for their receiving them: There might have been objected, They hold
up Jewish observations of Meats, and Days, which by the Death of Christ were
abolished, and so did deny some of the Effects of his Death; yet the Lord who
was principally wronged could pass this by, and commands others to receive
them also. And if it be a good Argument to receive such as are weak in any
thing, whom the Lord has received, Then there can be no good Argument to
reject for any thing for which the Lord will not reject them; For else the
Command in the first verse, and his Example in the third verse were
insufficient, without some other Arguments unto the Church, beside his Command
and Example.

Some Object, Chap. 15. 7. Receive you one
another, as Christ has received us unto the Glory of God, and from thence
supposing they were all in Church Fellowship before, whereas the Text says not
so: For if you consider the 8th and 9th verses, you may see he speaks unto Jews
and Gentiles in general, that if the Jews had the receiving, they should
receive Gentiles; and if the Gentiles had the receiving, they should receive
Jews; For had they not been on both sides commanded, The Jews might have said
to the Gentiles, you are commanded to receive us, but we are not commanded to
receive you; and if the weak had the receiving, they should receive the strong;
and if the strong had the receiving, they should not keep out the weak; and the
Text is reinforced with the Example of the Sons receiving us unto the Glory of
God, that as he receives Jews, and poor Gentiles, weak, and strong; in
Church Fellowship, or out of Church Fellowship: So should they, to the Glory of
God. And as the Lord Jesus received some, though they held some things more
than were Commanded, and some things less than were Commanded, and as those
that were weak and in Church Fellowship, so those that were weak and out of
Church Fellowship; and that not only into mutual Affection, but unto Fellowship
with himself; and so should they, not only receive such as were weak within
into mutual Affection, but such as were without, both to mutual Affection and
to Church Fellowship: Or else such weak ones as were without, had been excluded
by the Text. Oh! how is the heart of God the Father and the Son set upon this,
to have his Children in his House, and in one another hearts as they are in
his, and are born upon the shoulders and breasts of his Son their High Priest?
and as if all this will not do it, but the Devil will divide them still whose
work it properly is; But the God of Peace will come in shortly, and bruise
Satan under their feet, as in Romans 16. 20. And they will agree to be in one
House, when they are more of one Heart; in the mean time pray as in Chap. 15.
5. Now the God of Patience and Consolation grant that we be like-minded one
toward another according to Christ Jesus.

I shall endeavor the answering of some Objections, and leave it unto
Consideration.

Obj. Some say this bearing, or receiving, were but in things indifferent.

Answ. That eating, or forbearing upon a civil account, are things indifferent,
is true: But not when, done upon the account of Worship, as keeping of Days,
and establishing Jewish observations about Meats, which by the Death of Christ
are taken away, and it is not fairly to be imagined the same Church at Rome
looked so upon them as indifferent; nor that the Lord does; That it were all
alike to him to hold up Jewish Observations, or to keep Days or no Days, right
Days or wrong Days, as indifferent things, which is a great mistake, and no
less than to make God's Grace little in receiving such: For if it were but in
things wherein they had not sinned, it were no great matter for the Lord to
receive, and it would have been as good an Argument or Motive to the Church, to
say the things were indifferent, as to say the Lord had received them.

Whereas the Text is to set out the Riches of Grace to the Vessels of Mercy, as
Romans 9. 15. That as at first he did freely choose and accept them; so when they
sail and miscarry in many things, yea about his Worship also, although he be
most injured thereby, yet he is first in passing it by, and persuading others
to do the like; That as the good Samaritan did in the Old Testament, so our
good Samaritan does in the New, when Priest and Levite passed by, Pastor and
People pass by; yet he will not, but pours in Oil, and carries them to his Inn,
and calls for receiving, and setting it upon his account.

Object. That this bearing with, and receiving such as are weak in the Faith,
must be limited to Meats, and Days, and such like things that had been old
Jewish Observations, but not unto the being ignorant in, or doubting of any
New-Testament-Institution.

Answ. Where the Lord puts no limitation, men should be wary how they do it,
for they must have a Command or Example, before they can limit this Command;
for although the Lord took this occasion from their difference about Meats and
Days to give this Command, yet the Command is not limited there, no more than
Mat. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. That when they made use of his good Law
rigorously in the Letter, he presently published an Act of Grace, in the 7th
verse, and tells them, Had they known what this means, I will have Mercy and
not Sacrifice, they would not have condemned the guiltless; as also Mat. 9. 13.
Go learn what this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, which is not
to be limited unto what was the present occasion of publishing the Command, but
observed as a general Rule upon all occasions, wherein Mercy and Sacrifice
comes in competition, to show the Lord will rather have a Duty omitted that is
due to him, then Mercy to his Creatures omitted by them. So in the Text, when
some would not receive such as were weak in the Faith, as to matters of
Practice, the Lord was pleased to publish this ACT of Grace; Him that is weak
in the Faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputation. Now unless it be
proved, that no Saint can be weak in the Faith in any thing but Meats and Days,
or in some Old-Testament-Observation, and that he ought not to be judged a
Saint, that is weak in the Faith, as it relates to Gospel-Institutions, in
matters of practice, you cannot limit the Text, and you must also prove his
weakness SUCH, as that the Lord will not receive him; else the Command in the
first verse, and the Reason or Motive in the third verse, will both be in force
upon you, to wit, Him that is weak in the Faith, receive you, or unto you, for
God has received him.

Object. But some may object from 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles. Some there are that
affirm this to be meant of Water Baptism, and that particular Churches are
formed thereby, and all persons are to be admitted and joined unto such
Churches by Water Baptism.

Answ. That the Baptism intended in the Text, is the Spirits-baptism, and not
Waterbaptism; and that the Body the Text intends, is not principally the Church
of Corinth, but all Believers, both Jews and Gentiles, being baptized into one
Mystical Body, as Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one Body, and one Spirit, wherein there
is set out the Uniter and the United; therefore in the third verse they are
exhorted to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. The United are
all the Faithful, in one Body; into whom? in the fifth verse, in one Lord Jesus
Christ; by what? one Faith, one Baptism, which CANNOT be meant of
Water Baptism; for Water Baptism does not unite all this Body, for some of
them never had Water Baptism, and are yet of this Body, and by the Spirit
gathered into one Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10. both which are in Heaven and
in Earth, Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2. 16. that he might reconcile both unto God
in one Body by his Cross; the Instrument you have in verse. 18. by one Spirit,
Ephesians. 3. 6. That the Gentiles should be Fellow-Heirs of the same Body, verse.
15. of whom the whole family in Heaven and Earth is named. And the Reasons of
their keeping the Unity of the Spirit, in Ephesians. 4. 3. is said down in v. 4, 5.
being one Body, one Spirit, having one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
whether they were Jews or Gentiles, such as were in Heaven or in Earth, which
CANNOT be meant of Water Baptism, for
in that sense, they had not all one Baptism, nor admitted and united thereby:
So in 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body,
whether Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, we having been all made
to drink into one Spirit; which CANNOT be meant of Water Baptism, in
regard all the Body of Christ, Jews and Gentiles, bond and free, partook not
thereof*

Object. But Ephesians. 4. 5. says, there is but one Baptism; and by what has
been said, of granted, Water Baptism will be excluded, or else there is more
Baptisms than one.

Answ. It follows not that because the Spirit will have no corrival, that
therefore other things may not be in their places: That because the Spirit of
God takes the pre-eminence, therefore other things may not be subservient: 1
John 2. 27. The Apostle tells them, That the anointing which they have received
of him, abides in them; and you need not, says he, that any man teach you,
but as the same anointing teaches you all things. By this some may think, John
excludes the Ministry; no such matter, though the Holy Ghost had confirmed and
instructed them so in the Truth of the Gospel, as that they were furnished
against Seducers in v. 26. yet you see John goes on still teaching them in many
things: As also in Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. he gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, verse. 12. for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ; verse. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. So in the Spirits-baptism, though it have the
pre-eminence, and appropriateth some things,
as peculiar to it self, it does not thereby destroy the Use and End of
Water Baptism, or any other Ordinance in its place: for Water Baptism is a
means to increase Grace, and in it, and by it Sanctification is forwarded, and
Remission of sins more cleared and witnessed; yet the giving Grace, and
regenerating and renewing, is the Holy Spirit's peculiar. Consider Tit. 3. 5.
By the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Baptism being
the outward sign of the inward Graces wrought by the Spirit, a representation
or figure, as in 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like Figure, whereunto Baptism does now also
save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, not excluding
Water Baptism; but showing, That the Spiritual part is chiefly to be looked at:
Though such as slight Water Baptism as the Pharisees and Lawyers did Luke 7.
30, reject the Counsel of God against themselves not being Baptized; And such
as would set Water Baptism in the Spirit's place, exalt a duty against the
Deity and dignity of the Spirit, and do give the Glory due unto him, as God
blessed for ever, unto a duty.

By which mistake of setting up Water Baptism in the Spirit's place, and
assigning it a work, which was never appointed unto it of forming the Body of
Christ, either in general, as in 1 Cor. 12. 13. Ephesians. 4. 5. or as to particular
Churches of Christ, we may see the fruit, that instead of being the means of
uniting as the Spirit does, that it has not only rent his seamless Coat, but
divided his Body which he has purchased with his own blood, and opposed that
great design of Father, Son, and Spirit, in uniting poor Saints, thereby
pulling in pieces what the Spirit has put together. Him that is weak in the
Faith receive you, for God has received him; being such as the Spirit had
baptized and admitted of the Body of Christ, he would have his Churches receive
them also: whose Baptism is the ONLY Baptism, and so is called the
ONE Baptism: Therefore consider, whether such a Practice, has a Command or an
Example, that Persons must be joined into Church Fellowship by Water Baptism;
For John baptized many, yet he did not baptize some into one Church, and some
into another, nor all into one Church (as the Church of Rome does); And into
what Church did Philip baptize the Eunuch, or the Apostle the Jailer and his
house? And all the rest they baptized, were they not left free to join
themselves for their convenience, and Edification? All which I leave to
Consideration. I might have named some inconveniences, if not absurdities that
would follow the Assertion; As to father the mistakes of the Baptizers on the
Spirit's act, who is not mistaken in any He baptizeth; no false Brethren creep
in unawares into the Mystical Body by him; and also, how this manner of forming
Churches would suit a Country, where many are converted, and willing to be
baptized; but there being no Church to be baptized into, how shall such a
Church State begin? The first must be baptized into no Church, and the rest
into him as the Church, or the Work stand still for want of a Church.

Obj. But God is a God of Order, and has ordained Order in all the Churches of
Christ; and for to receive one that holds the Baptism he had in his Infancy,
there is no Command nor Example for, and by the same Rule Children will be
brought in to be Church Members?


Answ. That God is a God of Order, and and has ordained Orders in all the
Churches of Christ, is true; and that this is one of the Orders to receive him
that is weak in the Faith, is as true. And though there be no Example or
Command, in so many words, receive such an one that holds the Baptism he had in
his infancy, nor to reject such a one; but there is a Command to receive him
that is weak in the Faith, without limitation, and it is like this might not be
a doubt in those days, and so not spoken of in particular.

But the Lord provides a remedy for all times, in the Text, Him that is weak in
the Faith, receive you, for else receiving, would not be upon the account of
Saintship; but upon knowing, and doing all things according to Rule and Order,
and that must be perfectly, else for to deny any thing, or to affirm too much
is disorderly, and would hinder receiveing: But the Lord deals not so with his
People, but accounts LOVE the fulfilling of the Law, though they be ignorant in
many things, both as to knowing, and doing; and receives them into Communion
and Fellowship with himself, and would have others do the same also: And if he
would have so much bearing in the Apostle's days, when they had infallible
helps to expound Truths unto them, much more now, the Church has been so long
in the Wilderness and in Captivity, and not that his People should be driven
away in the dark day, though they are sick and weak, Ezekiel. 34. 16, 21. And that
it should be supposed such tenderness would bring in Children in Age to be
Church Members, yea, and welcome, if any body could prove them in the Faith,
though never so weak; for the Text is, Him that is weak in the Faith, receive
you: It is not He, and his Wife, and Children, unless it can be proved, they
are in the Faith.

Object. By this, some Ordinances may be lost or omitted, and is it to be
supposed the Lord would suffer any of his Ordinances to be lost or omitted in
the Old or New Testament, or the right use of them, and yet own such for true
Churches, and what reason can there be for it?

Answ. The Lord has suffered some Ordinances to be omitted and lost in the
Old Testament, and yet owned the Church. Though Circumcision were omitted in
the Wilderness, yet he owned them to be his Church, Acts 7. 38. and many of the
Ordinances were lost in the Captivity; See Ainsworth upon Exodus 28. 30, etc.
which showed what the High Priest was to put on, and were not to be omitted
upon pain of death, as the Urim and Thummim, yet being lost, and several other
Ordinances, the Ark, with the Mercy-Seat and Cherubims, the Fire from Heaven,
the Majesty and Divine Presence, etc. yet, he owns the Second Temple, though
short of the First, and filled it with his Glory, and honored it with his Son,
being a Member and a Minister therein. Mal. 3. 1. The Lord whom you seek will
suddenly come to his Temple: So in the New Testament, since their Wilderness
condition and great and long Captivity, there is some darkness and doubts, and
want of Light in the best of the Lord's People, in many of his Ordinances, and
that for several Ages, and yet how has the Lord owned them for his Churches,
wherein he is to have Glory and Praise throughout all Ages, Ephesians. 3. 21. And so
should we own them, unless we will condemn the Generation of the Just: It must
be confessed, That if exact Practice be required, and clearness in
Gospel-Institutions before Communion; who dare be so bold as to say his hands
are clean, and that he has done all the Lord Commands, as to Institutions in
his Worship? and must not confess the Change of Times does necessitate some
Variation, if not Alteration either in the matter or manner of things according
to Primitive Practice, yet owned for true Churches, and received as visible
Saints, though ignorant either wholly or in great measure, in laying on of
hands, singing, washing of feet, and anointing with oil, in the Gifts of the
Spirit, which is the Urim and Thummim of the Gospel? and it cannot be proved
that the Churches were so ignorant in the Primitive times, nor yet that such
were received into Fellowship; yet now herein it is thought meet there should
be bearing, and why not in Baptism, especially in such as own it for an
Ordinance, though in some things miss it, and do yet show their love unto it,
and unto the Lord, and unto his Law therein, that they could be willing to die
for it rather than to deny it, and to be baptized in their blood; which
shows, they hold it in Conscience their duty, while they have further Light
from above, and are willing o hear and obey as far as they know, though weak in
the Faith, as to clearness in Gospel-Institutions; surely the Text is on their
side, or else it will exclude all the former, Him that is weak in the Faith
receive you, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14. 5. Let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind, and such the Lord has received.

As to the Query, What reason is there, why the Lord should suffer any of his
Ordinances to be lost?

Answ. If there were no Reason to be shown, it should teach us silence, for he
does nothing without the highest Reason; and there does appear some Reasons, in
the Old Testament, why those Ordinances of Urim and Thummim, etc. were suffered
to be lost in the Captivity, that they might long, and look for the Lord Jesus,
the Priest, that was to stand up with Urim and Thummim, Ezra. 2. 63. Neh. 7.
65. which the Lord by this puts them upon the hoping for, and to be in the
expectation of so great a mercy, which was the promise of the Old Testament,
and all the Churches losses in the New Testament: By all the dark night of
ignorance she has been in, and long captivity she has been under, and in her
wandering wilderness-state, wherein she has rather been fed with Manna from
Heaven, than by men upon Earth; and after all her crosses and losses, the Lord
lets Light break in by degrees, and deliverance by little and little; and she
is coming out of the Wilderness leaning upon her Beloved; and the Lord has
given the Valley of Achor for a Door of Hope, that e're long she may receive
the Promise of the Gospel richly, by the Spirit to be poured upon us from on
High, Isa. 32. 15. and the Wilderness be a fruitful Field, and the fruitful
Field become a Forest, and then the Lord will take away the covering cast over
all people, Isa. 25. 7. and the Vail that is spread over all Nations; Isa. 11.
9. For the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters
cover the Sea. verse. 13. Then Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not
vex Ephraim. Thus will the God of Peace bruise Satan under-foot shortly; and
one Reason why the Lord may suffer all this Darkness and Differences that have
been, and yet are, is, that we might long and look for this blessed Promise of
the Gospel, the pourings out of the Spirit.

Object. But many Authors do judge, that the weak and strong were all in
Church Fellowship before, and that the receiving, Romans 14. 1. was but into
mutual affection.

Answ. It ought to be seriously weighed how any differ from so many worthy
Authors, is confessed, to whom the World is so much beholding for their help in
many things; but it would be of dangerous consequence to take all for granted
they say, and unlike the noble Bereans, Acts 17. 11. Though they had some
infallible Teachers, yet they took not their Words or Doctrine upon trust; and
there may be more ground to question Expositors on this Text, in regard their
Principles necessitate them to judge that the sense; for if it be in their
Judgments a Duty to compel all to come in, and to receive all, and their
Children, they must needs judge by that Text, they were all of the Church, and
in Fellowship, before their scrupling Meats and Days, because that is an Act
of grown persons at years of discretion; and therefore the receiving is judged
by them to be only into mutual affection, for it is impossible for them to
hold their Opinion, and judge otherwise of the Text; for in Baptism, they judge
Infants should be received into Church Fellowship; and then scrupling Meats and
Days must needs be after joining. Their Judgments might as well be taken,
that it is a Duty to baptize Infants, as that they can judge of this Text
rightly, and hold their practice.

Object. But no uncircumcised Person was to eat the Passover, Exodus 12. And
does not the Lord as well require, the sign of Baptism now, as of Cirumcision
then? and is there not like reason for it?

Answ. The Lord, in the Old Testament, expressly commanded no uncircumcised
Person should eat the Passover, Exodus 12. 28. and in Ezekiel. 34. 9. that no
stranger, uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised in flesh, should enter into
his Sanctuary: And had the Lord commanded, that no unbaptized Person should
enter into his Churches, it had been clear: And no doubt, Christ was as
faithful as a Son in all his House, as Moses was as a Servant; and although
there had been like reason, if the Lord had commanded it so to be, yet in God's
Worship we must not make the likeness of any thing in our reason, but the Will
of God, the Ground of Duty; for upon such a Foundation some would build the
baptising of Infants, because it would be like unto Circumcision, and so break
the Second Commandment, in making the likeness of things of their own
contrivance, of force with Institutions in the Worship of God.

The most that I think can be said is, That we have no Gospel-Example for
receiving without Baptism, or rejecting any for want of it: Therefore it is
desired, what has been said, may be considered, lest while we look for an
Example, we do not overlook a Command upon a mistake, supposing that they were
all in Church Fellowship before; whereas the Text says not so, but, Him that
is weak in the Faith receive you, or unto you.

We may see also how the Lord proceeds under the Law, though he accounts those
things that were done contrary to his Law, sinful, though done ignorantly; yet
never required the Offender to offer Sacrifice till he knew thereof, Levit. 5.
5. comp. with 15, and 16 verses. And that may be a man's own sin through his
ignorance; that though it may be another Duty to endeavor to inform him in,
yet not thereupon to keep him out of his Father's House; for surely the Lord
would not have any of his Children kept out, without we have a word for it. And
though they scruple some Meats in their Fathers House, yet it may be dangerous
for the stronger Children to deny them all the rest of the dainties therein,
till the weak and sick can eat strong Meat; whereas Peter had Meat for one, and
Milk for another; and Peter must feed the poor Lambs as well as the Sheep; and
if others will not do it, the Great Shepherd will come ere long and look up
what has been driven away, Ezekiel. 34. 4, 11. Isa. 40. 11. He will feed his
Flock like a Shepherd; he shall gather the Lambs into his Bosom, and gently
lead those that are with Young.

FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by John Wilkins, at his Shop next door to the
Exchange Coffee-house in Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal Exchange,
London.
In Folio.
SCapulae Lexicon: Graeco-Latinum. Cambridge Concordance to the Holy
Scriptures: with the various Readings both of Text and Margin; in a more exact
method than has hitherto been extant. The House of Mourning, furnished With
Directions for Preparations to Meditations of Consolations at the Hour of
Death: Delivered in 56 Sermons, Preached at the Funerals of diverse Faithful
Servants of Christ.
Large Octavo's.
Otefield's Generation of Seekers: Or, the right manner of the Saints Address
to the Throne of Grace; in two Treatises, etc. The History of the
Administration of Cardinal Ximenes, great Minister of State in Spain, etc.
Janewayes Death unstung: A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mowsley, an
Apothecary, who died in July 1669.
Small Octavo's.
Mr. Palmer's Childrens Bread: Or, the the first Principles of the Knowledge of
God, to season the Heads and Hearts of the Young-Ones betimes: by way of
Question and Answer. Scortreth's Warning-piece for the slumbring Virgins: Or,
an Alarm to the Friends of the Bridegroom; in some awakening Meditations upon
Christ's own watchword, Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and Pray, etc. The Privilege of
the Saints on Earth, beyond those in Heaven, in respect of Gifts and Graces
Exercised, Duties and Services performed; Sufferings and Trials undergone by
them: which the Glorified are not capable of. Being the sum of a Discourse upon
a part of Hezekiah's Song of Thanksgiving after his Recovery from his Sickness.
By William Hook, Preacher of the Gospel. Index Biblicus Multijugus: Or, a Table
to the Holy Scripture: wherein each of its Books, Chapters, and diverse Matters
are distinguished and Epitomized. Together with some most eminent Synchronisms,
Parallelisms, Reconciliations of places seeming Contradictory, Comparations of
Prophesies and their fulfillings; a Chronology to every eminent Epoch of time,
and a Harmony of the Four Evangelists, with a Table referring each Verse into
its due place and harmony, etc. All which, and their respective Uses, are
explained in the Epistle to the Reader.
Small Twelves.
Drexelius on Eternity. A Token for Children: being an exact account of the
Conversion, Holy and Exemplary Lives and Joyful Deaths of several young
Children: by James Janeway. The Shadow of the Tree of Life: Or, a Discourse of
Divine Institution, and most Effectual Applications of Medicinal Remedies, in
order to the Preservation of Health, by J. M.

