

THE Pilgrims Progress FROM THIS WORLD, TO That which is to come: Delivered
under the Similitude of a DREAM Wherein is Discovered, The manner of his
setting out, His Dangerous Journey; And safe Arrival at the Desired Country.

I have used Similitudes, Hos.12. 10. By John Bunyan.

^^censed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey near Cornhil,
1678.

THE AUTHOR'S Apology For his BOOK.
WHen at the first I took my Pen in hand,
Thus for to write; I did not understand
That I at all should make a little Book
In such a mode; Nay, I had undertook
To make another, which when almost done;
Before I was aware, I this begun.
And thus it was: I writing of the Way
And Race of Saints, in this our Gospel-Day,
Fell suddenly into an Allegory
About their Journey, and the way to Glory,
In more than twenty things, which I set down;
This done, I twenty more had in my Crown,
And they again began to multiply,
Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly.
Nay then, thought I, if that you breed so fast,
I Will put you by your selves, lest you at last
Should prove ad infinitum, and eat out
The Book that I already am about.
Well, so I did; but yet I did not think
To show to all the World my Pen and Ink
In such a mode; I only thought to make
I knew not what: nor did I undertake
Thereby to please my Neighbor; no not I;
I did it mine own self to gratify;
Neither did I but vacant seasons spend
In this my Scribble; nor did I intend
But to divert my self in doing this,
From worser thoughts, which make me do amiss.
Thus I set Pen to Paper with delight,
And quickly had my thoughts in black and white.
For having now my Method by the end,
Still as I pull d, it came; and so I penned
It down, until it came at last to be
For length and breadth the bigness which you see.
Well, when I had thus put mine ends together,
I showed them others, that I might see whether
They would condemn them, or them justify:
And some said, let them live; some, let them die.
Some said, John, print it; others said, Not so:
Some said, It might do good; others said, No.
Now was I in a straight, and d d not see
Which was the best thing to be done by me:
At last I thought, Since you are thus divided,
I print it will; and so the case decided.
For, thought I; Some, I see, would have it done,
Though others in (...) Channel do not run;
To prove then who advised for the best,
Thus I thought fit to put it to the test.
I further thought, If now I did deny
Those that would have it thus, to gratify,
I did not know but hinder them I might
Of that which would to them be great delight.
For those that were not for its coming forth,
I said to them, Offend you I am loath;
Yet since your Brethren pleased with it be,
Forbear to judge, till you do further see.
If that thou will not read, let it alone;
Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone.
Yea, that I might them better palliate,
I did too with them thus Expostulate.
May I not write in such a style as this?
In such a method too, and yet not miss
Mine end, thy good? why may it not be done?
Dark Clouds bring Waters, when the bright bring none
Yea, dark, or bright, if they their Silver drops
Cause to descend, the Earth, by yielding Crops,
Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either,
But treasures up the Fruit they yield together:
Yea, so commixes both, that in her Fruit
None can distinguish this from that, they suit
Her well, when hungry: but if she be full,
She spues out both, and makes their blessings null.
You see the ways the Fisherman does take
To catch the Fish; what Engines does he make?
Behold how he ingageth all his Wits,
Also his Snares, Lines, Angles, Hooks and Nets.
Yet Fish there be, that neither Hook, nor Line,
Nor Snare, nor Net, nor Engine can make thine;
They must be grop't for, and be tickled too,
Or they will not be caught, what e're you do.
How does the Fowler seek to catch his Game,
By diverse means, all which one cannot name?
His Gun, his Nets, his Lime-twi^s, light, and belle
He creeps, he goes, he stands; yea who can tell
Of all his postures, Yet there is none of these
Will make him master of what Fowls he please.
Yea, he must Pipe, and Whistle to catch this;
Yet if he does so, that Bird he will miss.
If that a Pearl may in a Toads-head dwell,
And may be found too in an Oister-shell;
If things that promise nothing, do contain
What better is then Gold; who will disdain,
(That have an inkling of it,) there to look,
That they may find it. Now my little Book,
(Tho void of all those paintings that may make
It with this or the other Man to take,)
Is not without those things that do excel
What do in brave, but empty notions dwell.
Well, yet I am not fully satisfied,
That this your Book will stand; when soundly tried
Why, what is the matter! it is dark what tho?
But it is feigned. What of that I tro?
Some men by feigning words as dark as mine,
Make truth to spangle, and its rays to shine.
But they want solidness: Speak man thy mind,
They drowned the weak; Metaphors make us blind.
Solidity, indeed becomes the Pen
Of him that writes things Divine to men:
But must I needs want solidness, because
By Metaphors I speak; Was not Gods Laws,
His Gospel-Laws, in oldertime held forth
By Types, Shaddows and Metaphors? Yet loath
Will any sober man below find fault
With them, lest he be found for to assault
The highest Wisdom. No, he rather stoops,
And seeks to find out what by pins and loops,
By Calves; and Sheep; by Heifers, and by R^ms;
By Birds, and Herbs, and by the blood of Lambs,
God speaks to him. And happy is he
That finds the light, and grace that in them be.
Be not too forward therefore to conclude,
That I want solidness, that I am rude:
All things solid in show, not solid be;
All things in parables despise not we,
Lest things most hurtful lightly we receive,
And things that good are, of our souls bereave.
My dark and cloudy words they do but hold
The Truth, as Cabinets enclose the Gold.
The Prophets used much by Metaphors
To set forth Truth; Yea, who so considers
Christ, his Apostles too, shall plainly see,
That Truths to this day in such Mantles be.
Am I afraid to say that holy Writ,
Which for its Style, and Phrase puts down all Wit,
Is every where so full of all these things,
(Dark Figures, Allegories,) yet there springs
From that same Book that luster, and those rays
Of light, that turns our darkest nights to days.
Come, let my Carper, to his Life now look,
And find There darker lines then in my Book
He finds any. Yea, and let him know,
That in his best things there are worse lines too.
May we but stand before impartial men,
To his poor One, I durst adventure Ten,
That they will take my meaning in these lines
Far better then his Lies in Silver Shrines.
Come, Truth, although in Swadling-clouts, I find
Informs the Judgment, rectifies the Mind,
Pleases the Understanding, makes the Will
Submit; the Memory too it does fill
With what does our Imagination please;
Likewise, it tends our troubles to appease.
Sound words I know Timothy is to use;
And old Wives Fables he is to refuse,
But yet grave Paul, him no where does forbid
The use of Parables; in which lay hid
That Gold, t^ose Pearls, and precious stones that were
Worth (...) for; and that with gre^est care.
Let me add one word more, O man of God!
Art thou offended? do thou wish I had
Put forth my matter in an over dress,
Or that I had in things been more express?
Three things let me propound, then I submit
To those that are my betters, (as is fi^)
1. I find not that I am denied the use
Of this my method, so I no abuse
Put on the Words, Things, Readers, or be rude
In hand^ing Figure, or Similitude,
In application; but, all that I may,
Seek the advance of Truth, this or that way:
Denied, did I say? Nay, I ^ave leave,
(Example too, and that from them that have
God better pleased by their words or ways,
Then any man that breaths now a days,)
Thus to express my mind, thus to declare
Things unto thee, that excellentest are.
2. I find that men (a^ high as Tr^) will write
Dialogue wise; yet (...) man does them slight
For writing so: Indeed if they (...)
Truth, cursed be they; and, the craft they use
To that intent; But yet let Truth be free
To make her Salleys upon Thee, and Me,
Which way it pleases God. For who knows how,
Better then he that taught us first to Plow,
To guide our Mind and Pens for his Design?
And he makes base things ^sher in Divine.
3. I find that holy Writ in many places
Has semblance with this method, where the cases
Does call for one thing, to set forth another:
Use it I may then, and yet nothing smother
Truths golden Beams; Nay, by this method may
Make it cast forth its rays as light as day.
And now, before I do put up my P^n,
I Will show the profit of my Book, and then
Commit both thee, and it unto that hand
That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand.
This Book it chaulketh out before thine eyes
The man that seeks the everlasting Prize:
It shows you whence he comes, whither ^e goes,
What he leaves undone; also what he does:
It also shows you how he runs, and (...)
T^ll he unto the Gate of Glory comes.
It shows too, who sets out for life amain,
As if the lasting Crown they would attain:
Here also you may see the reason why
They loose their labor, and like Fools do die.
This Book will make a Travailer of thee,
If by its Counsel thou will ruled be;
It will direct thee to the Holy Land,
If thou will its Directions understand:
Yea, it will make the sloathful, active be;
The Blind also, delightful things to see.
Art thou for something rare, and profitable?
Would thou see a Truth within a Fable?
Art thou forgetful? would thou remember
From New-years-day to the last of December?
Then read my fancies, they will stick like Burs,
And may be to the Helpless, Comforters.
This Book is writ in such a Dialect,
As may the minds of listless men affect:
It seems a Novelty, and yet contains
Nothing but sound, and honest Gospel-strains.
Would thou divert thy self from Melancholy?
Would thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly?
Would thou read Riddles, and their Explanation?
Or else be drownded in thy Contemplation?
Do thou love picking meat? or would thou s^e
A man in the Clouds, and hear him speak to thee?
Would thou be in a Dream, and yet not sleep?
Or would thou in a moment laugh, and weep?
Would thou loose thy self, and catch no harm?
And find thy felf a^ain without a charm?
Would read thy self, and read thou know not what
And yet know whether thou art blessed or not,
By reading the same lines? O then come hither,
And lay my Book, thy Head, and Heart together.
JOHN BUNYAN.

THE Pilgrims Progress: In the similitude of a DREAM.
AS I walked through the wilderness of this world, I lighted on a certain
place, where was a Denn; And I laid me down in that place to sleep: And as I
slept I dreamed a Dream. I dreamed, and behold I saw a Man Isa. 64. 6.
clothed with Rags, standing in a certain place, with his face from his own
House, a Lu. 14. 33 Ps. 38. 4. Hab. 2. 3. Act. 16. 31.
Book in his hand, and a great burden upon his back. I looked, and saw him open
the Book, and Read therein; and as he Read, he wept and trembled: and not being
able longer to contain, he brake out with a lamentable cry; saying, what shall
I do?

I saw also that he looked this way, and that way, as if he would run; yet he
stood still, because as I perceived, he could not tell which way to go. I
looked then, and saw a Man named Evangelist coming to him, and asked, W^erefore
do t^ou cry? He answered, S^r, I perceive, by the Book in my hand, that I am
Condemned to die, and Heb. 9. 27.
after that to come to Judgment; and I find that I am not Job. 2^ 21 22
willing to do the first, nor Ezekiel. 22. 14.
able to do the second.

Then said Evangelist, Why not willing to die? since this life is attended with
so many evils? The Man answered, Because I fear that this burden that is upon
my back, wild sinck me lower then the Grave; and I shall sall into Isa. 30. 33,
Tophet. And Sir, if I be not sit to go to Prison, I am not fit (I am sure) to
go to Judgment, and from thence to Execution; And the thoughts of these things
make me cry.

Then said E^list, If this be thy condition, why stand thou sti^ He
answered, Because I know not whither to go. Then he gave him a Pa^chment-Roll,
and there was written within, Mat. 3 7.
Fly from the wrath to come.

The Man therefore Read it, and looking upon Evangelist very carefully; said,
Whither must I fly? Then said Evangelist, pointing with his finger over a very
wide Field, Do you see yonder Mat. 7. Psalm. ^9. 0^.
Wicket-gate? The Man said, No. Then said the other, Do you see yonder Christ
and the way to hi^ cannot be (...) without the lord.
shining light? 2 Pe (...). 29.
He said, I think I do. Then said Evangelist, Keep that light in your eye, and
go up directly thereto, Christ and the way to him cannot be (...) without the
lord.
so shall thou see the Gate; at which when thou knockest, it shall be told thee
what thou shall do.

So I saw in my Dream, that the Man began to run; Now he had not run far from
his own door, but his Wife and Children perceiving it, began to cry after him
to return: Luke 14. 16.
but the Man put his fingers in his Ears, and ran on crying, Life, Life,
Eternal Life: so he looked not behind him, Genesis 19. 17.
but fled toward the middle of the Plain.

The Neighbors also came out to They that fly from the (...) (...) (...), (...)
see him run, and as he ran, some mocked, others threatened; and some A
Gazing-Stock to the world. Jer. 20. 10.
cried after him to return: Now among those that did so, there were two that
were resolved to fetch him back by force: The name of the one was Obstinate,
and the name of the other Pliable. Now by this time the Man was got a good
distance from them; But however they were resolved to pursue him; which they
did, and in little time they over-took him. Then said the Man, Neighbors,
Wheresore are you come? They said, To persuade you to go back with us; but he
said, That can by no means be: You dwell, said he, in the City of Destruction
(the place also where I was born,) I see it to be so; and dying there, sooner
or later, you will sink lower then the Grave, into a place that burns with Fire
and Brimstone; Be content good Neighbors, and go along with me.

Obstinate.
What! said Obstinate, and leave our Friends, and our comforts behind us!

Christian
Yes, said Christian, (for that was his name) because that all is not 2 Cor. 4.
18,
worthy to be compared with a little of that that I am seeking to enjoy, and if
you will go along with me, you shall fare as I my self; for there where I go,
is Luke 15.
enough, and to spare; Come away, and prove my words.

Obst. What are the things you seek, since you leave all the World to find
them?


Chr. I seek an 1 Pet. 1. 4
Inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away; and it is
laid up in Heaven, and fast there, to be bestowed at the * Heb. 11. 62.
time appointed, on them that diligently seek it.


Ob. Tush, said Obstinate, away with your Book; will you go back with us, or no?


Chapter No, not I, said the other; because I have laid my hand to the Luke 9. 6^
Plow.


Ob. Come then, Neighbor Pliable, let us turn again, and go home without him;
There is a Company of these Craz d-headed Coxcombs, that when they take a fancy
by the end, are wiser in their own eyes then seven men that can render a Reason.


Pli. Then said Pliable, Don't (...); if what the good Christian says is true,
the things he looks after, are better then ours: my heart inclines to go with
my Neighbor.


Obst. What! more Fools ^ill be (...) by (...) and go ^ack, who knows whither
such a brainsick fellow will lead you? Go back, go back, and be wise.


Chapter Come with me Neighbor Pliable; there are such things to be had which I
spoke of, and many more Glo^s besides. If you believe not me, read here in this
Book: and for the truth of what is expressed therein, behold all is confirmed by
the Heb. 13. 20. 21.
blood of him that made it.


Pli. Well Neighbor Obstinate (said Plia le) I begin to come to a point; I
intend to go along with this good man, and (...) in my lot with him: But my
good Companion, do you know the way to this defired place?


Chapter I am directed by a man whose name is Evangelist: to speed me to a little
Gate that is before us, where we shall receive instruction about the way.


Pli. Come then good Neighbor, let us be gving.


Then they went both togeth^r.

Obst. And I will go back to my place, said Obstinate. I will be no Companion
of such miss-led (...) Fellows.

Now I saw in my Dream; that when Obstinate was gone back, Christian and Pliable
went Talk between Christian, and Pliable.
talking over the Plain; and thus they began their discourse,


Christ. Come Neighbor Pliable, how do you do? I am glad your are persuaded to
go along with me; and had even Obstinate himself, but felt what I have felt of
the Powers and Terrors of what is yet unseen, he would not thus lightly have
given us the back.


Pliable. Come Neighbor Christian, since there is none but us two here, tell
me now further, what the things are, and how to be enjoyed, whither we are
going?


Chapter I can better conceive of them with my Mind, then speak of them with my
^ongue: But yet since you are desirous to know, I will read of them in my Book.


Pli. And do you think that the words of your Book are certainly true?


Ch Yes verily, for it was made by him that Tit. 1. (...)
cannot lie.


Plia: Well said; what things are they?


Chapter There is an Is. 4. 5. 17
endless Kingdom to be Inhabited, and everlasting life John. ^0. 27, 28. 29.
to be given us; that we may Inhabit that Kingdom for ever.


Pli. Well said; and what else?


Chr. There are Crowns of Glory to be given us; 2 Timothy 4 8.
and Garments that will make us shine like the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven.
Rev. 3. 4



Plia. This is excellent; And what Matthew 13.
else?


Chapter There shall be no more crying, Isa 25. 8.
nor sorrow; For he that is owner of the places, will wipe all tears Rev 7. 16.
17.
from our eyes.


Pli. And what company shall we have Cap. 21. 4.
there?


Chapter There we shall be with Seraphims, Isa 6. 2.
and Cherubins, Creatures that will dazzle your eyes to look on them: 1 T^. 4.
16. 17.
There also you shall meet with thousands, Rev. 7. 17.
and ten thousands that have gone before us to that place; none of them are
hurtful, but loving, and holy: every one walking in the sight of God; and
standing in his presence with acceptance for ever: In a word, there we shall
see the Rev. 4. 4.
Elders with their Golden Crowns: There we shall see the Holy Cha. ^4. 12, 3,
4, 5
Virgins with their Golden Harps. There we shall see Joh. 12. 25.
Men that by the World were cut in pieces, burned in flames, eaten of Beasts,
drownded in the Seas, for the love that they bare to the Lord of the place; all
well, and clothed with 2 Cor 5. 2, 3, 5.
Immortality, as with a Garment.


Pli. The hearing of this is enough to ravish ones heart; but are these things
to be enjoyed? how shall we ^ges to be Sharers hereof?


Chapter The Lord, the Governor of that Country, has Recorded that Isa. 55. 12.
in this Book: The substance of which is, If we be truly willing to Joh. 7.
(...).
have it, he will bestow it upon us Chap. 6. 37.
freely. Rev. (...). 6.



Pli. Well, my good Companion, glad Chapter 22. 17
am I to hear of these things: Come on, let us mend our pace.


Chapter I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason of this burden that is upon my
back.

Now I saw in my Dream, that just as they had ended this talk, they drew near
to a very Miry Slough, that was in the midst of the Plain, and they being
heedless, did both fall suddenly into the bogg. The name of the Slow was
Dispond. Here therefore they wallowed, for a time, being grieviously bedaubed
with the dirt; And Christian, because of the burden that was on his back, began
to sink in the Mire.


Pli. Then said Pliable, Ah, Neighbor Christian, where are you now?


Chapter Truly, said Christian, I do not know.


Pli. At that, Pliable began to be offended; and angerly said to his Fellow, Is
this the happiness you have told me all this while o^? if we have such ill
speed at our first setting out, what may we exp^, twixt this, and our Journeys
e^d? It is not enough to be Pliable.
May I get out again with my life, you shall possess the brave Country alone
for me. And with that be gave a desperate struggle or two, and got out of the
Mire, on that side of the Slough which was next to his own House: So away he
went, and Christian saw him no more.

Wherefore Ch^ was left to tumble in the Slough of Dispondency alone, but still
he endeavored to struggle to that side of the Slough, that was still further
Christian in trouble, seeks still to get further from his own House.
from his own House, and next to the Wicket-gate; the which he did, but could
not get out, because of the burden that was upon his back. But I beheld in my
Dream, that a Man came to him, whose name was Help, and asked him, What he did
the?


Chr. Sir, said Christian, I was directed this way by a Man called (...); who
directed me also to yonder Gate, that I might esc^pe the wrath to come: And as
I was going thither, I fell in here.


Help. But why did you not look for The Pro^s.
the steps?


Ch, Fear followed me so hard, that I ^ed the next way, and fell in.


Help. Give me thy hand. So he gave him his hand, and (...). 40. 2:
he drew him out, and set him upon sound ground, and bid him go on his way.

Then I stepped to him that pluck^ him out; and said; Sir. W^ore (since over
this place, is the (...) from the City of De^n, (...) yonder G^) is it, that
this Plat is not ^ded, that poor Trav^ (...) go thither with (...) (...) (...)
he said unto me; this Miry (...) is such a place as cannot be mended: It is the
descent whither the soum and filth that attends conviction (...) sin,
continually run, and therefore is it called the Slough of Dispond: for still as
the sinner is awakened about his lost condition, there arises in his soul many
fears, and doubts, and discouraging apprehensions, which all of them get
together, and settle in this place: And this is the reason of the badness of
this ground.

It is not the Isa. 35. 3, 4.
pleasure of the King, that this place should remain so bad; his Laborers
also, have by the direction of His Majesty's Surveyors, been for above this
sixteen hundred years, employed about this patch of ground, if perhaps it might
have been mended: yea, and to my knowledge, says he, Here has been swallowed
up, at least. Twenty thousand Cart Loads; Yea Millions of whol^ Instructions,
that have at all seasons been ^ght from all places of the Kings Dominions; (and
they that can tell, say, they are the best Materials to make good ground of the
pla^) If so be it might have been mended, but it is the Slough of Dispond
still; and so will be; when they have done what they can.

True, there are by the direction of the Law giver, certain good and subs^,
Steps^, placed even i The Promises of foreiveness and accep^nce to life by
faith in Christ.
through the very midst of this Slough; but at such time as this place does
much spue out (...), as it does against change of weather, these steps are
hardly seen; or if they be, Men through the diziness of their heads, step
besides; and then they are bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps be
there; but the ground is 1 Sa 12. 23.
good when they are once got in at the Gate.

Now I saw in my Dream, that by this time Pliable was got home to his House
again. So his Neighbors came to visit him; and some of them called him wife
Man for coming back; and some called him Fool, for hazarding himself with
(...): others again did mock at his Cowardliness; saying, Surely (...) yo^
began to venture, I would not have been so base to have given out (...) a few
^culties. So Pliable sat sneaking (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
among them. But at last he got more confidence, and then they all turned their
tales, and began to deride poor Christian behind his bac^. And thus much
concerning (...).

By this time Christian was got up to the Gate. Now over the Gat^ there was
Written, Knock and it shall be opened unto you. Mat. 7. 8,
He knocked therefore, more then once or twice, saying,

May I now enter here (...) will be within
Open to sorry me, though I have bin
An undeserving Rebels then shall I
No^ fail to fing his lasting praise on ^igh
At last there came a grave Person to the Gate, named Good Will, who asked Who
was there? and whence he ca^? and what he would have?


Chapter Here is a poor burdened (...), I come srom the City of Destruction, but am
going to Mount Zion, that I may be delivered from the wrath to come; I would
therefore. Sir, since I am informed that by this Gate is the way thither, know
if you are willing to let me in.


Good Will. The Gate will be opened to broken bearted sin^rs.
I ^m willing with all my heart, said he; and with that he op^d the Gate.

So when Ch^ was stepping in, the other gave him a pull; Then ^id Christian,
What means that? The other told him, A little distance from this Gate, there is
erected a strong Castle, of which Satan en^ies those that enter the straight
Gate.
Beelzebub is the Captain: from thence both he, and them that are with him
shoot Arrows at those that come up to this Gate; if happily they may dye before
they can enter in. Then said Ch^tian, I rejoice and tremble. So when he was got
in, the Man of the Gate asked him, Who directed him thither?


Chapter Evangelist bid me come hither and knock, (as I (...)) And he said, that
you, Sir, would (...) me what I must do.


Good Will. An open Door is set be^ (...), and no man can shut (...).


Chapter Now I begin to reap the benefits of my hazzards.


Good Will. But how is it that you came alone?


Chapter Because none of my Neighbors saw their danger, as I saw mine.


Good Will. Did (...) of them know of your coming?


Chapter Yes, my W^ and Children saw me at the first, and called (...) me to (...)
again: Also some of my Neighbors stood crying, and calling after me to return;
but I put my Fingers in mine Ears, and so came on my way.


Good Will. But did none of them follow you, to persuade you to go back?


Chapter Yes, both Obstinate, and Pliable: But when they saw that they could not
prevail, Obstinate went railing back; but Pliable came with me a little way.


Good Will. But why did he not come through?


Chapter We indeed came both together, until we came at the Slow of Dispond, into
the which, we also suddenly fell. And then was my Neighbor Pliable
discouraged, and would not adventure further. A Man may have Company when he
sets out for Heaven. and yet go thither alone.
Wherefore g^ing out again, on that side next to his own House; he told me, I
should possess the brave Country alone for him: So he went his way, and I came
mine. He after Obstinate, and I to this Gate.


Good Will. Then said Good Will, Alas poor Man, is the Caelestial Glory of so
small esteem with him, that he counts it not worth running the hazards of a
few difficulties to obtain it. Well, good Christian, come a little way with me,
and I will teach (...) about the way thou must go. Look before thee; do thou
see this narrow way? That is the way thou must go. It was cast up by the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, his Apostles; and it is as straight as a Rule can
make it: This is the way thou must go.


Chapter But said Christian, Is there no turnings nor windings by which a Stranger
may loose the way?


Good Will. Yes, there are many ways Butt down upon this; and they are Crooked,
and Wide: But thus thou may distinguish the right from the wrong, That only
being straight and narrow.

Then I saw in my Dream, That Christian asked him further, If he could not help
him off with his burden that was upon his back; For as yet he had not got rid
thereof, nor could he by any means get it off without help.

He told him; As to the burden, be content to bear it, until thou come to
the place of There is no deliverance from the guilt, and burden of sin, but by
the death and blood of Christ.
Deliverance; for there it will fall from thy back it self.

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and to address himself to Journey.
So the other told him, that by that he was gone some distance from the Gate, he
would come at the House of the Interpreter; at whose Door he should knock; and
he would show him excellent things. Then Christian took his leave of his
Friend, and he again bid him, God speed.

Then he went on, till he came at the House of the Christian comes to the House
of the Interpreter.
Interpreter, where he knocked over and over: at last one came to the Door, and
asked Who was there?


Chapter Sir, here is a Travailer, who was bid by an acquaintance of the Good Man
of this House, to call here for my profit: I would therefore speak with the
Master of the House: so he called for the Master of the House; who after a
little time came to Christian, and asked him what he would have?


Chapter Sir, said Christian, I am a Man that am come from the City of Destruction,
and am going to the Mount Zion, and I was told by the Man that stands at the
Gate, at the head of this way, That if I called here, you would show me
excellent things, He is ^tertained.
such as would be an help to me in my Journey.


Inter. Then said the Interpreter, Illumination.
Come in, I will show thee that which will be profitable to thee. So he
commanded his Man to light the Candle, and bid Christian follow him; so he had
him into a private Room, and bid his Man open a Door; the which when he had
done, Christian sees a brave Picture.
Christian saw a Picture of a very grave Person hang up against the Wall, and
this was the fashion of it. The fashion of the Picture.
It had eyes lift up to Heaven, the best of Books in its hand, the Law of Truth
was written upon its lips, the World was behind his back; it stood as if it
Pleaded with Men, and a Crown of Gold did hang over its head.


Chapter Then said Christian, What means this?


Inter. The Man whose Picture this is, is one of a thousand, he can Cor. 4. 15
beget Children, Travel in birth with Children, and Gal. 4. 19
Nurse them himself, when they are born. And whereas thou see 1 These. (...). 9
him with eyes lift up to Heaven, the best of Books in his hand, and the Law of
Truth writ on his lips: it is to show thee, that his work is to know and unfold
dark things to sinners; even as also thou see The meaning of the Picture.
him stand as if he Pleaded with Men: And whereas thou see the World as cast
behind him, and that a Crown hangs over his head; that is, to show thee that
slighting and despising the things that are present, for the love that he has
to his Masters service, he is sure in the World that comes next to have Glory
for his Reward: Now, said the Interpreter, I have showed thee this Picture,
first, Why be (...) him (...) (...) (...).
because the Man whose Picture this is, is the only Man, whom the Lord of the
Place whither thou art going, has Authorized, to be thy Guide in all difficult
places thou may meet with in the way: wherefore take good heed to what I
have showed thee, and bear well in thy mind what thou have seen; lest in thy
Journey, thou meet with some that pretend to lead thee right, but their way
goes down to death.

Then he took him by the hand, and led him into a very large Parlour that was
full of dust, because never swept; the which, after he had reviewed a little
while, the Interpreter called for a man to sweep: Now when he began to sweep,
the dust began so abundantly to fly about, that Christian had almost there with
been (...): Then said the Interpreter to (...) that stood by, Bring hither
Water, and sprinkle the Room; which when she had done, was swept and cleansed
with pleasure.


Chapter Then said Christian, What means this?


In. The Interpreter answered; This Parlor is the heart of a Man that was never
sanctified by the sweet Grace of the Gospel: The dust, is his Original Sin, and
inward Corruptions that have defiled the whole Man; He that began to sweep at
first, is the Law; but She that brought water, and did sprinkle it, is the
Gospel: Now, whereas thou saw that so soon as the first began to sweep, the
dust did so fly about that the Room by him could not be cleansed, but that thou
wast almost choked therewith. This is to show thee, that the Law, instead of
cleansing the heart (by its working) from sin, To. 7. 6.
does revive, put 1 Cor. 15 ^6.
strength into, and To. 5. 20.
increase it in the soul, as it does discover and sorbid it, but does not give
power to subdue.

Again, as thou saw the Damsel sprinkle the Room with Water, upon which it
was cleansed with pleasu^ This is to show thee, that when the Gospel comes in
the sweet and precious influences thereof to the heart, then I say, even as
thou saw the Damsel lay the dust by sprinkling the Floor with Water, so is
sin vanquished and subdued, and the soul Joh. 15. 3
made clean, through the Faith of it; Ephesians. 5. 16.
and consequently: fit for the King of Act 1^ 19.
Glory to inhabit. R^m. 16. 2^. 26.


I saw mor^over in my Dream, He (...) him Passion and Patience.
that the Interpreter took him by the Joh. 15. 2.
hand, and had him into a little Room; where sat two little Children, each one
in his Chair: The name of the eldest was Passion, and of the other Patience;
Passion seemed to be much discontent, but Patience was very quiet. Then
Christian asked, What Passion (...) (...) (...) (...).
is the reason of the discontent of Passion? The Interpreter answered, The
Governor of them would have him stay for his best things till the beginning of
the next year; but he will have all now: (...) (...) (...).
Bu^ Patience is willing to wait.

Then I saw that one came to Passion has his desire.
Passion, and brought him a Bag of Treasure, and poured it down at his feet;
the which he took up, and rejoiced therein; and withal, laughed Patience to
scorn: But I beheld but a while, and he had And quickly (...) all away.
lavished all away, and had nothing left him but Rags.


Chapter Then said Christian to the Interpreter, The matter expounded.
Expound this matter more fully to me.


In. So he said, These two Lads are Figures; Passion, of the Men of this World;
and Patience, of the Men of that which is to come: For as here thou see,
Passion will have all now, this year; that is to say, in this World; So are the
Men of this World: they must have all their good things now, they cannot stay
till next Year; that is, until the next World, for their Portion of good. That
Proverb, A The Worldly Man for a Bird in (...) hand.
Bird in the Hand is worth two in the Bush, is of more Authority with them,
then are all the Divine Testimonies of the good of the World to come. But as
thou saw, that he had quickly lavished all away, and had presently left him,
nothing but Rags; So will it be with all such Men at the end of this World.


Chapter Then said Christian, Now I see that Patience has the best Patience ha^ the
best Wisdom.
Wisdom; and that upon many accounts. 1. Because he stays for the best things.
2. And also because he will have the Glory of His, when the other has nothing
but Rags.


In. Nay, you may add another; to wit, The glory of the next World will never
wear out; but these are suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had not so much reason
to laugh at Patience, because he had his good things first, as Patience will
have to laugh at Passion, Things that are first must give place, but things
that are last, are lasting.
because he had his best things last; for first must give place to last,
because last must have his time to come, but last gives place to nothing; for
there is not another to succeed: he therefore that has his Portion first, must
needs have a time to spend it; but he that has his Portion last, must have it
lastingly. Therefore it is said of ^uk. 16. Dives had his g^od things first
Dives, In thy lifetime thou hadest, or receivedest thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things; But now he is comforted, and (...) art tormented.


Chapter Then I perceive, it is not best to covet things that are now; but to wait
for things to come.


In. You say the Truth; 2 Cor 4. 18 The first (...) t^ngs arbut T^po ral.
For the things tha^ are seen, are Temporal; but the things that are not seen,
are Eternal: But though this be so; yet since things present, and our fleshly
appetite, are such near Neighbors one to another; and again, because things to
come, and carnal sense, are such strangers one to another: therefore it is,
that the first of these so suddenly fall into amity, and that distance is so
continued between the second.

Then I saw in my Dream, that the Interpreter took Christian by the hand, and
led him into a place, where was a Fire burning against a Wall, and one standing
by it always, casting much Water upon it to quench it: Yet did the Fire burn
higher and hotter.

Then said Christian, What means this?

The Interpreter answered, This fire is ^e work of Grace that is wrought in the
heart; he that casts Water upon it, to extinguish and put it out, is the Devil:
but in that thou see the fire notwithstanding burn higher and hotter, thou
shall also see the reason of that: So he had him about to the back side of the
Wall, where he saw a Man with a Vessel of Oil in his hand, of the which he did
also continually cast, but secretly, into the fire. Then said Christian, What
means this? The Interpreter answered, This is Christ, who continually with the
Oil ofhis Grace, maintains the work already begun in the heart; By the means of
which, notwithstanding what the Devil can do, the souls of his People' prove
gracious 2 Cor. 12. 9
still. And in that thou saw, that the Man stood behind the Wall to maintain
the fire; this is to teach thee, that it is hard for the tempted to see how
this work of Grace is maintained in the soul.

I saw also that the Interpreter took him again by the hand, and led him into a
pleasant place, where was builded a stately Palace, beautiful to behold; at the
sight of which, Christian was greatly delighted; he saw also upon the top
thereof, certain Persons walked, who were clothed all in Gold. Then said
Christian, May we go in thither? Then the Interpreter took him, and led him up
toward the door of the Palace; and behold, at the door stood a great Company of
men, as desirous to go in, but durst not. There also sat a Man, at a little
distance from the door, at a Table-side, with a Book, and his Inkhorn before
him, to take the Name of him that should enter therein: He saw also that in the
doorway, stood many Men in Armor to keep it; being resolved to do to the Man
that would enter, what hurt and mischief they could. Now was Christian somewhat
in a muse: at last, when every Man started back for fear of the Armed Men;
Christian saw a Man of a very stout countenance come up to the Man that sat
there to write; saying, Set down my name, Sir; the which when he had done, he
saw the Man draw his Sword, and put an Helmet upon his Head, and rush toward
the door upon the Armed Men, who laid upon him with deadly force; but the Man,
not at all discouraged, fell to cutting and hacking most fiercely; so, after he
had received and given Act. 14, (...)
many wounds to those that attempted to keep him out, he cut his way through
them all, and pressed forward into the Palace; at which there was a pleasant
voice heard from those that were within, even of the Three that walked upon the
top of the Palace.

Come in, Come in;
Eternal Glory thou shall win.
So he went in, and was clothed with such Garments as they. Then Christian
smiled, and said, I think verily I ^now the meaning of this.

Now, said Christian, let me go hence: Nay stay (said the Interpreter,) till I
have showed thee a little more, and after that thou shall go on thy way. So he
took him by the hand again, and led him into a very dark Room, where there sat
a Man in an Iron Despair like (...) Iron Cage.
Cage.

Now the Man, to look on, seemed very sad: he sat with his eyes looking down to
the ground, his hands ^olded together; and he sighed as if he would break his
heart. ^hen said Christian, What means this? At which the Interpreter bid him
talk with the Man.


Chr. Then said Christian to the Man, What art thou? The Man answered, I am
what I was not once.


Chr. What wast thou once?


Man. The Man said, I was once a fair and flourishing Professor, both in mine
own eyes, and also in the eyes of others: I once was, as I thought, fair for
the Celestial City, and had then even joy at the thoughts that I should get
thither.


Chr. Well, but what art thou now?


Man. I am now a Man of Despair, and am shut up in it, as in this Iron Cage. I
cannot get out; O now I cannot.


Chr. But how came thou in this condition?


Man. I left off to watch, and be sober; I laid the reins upon the neck of my
lusts; I sinned against the light of the Word, and the goodness of God: I have
grieved the Spirit, and he is gone; I tempted the Devil, and he is come to me;
I have provoked God to anger, and he has left me; I have so hardened my heart,
that I cannot repent.

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, But is there no hopes for such a Man
as this? Ask him, said the Interpreter? Nay, said Christian, pray Sir, do you.


Inter. Then said the Interpreter, Is there no hope but you must be kept in
this Iron Cage of Despair?


Man. No, none at all.


Inter: Why? the Son of the Blessed is very pitiful.


Man. I have Heb. 6. 6.
Crucified him to my self, a fresh. I have despised Luke 19. 14.
his Person, I have despised his Righteousness, I have counted his Blood an
unholy thing, I have done despite Heb. 10. 28, 29.
to the Spirit of Grace: Therefore I have shut my self out of all the Promises;
and there now remains to me nothing but threatenings, dreadful threatenings,
faithful threatenings of certain Judgment, which shall devour me as an
Adversary.


Inter. For what did you bring your self into this condition?


Man. For the Lusts, Pleasures, and Profits of this World; in the enjoyment of
which, I did then promise my self much delight: but now even every one of those
things also bite me, and gnaw me like a burning worm.


Inter. But can thou not now repent and turn?


Man. God has denied me repentance; his Word gives me no encouragement to
believe; yea, himself has shut me up in this Iron Cage; nor can all the men in
the World let me out. O Eternity! Eternity! how shall I grapple with the misery
that I must meet with in Eternity!


Inter. Then said the Interpreter to Christian, Let this man's misery be
remembered by thee, and be an everlasting caution to thee.


Chr. Well, said Christian, this is fearful; God help me to watch and be sober;
and to pray, that I may shun the causes of this man's misery. Sir, is it not
time for me to go on my way now?


Inter. Tarry till I shall show thee one thing more, and then thou shall go on
thy way.

So he took Christian by the hand again, and led him into a Chamber, where
there was one a rising out of Bed; and as he put on his Raiment, he shook and
trembled. Then said Christian, Why does this Man thus tremble? The Interpreter
th^n bid him tell to Christian the reason of his so doing, So he began, and
said. This night as I was in my sleep, I Dreamed, and behold the Heavens grew
exceeding black; also it thundered and lightened in most fearful wise, that it
put me into an Agony. So I looked 1 Cor. 15.
up in my Dream, and saw the Clouds 1 Thcss. 4.
rack at an unusual rate; upon which Jude 15.
I heard a great sound of a Trumpet, 2 These. 1. 8
and saw also a Man sit upon a Cloud, Joh 5. 28.
Rev. 20. 11 12, 13, 14.
attended with the thousands of Heaven; they were all in flaming fire, also Is^
26. 21.
the Heavens was on a burning flame. Mic. 7. 16. 17
I heard then a voice, saying, Arise ye Ps. 5. 1, 2, 3
Dead, and come to Judgment; and Dan. 7. 10.
with that, the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, and the Dead that were therein,
came forth; some of them were exceeding glad, and looked upward; and some
sought to hide themselves under the Mountains: Then I saw the Man that sat upon
the Cloud, open the Book; and bid the World draw near. Yet there was by reason
of a Fiery flame that issued out and came from before him, a convenient
distance betwixt him and them, as betwixt the Judge and the Prisoners at the
Bar. I heard it also proclaimed to them that attended on the Man that sat on
the Cloud; Mat. 3. 12
Gather together Chapter 13. 30.
Mal. 4. 1.
the Tares, the Chaff, and Stubble, and cast them into the burning Lake; and
with that, the Bottomless pit opened, just whereabout I stood; out of the mouth
of which there came in an abundant manner Smoke, and Coals of fire, with
hideous noises. It was also said to the same persons; Gather my Wheat into my
Garner. And with that I saw many caught up 1 These 4. 16, 17.
and carried away into the Clouds, but I was left behind. I also sought to hide
my self, but I could not; for the Man that sat upon the Cloud, still To. 2. 14,
15.
kept his eye upon me: my sins also came into mind, and my Conscience did
accuse me on every side. Upon this I awaked from my sleep.


Chr. But what was it that made you so fraid of this sight?


Man. Why I thought that the day of Judgment was come, and that I was not
ready for it: but this frighted me most, that the Angels gathered up several,
and left me behind; also the pit of Hell opened her mouth ^ust where I stood:
my Conscience too within afflicted me; and as I thought, the Judge had always
his eye upon me, showing indignation in his countenance.

Then said the Interpreter to Christian, Have thou considered all these things?


Chri. Yes, and they put me in hope and fear.


Inter. Well, keep all things so in thy mind, that they may be as a Goad in thy
sides, to prick thee forward in the way thou must go. Then Christian began to
gird up his loins, and to address himself to his Journey. Then said the
Interpreter, The Comforter be always with thee good Christian, to guide thee in
the way that leads to the City.

So Christian went on his way, saying,

Here I have seen things rare, and profitable;
Things pleasant, dreadful, things to make me stable
In what I have began to take in hand:
Then let me think on them, and understand
Wherefore they showed me was, and let me be
Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee.
Now I saw in my Dream, that the high way up which Christian was to go, was
fenced on either side with a Wall, and that Wall is called Salvation. Up this
way therefore did burdened Christian run, but not without great difficulty,
because of the load on his back.

He ran thus till he came at a place somewhat ascending; and upon that place
stood a Cross, and a little below in the bottom, a Sepulcher. So I saw in my
Dream, that just as Christian came up with the Cross, his burden loosed from
off his Shoulders, and fell from off his back; and began to tumble; and so
continued to do, till it came to the mouth of the Sepulcher, where it fell in,
and I saw it no more.

Then was Christian glad When God releases us of our guilt and burden, we are
as those that leap for joy.
and lightsom, and said with a merry heart, He has given me rest, by his
sorrow; and life, by his death. Then he stood still a while, to look and
wonder; for it was very surprising to him, that the sight of the Cross should
thus ease him of his burden. He looked therefore, and looked again, even till
the springs that were in his head sent the Zech. 1^. 10.
waters down his cheeks. Now as he stood looking and weeping, behold three
shining ones came to him, and saluted him, with Peace be to thee: so the first
said to him, Thy sins be forgiven. The second, stripped him of his Rags, and
clothed him with change of Raiment. The third also set a mark in his
forehead, and gave him a Roll with a Seal upon it, which he bid him look on as
he ran, and that he should give it in at the Celestial Gate: so they went
their way Then Christian gave three leaps for joy, and went out singing,

Thus far did I come laden with my sin; A Christian can ^ng the alo^, when God
does (...) him the joy of his heart

Nor could ought ease the grief that I was in^
Till I came hither: What a place is this!
Must here be the beginning of my bliss!
Must here the burden fall from off my back?
Must here the strings that bound it to me, crack?
Blessed Cross! blessed Sepalcher! blessed rather be
The Man that there was put to shame for me.
I saw then in my Dream that he went on thus, even until he came at a bottom,
where he saw, a little out of the way, three Men fast asleep with Fetters upon
their heels. The name of the one was Simple, Sloth, and Presumption.
Simple, another Sloth, and the third Presumption.

Christian then seeing them lie in this case, went to them, if peradventure he
might awake them. And cried, You are like them that sleep on the top of a Mast,
for the dead Sea is under you, a Gulf that has no bottom: Awake therefore and
come away, be willing also, and I will help you off with your Irons. He also
told them, If he that goes about like a roaring Lion comes by, you will
certainly become a prey to his teeth. With that they looked upon him, and began
to reply in this sort: There is no persuasion will do, is God opens not the
eyes,
Simple said, I see no danger; Sloth said, Yet a little more sleep: and
Presumption said, Every Fait must stand upon his own bottom, what is the answer
else that I should give thee? And so they lay down to sleep again, and
Christian went on his way.

Yet was he troubled to think, That men in that danger should so little esteem
the kindness of him that so freely offered to help them; both by awakening of
them, counselling of them, and proffering to help them off with their Irons.
And as he was troubled there-about, he espied two Men come tumbling over the
Wall, on the left hand of the narrow way; and they made up a pace to him. The
name of the one was Formalist, and the name of the other Hypocrisy. So, as I
said, they drew up unto him, who thus entered with them into discourse.


Chr. Gentlemen, Whence came you, and whither do you (...)


Form. and Hyp. We were born in the Land of Vainglory, (...) are going for
praise to Mount Sion.


Chr. Why came you not in at the Gate which stands at the beginning of the
way? Know you not that it is written, ^oh. 10 1.
That he that comes not in by the door, but climbeth up some other way, the
same is a thief and a robber?


Form. and Hyp. They said, That to go to the Gate for entrance, was by all
their Contrymen counted too far about; and that therefore their usual way
was to make a short cut of it, and to climb over as they had done.


Chr. But will it not be counted a Trespass, against the Lord of the City
whither we are bound, thus to violate his revealed will?


Form. and Hyp. They told him, They that com^ unto ^e way, but not by the door,
think that they can say something in vindication of their own Practice.
That as for that, he needed not to trouble his head thereabout: for what they
did, they had custom for; and could produce, if need were, Testimony that would
witness i^, for more then a thousand years.


Chr. But, said Christian, Will your Practce stand a (...) at Law?


Form. and Hyp. They told him, That Custom, (...) being of so long a standing,
as above a thousand years, would doubtless now be admitted as a thing legal, by
any Impartial Judge. And besides, said they, so be we get into the way, what is
matter which way we get in; if we are in, we are in: thou art but in the way,
who, as we perceive, came in at the Gate; and we are also in the way, that came
tumbling over the wall: Wherein now is thy condition better then ours?


Chr. I walk by the Rule of my Master, you walk by the rude working of your
fancies. You are counted thieves already, by the Lord of the way; therefore I
doubt you will not be found true men at the end of the way. You come in by your
selves without his direction, and shall go out by your selves without his mercy.

To this they made him but little answer; only they bid him look to himself.
Then I saw that they went on every man in his way, without much conference one
with another; save that these two men told Christian, That, as to Laws and
Ordinances, they doubted not but they should as conscientiously do them as he.
Therefore said they, We see not wherein thou differest from us, but by the Coat
that is on thy back, which was, as we tro, given thee by some of thy
Neighbors, to hide the shame of thy nakedness.


Chr. By G^. 1. 16.
Laws and Ordinances, you will not be saved, since you came not in by the door.
And as for this Coat that is on my back, it was given me by the Lord of the
place whither I go; and that, as you say, to cover my nakedness with. And I
take it as a token of his kindness to me, for I had nothing but rags before.
And besides, Christian has got his Lords Coat on his back and is comforted
there with, he is comforted also with his Mark and his Roll.
thus I comfort my self as I go: Surely, think I, when I come to the Gate of
the City, the Lord thereof will know me for good, since I have his Coat on my
back; a Coat that he gave me freely in the day that he stripped me of my rags. I
have moreover a mark in my forehead, of which perhaps you have taken no notice,
which one of my Lords most intimate Associates, fixed there in the day that my
burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell you moreover, that I had then given
me a Roll sealed to comfort me by reading, as I go in the way; I was also bid
to give it in at the Celestial Gate, in token of my certain going in after it:
all which things I doubt you want, and want them, because you came not in at
the Gate.

To these things they gave him no answer, only they looked upon each other and
laughed. Then I saw that they went on all, save that Christian kept before, who
had no more talk but with himself, and that sometimes sighingly, and sometimes
comfortably: also he would be often reading in the Roll that one of the shining
ones gave him, by which he was refreshed.

I beheld then, that they all went on till they came to the foot of an Hill, He
comes to the hill Difficulty.
at the bottom of which was a Spring. There was also in the same place two
other ways besides that which came straight from the Gate; one turned to the
left hand, and the other to the right, at the bottom of the Hill: but the
narrow way lay right up the Hill (and the name of the going up the side of the
Hill, is called Difficulty.) Christian now went to the Spring and drank thereof
to refresh himself, and then began to go up the Hill; saying,

This Hill, though high, I covet to ascend;
The difficulty will not me offend;
For I perceive the way to life lies here;
Come, pluck up, Heart; lets neither faint nor fear:
Better, tho difficult, th'right way to go,
Then wrong, though easy, where the end is woe.
The other two also came to the foot of the Hill. But when they saw that the
Hill was steep and high, and that there was two other ways to go; and supposing
also, that these two ways might meet again, with that up which Christian went,
on the other side of the Hill: Therefore they were resolved to go in those ways
(now the name of one of those ways was Danger, and the name of the other
Destruction.) So The (...) (...) of turning out of the way.
the one took the way which is called Danger, which led him into a great Wood;
and the other took directly up the way to Destruction, which led him into a
wide field full of dark Mountains, where he stumbled and fell, and rise no more.

I looked then after Christian, to see him go up the Hill, where I perceived he
fell from running to going, and from going to clambering upon his hands and his
knees, because of the steepness of the place. Now about the midway to the top
of the Hill, was a pleasant A ward of grace.
Arbor, made by the Lord of the Hill, for the refreshment of weary Travailers.
Thither therefore Christian go^, where also he sat down to rest him. Then he
pulled his Roll out of his bosom and read therein to his comfort; he also now
began afresh to take a review of the Coat or Garment that was given him as he
stood by the Cross. Thus pleasing himself a while, he at last fell into a
slumber, and thence into a fast sleep, which detained him in that place until
it was almost night, and in his sleep his He that sleeps is a l^r.
Roll fell out of his hand. Now as he was sleeping, there came one to him and
awaked him saying, Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise:
and with that Christian suddenly started up, and sped him on his way, and went
a pace till he came to the top of the Hill.

Now when he was got up to the top of the Hill, there came two Men running
against him amain; the name of the one was Timorus, and the name of the other
Mistrust. To whom Christian said, Sirs, what is the matter you run the wrong
way? Timorus answered, That they were going to the City of Zion, and had got up
that difficult place; but, said he, the further we go, the more danger we meet
with, wherefore we turned, and are going back again.

Yes, said Mistrust, for just before us lie a couple of Lions in the way,
whether sleeping or wakeing we know not; and we could not think, if we came
within reach, but they would presently pull us in pieces.


Chr. Then said Christian, You make me afraid, but whither shall I fly to be
safe? If I go back to mine own Country, That is prepared for Fire and
Brimstone; and I shall certainly perish there. If I can get to the Celestial
City, I am sure to be in safety there. I must venture: To go back is nothing
but death, to go forward is fear of death, and life everlasting beyond it. I
will yet go forward. So Mistrust and Timorus ran down the Hill; and Christian
went on his way. But thinking again of what he heard from the men, he felt in
his bosom for his Roll, that he might read therein and be comforted; but he
felt and Christian miss^d ^is Roll, wherein he used to take comfort.
found it not. Then was Christian in great distress, and knew not what to do,
for he wanted that which used to relieve him, and that which should have been
his Pass into the lestial City. Here therefore he began to be much perplexed,
and knew not what to do; at last he bethought himself that he had slept in the
Arbor that is on the side of the Hill: and falling down upon his knees, he
asked God forgiveness for that his foolish Fact; and then went back to look for
his Roll. But all the way he went back, who can sufficiently set forth the
sorrow of Christians heart? sometimes he sighed, sometimes he wept, and often
times he chid himself, for being so foolish to fall asleep in that place which
was erected only for a little refreshment from his weariness. Thus therefore he
went back; carefully looking on this side, and on that, all the way as he went,
if happily he might find his Roll, that had been his comsort so many times in
his Journey. He went thus till he came again within sight of the Arbor, whi^
he sat and slept; but that sight renewed Christian bewails his foolish sleeping.
his sorrow the more, by bringing again, even a fresh, his evil of sleeping
unto his mind. Thus therefore he now went on bewailing his sinful ^ev. 2. 2.
sleep, saying, O wretched Man that I am, that I should sleep in the daytime!
that I should sleep in the midst os difficulty! that I should so indulge the
flesh, as to use that rest for ^ase to my flesh, which the Lord of the Hill
has erected only for the relief of the spirits of Pilgrims! How many steps
have I took in vain! (Thus it happened to Israel for their sin, they were sent
back again by the way of the Red Sea) and I am made to tread those steps with
sorrow, which I might have trod with delight, had it not been for this sinful
sleep. How far might I have been on my way by this time! I am made to tread
those steps thrice over, which I needed not to have trod but once: Yea now also
I am like to be benighted, for the day is almost spent. O that I had not slept!
Now by this time he was come to the Arbor again, when for a while he sat down
and wept, but at last (as Christian would have it) looking sorrowfully down
under the Settle, there he espied his Roll; the which he with trembling and
haste caught up, and put it into his bosom; but who can tell how joyful this
Man was, when he had gotten his Roll again! For this Roll was the assurance of
his life and acceptance at the desired Haven. Therefore he laid it up in his
bosom, gave thanks to God for directing his eye to the place where it lay, and
with joy and tears be took him self again to his Journey. But Oh how nimbly
now, did he go up the rest of the Hill! Yet before he got up, the Sun went down
upon Christian; and this made him again recall the vanity of his sleeping to
his remembrance, and thus he again began to condole with himself: Ah thou
sinful sleep! how for thysake am I like to be benighted in my Journey! I must
walk without the Sun, darkness must cover the path of my foet, and I must hear
the noise of doleful Creatures, because of my sinful sleep! Now also he
remembered the story that Mistrust and Timorus told him of, how they were
frighted with the sight of the Lions. Then said Christian to himself again,
These Beasts range in the night for their prey, and if they should meet with me
in the dark, how should I shift them! how should I escape being by them torn
pieces? Thus he went on his way, but while he was thus bewayling his unhappy
miscarriage, he lift up his eyes, and behold there was a very stately Palace
before him, the name whereof was Beautiful, and it stood just by the Highway
side.

So I saw in my Dream, that he made haste and went forward, that if possible he
might get Lodging there; now before he had gone far, he entered into a very
narrow passage, which was about a furlong off of the Porters Lodge, and looking
very narrowly before him as he went, he espied two Lions in the way. Now,
thought he, I see the dangers that Mistrust and Timorus, were driven back by.
(The Lions were Chained, but he saw not the Chains) Then he was afraid, and
thought also himself to go back after them, for he thought nothing but death
was before him: But the Porter at the Lodge, whose name is Mar. 13
Watchful, perceiving that Christian made a halt, as if he would go back, cried
unto him, saying, Is thy strength so small? fear not the Lions, for they are
Chained: and are pla ed there for trial of faith where it is; and for discovery
of those that have none: keep in the midst of the Path, and no hurt shall come
unto thee.

Then I saw that he went on, trembling for fear of the Lions; but taking good
heed to the directions of the Porter; he heard them roar, but they did him no
harm. Then he clapped his hands, and went on, till he came and stood before the
Gate where the Porter was. Then said Christian to the Porter, Sir, What house
is this? and may I lodge here to night? The Porter answered, This House was
built by the Lord of the Hill: and he built it for the relief and security of
Pilgrims. The Porter also asked whence he was, and whither he was going?


Chr. I am come from the City of Destruction, and am going to Mount Zion, but
because the Sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here to night.


Por. What is your name?


Chr. My name is now Christian but my name at the first was Graceless: I came
of the Race of Japhet, whom God will persuade to dwell in the Tents of Shem.


Por. But how does it happen that you come so late, the Sun is set?


Chr. I had been here sooner, but that, wretched man that I am! I slept in the
Arbor that stands on the Hill side; nay, I had notwithstanding that, been here
much sooner, but that in my sleep I lost my Evidence, and came without it to
the brow of the Hill; and then feeling for it, and finding it not, I was forced
with sorrow of heart, to go back to the place where I slept my sleep, where I
found it, and now I am come.


Por. Well, I will call out one of the Virgins of this place, who will, if she
likes your talk, bring you in to the rest of the Family, according to the Rules
of the House. So Watchful the Porter rang a Bell, at the sound of which, came
out at the door of the House, a Grave and Beautiful Damsel, named Discretion,
and asked why she was called.

The Porter answered, This Man is in a Journey from the City of Destruction to
Mount Zion, but being weary, and benighted, he asked me if he might lodge here
to night; so I told him I would call for thee, who after discourse had with
him, may est do as seems thee good, even according to the Law of the House.

Then she asked him whence he was, and whither he was going, and he told her.
She asked him also, how he got into the way, and he told her; Then she asked
him, What he had seen, and met with in the way, and he told her; and last, she
asked his name, so he said, It is Christian; and I have so much the more a
desire to lodge here to night, because, by what I perceive, this place was
built by the Lord of the Hill, for the relief and security of Pilgrims. So she
smiled, but the water stood in her eyes: And after a little pause, she said, I
will call forth two or three more of the Family. So she ran to the door, and
called out Prudence, Piety, and C^arity, who after a little more discourse with
him, had him in to the Family; and many of them meeting him at the threshold of
the House, said, Come in thou blessed of the Lord; this House was built by the
Lord of the Hill, on purpose to entertain such Pilgrims in. Then he bowed his
head, and followed them into the House. So when he was come in, and set down,
they gave him something to drink; and consented together that until supper was
ready, some one or two of them should have some particular discourse with
Christian, for the best improvement of time: and they appointed Piety and
Prudence to discourse with him; and thus they began.


Piety. Come good Christian, since we have been so loving to you, to receive
you in to our House this night; let us, if perhaps we may better our selves
thereby, talk with you of all things that have happened to you in your
Pilgrimage.


Chr. With a very good will, and I am glad that you are so well disposed.


Piety What moved you at first to betake yourself to a Pilgrims life?


Chr. I was How Christian was driven out of his own Country.
driven out of my Native Country, by a dreadful sound that was in mine ears,
to wit, That unavoidable destruction did attend me, if I abode in that place
where I was.


Piety. But how did it happen that you came out of your Country this way?


Chr. It was as God would have it, for when I was under the fears of
destruction, I did not know whither to go; but by chance there came a Man, even
to me, (as I was trembling and weeping) whose name is How he g^t into the way
to Sion.
Evangelist, and he directed me to the Wicket-Gate, which else I should never
have found; and so set me into the way that has led me directly to this House.


Piety. But did you not come by the House of the Interpreter?


Chr. Yes, and did see such things there, the remembrance of which will stick
by me as long as I live; specially three (...) of what ^e s^w in the way.
things, to wit, How Christ, in despite of Satan, maintains his work of Grace
in the heart; how the Man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of Gods mercy;
and also the Dream of him that thought in his sleep the day of Judgment was
come.


Piety. Why? Did you hear him tell his Dream?


Cho. Yes, and a dreadful one it was. I thought it made my heart ache as he was
telling of it, but yet I am glad I heard it.


Piety. Was that all that you saw at the House of the Interpreter?


Chr. No, he took me and had me where he showed me a stately Palace, and how
the People were clad in Gold that were in it; and how there came a venturous
Man, and cut his way through the armed men that stood in the door to keep him
out; and how he was bid to come in, and win eternal Glory. Methought those
things did ravish my heart; I could have staid at that good Man's house a
twelvemonth, but that I knew I had further to go.


Piety. And what saw you else in the way?


Chr. Saw! Why I went but a little further, and I saw one, as I thought in my
mind, hang bleeding upon the Tree; and the very sight of him made my burden
fall olf my back (for I groaned under a weary burden) but then it fell down
from off me. 'T was a strange thing to me, for I never saw such a thing before:
Yea, and while I stood looking up, (for then I could not forbear looking) three
shining ones came to me: one of them testified that my sins were forgiven me;
another stripped me of my Rags, and gave me this Broidred Coat which you see; and
the third set the mark which you see, in my forehead, and gave me this sealed
Roll (and with that he plucked it out of his bosom.)


Piety. But you saw more then this, did you not?


Chr. The things that I have told you were the best: yet some other small
matters I saw, as namely I saw three Men, Simple, Sloth, and Presumption, lie a
sleep a little out of the way as I came, with Irons upon their heels; but do
you think I could awake them! I also saw Formalist and Hypocrisy come tumbling
over the wall, to go, as they pretended, to Sion, but they were quickly lost;
even as I myself did tell them, but they would not believe: but, above all, I
found it hard work to get up this Hill, and as hard to come by the Lions
mouths; and truly if it had not been for the good Man, the Porter that stands
at the Gate, I do not know, but that after all, I might have gone back again:
but now I thank. God I am here, and I thank you for receiving of me.

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few questions, and desired his answer
to them.


Pru. Do you not think sometimes of the Country from whence you came?


Chr. Yes, Christians thoughts of his Native Country.
but with much shame and detestation; Truly, if I had been mindful of that
Country from whence I came out, I might have had opportunity to have returned,
but now I desire a Heb. (...). 15, 16.
better Country, that is, an Heavenly.


Pru. Do you not yet bear away with you some of the things that then you were
conversant withal?


Chr. Yes, but greatly against my will; especially my inward and Christian
distasted with carnal cogitations.
carnal cogitations; with which all my Contrymen, as well as my self, were
delighted; but now all those things are my grief: and might I but choose mine
own things, I would Christians choice.
choose never to think of those things mo^e; but when I would be doing of that
which is best, that which is worst is with me.


Pru. Do you not find sometimes, as if those things were vanquished, which at
other times are your perplexity.


Chr. Yes, but that is but seldom; but they are to me Christians golden hours
Golden hours, in which such things happens to me.


Pru. Can you remember by what means you find your anoyances at times, as if
they were vanquished?


Chr. Yes, when How Christian gets power against hu corruptions.
I think what I saw at the Cross, that will do it; and when I look upon my
Broidered Coat, that will do it; also when I look into the Ro^ that I carry in
my bosom, that will do it; and when my thoughts wax warm about whither I am
going, that will do it.


Pru. And what is it that makes you so desirous to go to Mount Zion?


Chr. Whv, there I hope to see him alive, that did hang dead on the Cross Why
Christian would vt at Mount Zion.
and there I hope to be rid of all those things, that to this day are in me, an
a^oiance to me; there they say there is no death, and there I shall dwell with
such Company as I like best. For to tell you truth, I love him, because I wasby
him eased of my burden, and I am ^eary of my inward sickness; I would fain be
where I shall die no more, and with the Company that shall continually cry
Holy, Holy, Holy.

Now I saw in my Dream, that thus they sat talking together until supper was
ready. So when they had made ready, they sat down to meat; Now the Table was
furnished What Christian had to his supper.
with fat things, and with Wine that was well refined; and all their talk Their
talk at supper time
at the Table, was about the Lord of the Hill: As namely, about what he had
done, and wherefore he did what he did, and why he had builded that House: and
by what they said, I perceived that he had been a great Warrior, and had
fought with and slain him that had the power of death, but not without great
danger to himself, which made me love him the more.

For, as they said, and as I believe (said Christian) he did it with the loss
of much blood; but that which put Glory of Grace into all he did, was, that he
did it of pure love to his Country. And besides, there were some of them of
the Household that said, they had seen and spoke with him since he did dye on
the Cross; and they have attested, that they had it from his own lips, that he
is such a lover of poor Pilgrims, that the like is not to be found from the
East to the West

They moreover gave an instance of what they affirmed, and that was, He had
stripped himself of his glory that he might do this for the Poor; and that they
heard him say and affirm, That he would not dwell in the Mountain of Zion
alone. They said moreover, That he had made many Pilgrims Christ makes Princes
of Beggars.
Princes, though by nature they were Beggars born, and their original had been
the Dunghill.

Thus they discoursed together till late at night, and after they had committed
themselves to their Lord for Protection, they betook themselves to rest. The
Pilgrim they laid in a large upper Christians Bedchamber.
Chamber, whose window opened toward the Sun rising; the name of the Chamber
was Peace, where he slept till break of day; and then he awoke and sang,

Where am I now! is this the love and care
Of Jesus, for the men that Pilgrims are!
Thus to provide! That I should be forgiven!
And dwell already the next door to Heaven.
So in the Morning they all got up, and after some more discourse, they told
him that he should not depart, till they had showed him the Rarities of that
place. And first they had him into the Study, Christian had into the Study, and
what he saw there.
where they showed him Records of the greatest Antiquity; in which, as I
remember my Dream, they showed him first the Pedigree of the Lord of the Hill,
that he was the Son of the Ancient of Days, and came by an eternal Generation.
Here also was more fully Recorded the Acts that he had done, and the names of
many hundreds that he had taken into his service; and how he had placed them in
such Habitations that could neither by length of Days nor decaies of Nature, be
dissolved.

Then they read to him some of the worthy Acts that some of his Servants had
done. As how they had subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the Heb. 11. 33, 34.
violence of Fire, escaped the edge of the Sword; out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens.

Then they read again in another part of the Records of the House, where it was
showed how willing their Lord was to receive into his favor any, even any,
though they in time past had offered great affronts to his Person and
proceedings. Here also were several other Histories of many other famous
things, of all which Christian had a view. As of things both Ancient and
Modern; together with Prophecies and Predictions of things that have their
certain accomplishment, both to the dread and amazement of enemies, and the
comfort and solace of Pilgrims.

The next day they took him and had him into the Christian had into the Armory.
Armory; where they showed him all manner of Furniture, which their Lord had
provided for Pilgrims, as Sword, Shield, Helmet, Breast plate, All-Prayer, and
Shoes that would not wear out. And there was here enough of this to harness
out as many men for the service of their Lord, as there be Stars in the Heaven
for multitude.

They also showed him some of the Engines with which some of his Servants had
done wonderful things. Christian is made to see Ancient things.
They showed him Moses Rod, the Hammer and Nail with which Jael slew Sisera,
the Pitchers, Trumpets, and Lamps too, with which Gideon put to flight the
Armies of Midi^. Then they showed him the Oxes goad wherewith Shamger slew six
hundred men. They showed him also the Jaw bone with which Sampson did such
mighty feats; they showed him moreover the Sling and Stone with which David
slew Goliath of Gath: and the Sword also with which their Lord will kill the Man
of Sin, in the day that he shall rise up to the prey. They showed him besides
many excellent things, with which Christian was much delighted. This done, they
went to their rest again.

Then I saw in my Dream, that on the morrow he got up to go forwards, but they
desired him to stay till the next day also, and then said they, we will, if the
day be clear, show you the Christian showed the delectable Mountains
delectable Mountains; which they said, wouldyet further add to his comfort;
because they were nearer the desired Haven, th^n the place where at present he
was. So he consented and staid. When the Morning was up, they had him to the
top of the House, Isa. 33. 16, 17.
and bid him look South, so he did; and behold at a great distance he saw a
most pleasant Mountainous Country, beautified with Woods, Vinyards, Fruits of
all sorts, Flowers also; Springs and Fountains, very delectable to behold. Then
he asked the name of the Country, they said it was Immanuels Land: and it is
a^ common, said they, as this Hill is to and for all the Pilgrims. And when
thou come there, from thence said they, thou may see to the Gat^ of the
Celestial City, as the Shepherds that live there will make appear.

Now he bethought himself of setting forward, Christian s^ts forward.
and they were willing he should: but first, said they, le^ us go again into
the Armory, so they did; and when he came there, they Christian s^nt away Arm^d:
harn^ssed him from head to foot with what was of proof, lest perhap^ he should
meet with assaults in the way. He being therefore thus a^ coutred walks out
with his friend^ to the Gate, and there he asked the Porter if he saw any
Pilgrims pass by, Then the Porter answered, Yes.


Chr. Pray did you know him?


Por. I asked his name, and he told me it was Faithful.


Chr. O, said Christian, I know him, he is my Towns-man, my near Neighbor, he
comes from the place where I was born: how far do you think he may be before?


Porter. He is got by this time below the Hill.


Chr. Now Christian and the Porter greet at parting.
Well, said Christian, good Porter the Lord be with thee, and add to all thy
blessings much increase, for the kindness that thou have showed to me.

Then he began to go forward, but Discretion, Piety, Charity, and Prudence,
would accompany him down to the foot of the Hill. So they went on together,
reiterating their former discourses till they came to go down the Hill. Then
said Christian, As it was difficult coming up, so (so far as I can see) it is
dangerous going down. Yes, said Prudence, so it is; for it is an hard matter
for a man to go down into the valley of Humiliation, as thou art now, and to
catch no slip b^ the way; therefore, said they, are we come out to accompany
thee down the Hill. So he began to go down, but very warily, yet he caught a
slip or too.

Then I saw in my Dream, that these good Companions, when Christian was gone
down to the bottom of the Hill, gave him a loaf of Bread, a bottle of Wine, and
a cluster of Raisins; and then he went on his way.

But now in this Valley of Humiliation poor Christian was hard put to it, for
he had gone but a little way before he espied a foul Fiend coming over the
field to meet him; his name is Apollyon. Then did Christian begin to be afraid,
and to cast in his mind whither to go back, or to stand his ground. But he
considered again, that he had no Armor for his back, and therefore thought
that to turn the back to him, might give him greater advantage with ease to
pierce him with his Darts; therefore he resolved Christians resolution at the
approach of Apollyo^.
to venture, and stand his ground. For thought he, had I no more in mine eye,
then the saving of my life, 'twould be the best way to stand.

So he went on, and Apollyon met him; now the Monster was hidious to behold, he
was clothed with scales like a Fish (and the^ are his pride) he had Wings like
a Dragon, and out of his belly came Fire and Smoke, and his mout^ was as the
mouth of a Lion. When he was come up to Christian, he beheld him with a
disdainful countenance, and thus began to question with him.


Apol. Whence come you, and whither are you bound?


Chr. I come from the City of Destruction, (...) (...) Christian ard Apollyon.
which is the place of all evil, and am going to the City of Zion.


Apol. By this I perceive thou art one of my Subjects, for all that Country is
mine; and I am the Prince and God of it. How is it then that thou have ran away
from thy King? Were it not that I hope thou may do me more service, I would
strike thee now at one blow to the ground.


Chr. I was born indeed in your Dominions, but your service was hard, and your
wages such as a man could not live on, for the wages of Sin is death; therefore
when I was come to years, I did as other considerate persons do, look out, if
perhaps I might mend my self,


Apol. There is no Prince that will thus lightly lose his Subjects; neither
will I as yet lose ^hee. But since thou complainest of thy service and wages,
Apollyons ^attery.
be content to go back; what our Country will afford, I do here promise to
give thee.


Chr. But I have let my self to another, even to the King of Princes, and how
can I with fairness go back with thee?


Apol. Thou have done in this, accorcording to the Proverb, Apollyon (...)
alues Christ's service.
changed a bad for a worse: but it is ordinary for those that have professed
themselves his Servants, after a while to give him the slip, and return again
to me: do thou so to, and all shall be well.


Chr. I have given him my faith, and sworn my Allegiance to him; how then can I
go back from this, and not be hanged as a Traitor?


Apol. Thou did the same to me, Apollyon pretends to be merciful
and yet I am willing to pass by all, if now thou will turn again, and go back.


Chr. What I promised thee was in my nonage; and besides, I count that the
Prince under whose Banner now I stand, is able to absolve me; yea, and to
pardon also what I did as to my comp^ance with thee: and besides, (O thou
destroying Apollyon) to speak truth, I like his Service, his Wages, his
Servants, his Government, his Company, and Country better then thine: and
therefore leave off to persuade me further, I am his Servant, and I will follow
him.


Apol. Consider again when thou art in cool blood, what thou art like to meet
with in the way that thou go. Thou know that for the most part, his
Servants come to an ill end, because they are Apollyon pleads the grievous ends
of Christ: to di Chri (...)
transgressors against me, and my w^ys: How many of them have been put to
shameful deaths! and besides, t^ou countest his service better then mine,
whereas he never came yet from the place where he is, to deliver any that
served him out of our hands: but as for me, how (...)
many times, as all the World very well knows, have I delivered, either by
power ^or fraud, those that have (...) fully served me, from him and thoug^
though taken by t^, and so I will deliver thee.


Chr. His forbearing at present to deliver them, is on purpose to try their
love, whether they will cleave to him to the end: and as for the ^ll end thou
say they come too, that is most glorious in their account: For for present
deliverance, they do not much expect it; for they stay for their Glory, and
then they shall have it, when their Prince comes in his, and the Glory of the
Angels.


Apol. Thou have already been unfaithful in thy service to him, and how do
thou t^ink to receive wages of him?


Chr. Wherein, O Apollyon, have I been unfaithful to him.


Apol. Thou did faint at first Apollyon pleads ^ristians (...) (...)
setting out, when thou wast almost ehoked in the Gulf of Dispond. Thou did
attempt wrong ways to be rid of thy burd^, whereas ^ou should have stayed
till thy Prince had taken it off: Thou did sin^ully sleep and loose thy
choice thing: thou wast also almost persuaded to go back, at the sight of the
(...), (...) when thou talkest of thy (...) and of what thou have heard,
andseen, thou art inwardly desirous of vainglory in all that thou say or
do.


Chr. All this is true, and much more, which thou have left out; but the Prince
whom I serve and honor, is merciful, and ready to forgive: but besides, these
infirmitles possessed me in thy Country, for there I sucked them in, and I have
groaned under them, been sorry for them, and have obtained pardon of my Prince.


Apol. Then Apollyon broke out into Apollyon in a rage ^alls upon Christian.
a grievous rage, saying, I am an Enemy to this Prince: I hate his Person, his
Laws, and People: I am come out on purpose to withstand thee.


Chr. Apollyon beware what you do, for I am in the Kings Highway, the way of
Holiness, therefore take heed to your self.


Apol. Then Apollyon strodled quite over the whole breadth of the way, and
said, I am void. of fear in this matter, prepare thy self to dye, for I swear
thou shall go no further, here will I spill thy soul; and with that, he threw a
flaming Dart a^ his breast, but Christian had a Shield in h^ ha^ with which he
caught it, and so prevented the danger of that. Then Christian wounded in his
understanding, ^ith and conversation.
did Christian draw, for he saw 'twas time to bestir him; and Apollyon as fast
made at him, throwing Darts as thick as Hail; by the which, notwithstanding all
that Christian could do to avoid it, Apollyon wounded him in his head, his hand
and foot; this made Christian give a little back: Apollyon therefore followed
his work amain, and Christian again took courage, and resisted as manfully as
he could. This sore Combat lasted for above half a day, even till Christian was
almost quite spent. For you must know that Christian by reason of his wounds,
must needs grow weaker and weak^r.

Then Apollyon espying his opportunit^, began to gat^er up close to (...), and
wrestling with him, Apollyon (...) down to the ground the Christian.
gave him a dreadful fall; and with that, Christians Sword flew out of his
hand. Then said Apollion, I am sure of thee now; and with that, he had almost
pressed him to death, so that Christian began to despair of life. But as God
would have it, while Apollyon was fetching of his last blow, thereby to make a
full end of this good Man, Christian nimbly reached Christians victory over
Apollyon.
out his hand for his Sword, and caught it, saying, Rejoice not against me, O
mine Enemy! when I fall, I shall arise; and with that, gave him a deadly
thrust, which made him give back, as one that had received his mortal wound:
Christian perceiving that, made at him again, saying, Nay, in all these things
we are more then Conquerours. And with that, Apollyon spread forth his Dragons
wings, and sped Jam. 4. 7.
him away, that Christian for a ^ason saw him no more.

In this Combat no man can imagine, unless he had seen and heard A brief
relation of the Combat by the spectator.
as I did, what yelling, and hideous roaring Apollyon made all the time of the
fight, he spoke like a Dragon: and on the other side, what sighs and groans
brast from Christi^s heart. I never saw him all the while, give so much as one
pleasant look, till he perceived he had wounded Apollyon with his two edged
Sword, then indeed he did smile, and look upward: but 'twas the dreadfullest
^ight that ever I saw.

So when the Battle was over, Christian ` gives God thanks for deliveranc^
Christian sa^d, I will here give thanks to him that has delivered me out of
the mouth of the Lion; to him that did help me against Apollyon: and so he did,
saying,

Great Beelzebub, the Captain of this Fiend,
Designed my ruin; therefore to this end
He sent him harnest out, and he with rage
That Hellish was, did fiercely me Engage:
But blessed Michael helped me, and I
By dint of Sword did quickly make him fly;
Therefore to him let me give lasting praise,
And thank and bless his holy name always.
Then there came to him an hand, with ^ome of the leaves of the Tree of Life,
the which Christian took, and applied to the wounds that he had received in the
Battle, and was healed immediately. He also sat down in that place to eat
Bread, and to drink of the Bottle that was given him a little before; so being
refreshed, he addressed himself to his Journey, with his Christian goes on his
Journey with his Sword drawn in hic ^and.
Sword drawn in his hand, for he said, I know not but some other Enemy may be
at hand. But he met with no other affront from Apollyon, quite through this
Valley.

Now at the end of this Valley, was another, called the Vallev of the Shadow of
Death, and C^ristian must needs go through it, because the way to the
Celestial City lay through the midst of it: Now this Valley is a very solitary
place. The Prophet Jer. 2. 6:
Jeremiah thus describes it, A Wilderness, a Land of deserts, and of Pits, a
Land of drought, and of the shadow of death, a Land that no Man (but a
Christian) passes through, and where no man dwelt.

Now here Christian was worse put to it then in his fight with Apollyon, as by
the sequel you shall see.

I saw then in my Dream, that when Christian was got to the Borders of the
Shadow of Death, there met him two Men, The children of the Spies go back.
Children of them that brought up an evil report of the good Land, making have
to go back: to whom Christian spoke as follows.


Chr. Whither are you going?


Men. They said, Back, back; and would have you to do so too, if either life or
peace is prized by you.


Chr. Why? what is the matter? said Chri^ian.


Men. Matter! said they; we were going that way as you are going, and went as
far as we durst; and indeed w^ were almost past coming back, for had we gone
alittle further, we had not been here to bring the news to thee.


Chr. But what have you met with, said Christian?


Men. Why we were almost in the Valley of the shadow of death, but Ps. 44. 19.
that by good hap we looked before Ps. 107. 10.
us, and saw the danger before we came to it.


Chr. But what have you seen, said Christian?


Men. Seen! Why the Valley it self, which is as dark as pitch; we also saw
there the Hobgoblins, Satyrs, and Dragons of the Pit: we heard also in that
Valley a continual howling and yelling, as of a People under unutterable
misery; who there sat bound in affliction and Irons: and over that Valley hangs
the discouraging Job. 3. 5. chapter 10. 22.
Clouds of confusion, death also does always spread his wings over it: in a
word, it is every whit dr^adful; b^ing utterly without Order.


Chr. Then said Christian, I perceive not yet, by what you have said, but that
Jer. 2. 6.
this is my way to the desired Haven.


Men. Be it thy way, we will not choose it for ours; so they parted, and
Christian went on his way, but still with his Sword drawn in his hand, for fear
lest he should be assaulted.

I saw then in my Dream, so far as Ps. 69. 14.
this vall^y reached, there was on the right hand a very d^ep Ditch; that Ditch
is it into which the blind have led the blind in all Ages, and have both there
miserably perished. Again, behold on the left hand, there was a very dangerous
Quagg, into which, if even a good Man falls, he can find no bottom for his foot
to stand on; Into that Quagg King David once did fall, and had no doubt therein
been smothered, had not He that is able, plucked him out.

The pathway was here also exceeding narrow, and therefore good Christian was
the more put to it; for when he sought in the dark to shun the ditch on the one
hand, he was ready to tip over into the mire on the other; also when he sought
to escape the mirc, without great carefulness he would be ready to fall into
the ditch. Thus he went on, and I heard him here sigh bitterly: for besides the
dangers mentioned above, the pathway was here so dark, that often times when he
lift up his foot to set forward, he knew not where, or upon what he should set
it next.

About the midst of this Valley, I perceived the mouth of Hell to be, and it
^tood also hard by the way side: Now thought Christian, what shall I do? And
ever and anon the flame and smoke would come out in such abundance, with sparks
and hideousnoises, (things that cared not for Christians Sword, as did Apollyon
before) that he was forced to put up his Sword, and betake himself to another
weapon called Ephesians. 6. 18
All-prayer, so he cried in my hearing, Ps. 116. 3.
O Lord I beseech thee deliver my Soul. Thus he went on a great while, yet
still the flames would be reaching toward him: also he heard doleful voices,
and rushings too and fro, so that sometimes he thought he should be torn in
pieces, or trodden down like mire in the Streets. This frightful sight was seen,
and these dreadful noises were heard byhim for several miles together:
Christian put to a stand, but for a while
and coming to a place, where he thought he heard a company of Fiends coming
forward to meet him, he stopped, and began to m^e what he had best to do.
Sometimes he had half a thought to go back. Then again he thought he might be
half way through the Valley; he remembered also how he had already vanquished
many a danger: and that the danger of going back might be much more, then for
to go forward, so he resolved to go on. Yet the Fiends seemed to come nearer
and nearer, but when they were come even almost at him, he cried out with a
most vehement voice, I will walk in the strength of the Lord God; so they gave
back, and came no further.

One thing I would not let slip, I took notice that now poor Christian was so
confounded, that he did not know his own voice: and thus I perceived it: Just
when h^ was come over against the mouth of the burning Pit, one of the wicked
ones got behind him, and stepped up softly to him, and whisperingly suggested
many grievous blasphemies to him, which he Christian made believe that he spoke
blasphemies, when 't was Satan that suggested them into his mind.
verily thought had proceeded from his own mind. This put Christian more to it
than any thing that he met with before, even to think that he should now
blaspheme him that he loved so much before; yet could he have helped it, he
would not have done it: but he had not the discretion neither to stop his ears,
nor to know from whence those blasphemies came.

When Christian had traveled in this disconsolate condition some considerable
time, he thought he heard the voice of a man, as going before him, saying,
Though I walk through Ps. 23. 4.
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill, for thou art with me.

Then was he glad, and that for these reasons:

First, Because he gathered from thence that some who feared God were in this
Valley as well as himself.

Secondly, For that he perceived God was with them, though in that dark and
dismal state; and why not, Job. 9. 10.
thought he, with me, though by reason of the impediment that attends this
place, I cannot perceive it.

Thirdly, For that he hoped (could he over-take them) to have company by and
by. So he went on, and Amos 5. (...). Christian glad at break of day.
called to him that was before, but he knew not what to answer, for that he
thought himself to be alone: And by and by, the day broke; then said Christian,
He has turned the shadow of death into the morning.

Now morning being come, he looked back, not of desire to return, but to see,
by the light of the day, what hazards he had gone through in the dark. So he
saw more perfectly the Ditch that was on the one hand, and the Quag that was on
the other; also how narrow the way was which lay betwixt them both; also now he
saw the Hobgoblins, and Satyrs, and Dragons of the Pit, but all afar off, for
after break of day, they came not nigh; yet they were discovered to him,
according to that which is written, He discovers deep things out of (...),
and brings out to light the shadow of death.

Now was Christian much affected with his deliverance from all the dangers of
his solitary way, which dangers, tho he feared them more before, ^et he saw
them more clearly now, because the light of the day (...) (...) conspicuous to
him; and about (...) ^ime the Sun was rising, and (...) (...) another mercy to
Christian: (...) (...) must note, that tho the first p^t (...) the Valley of
the Shadow of (...) (...) dangerous, yet this (...) (...) which he was yet to
go, (...), (...) (...), far more dangerous: for (...) (...) place where he now
stood, even to the end of the Valley, the way was all along set so full of
(...), Tra^s, Gins, and Nets here, and so full of Pits, Pitfalls, deep holes
and shelvings down there, that Job 29. 3.
had it no^ (...) dark, as it was when he came the first part of the way, (...)
(...) had a thousand souls, they had (...) reason been cast away; but as (...)
said, (...) (...) the Sun was rising. Then said he, His candle shines on my
head, and by his light I go through darkness.

In this light therefore' he came to the end of the Valley. Now I saw in my
Dream, that at the end of this Valley lay blood, bones, ashes, and mangled
bodies of men, even of Pilgrims that had gone this way formerly: And while I
was musing what should be the reason, I espi^d alittle before me a Cave, where
two Giants, Pope and Pagan, dwelt in old time, by whose Power and Tyranny the
Men whose bones, blood, ashes, etc. lay there, were cruelly put to death. But
by this place Christian went without much danger, whereat I somewhat wondered;
but I have learnt since, that Pagan has been dead many a day; and as for the
other, though he be yet alive, he is by reason of age, and also of the many
shrewd brushes that he met with in his younger days, grown so crazy, and stiff
in his joints, that he can now do little more then sit in his Caves mouth,
grinning at Pilgrims as they go by, and biting his nails, because he cannot
come at them.

So I saw that Christian went on his way, yet at the sight of the old Man, that
sat in the mouth of the Cave, he could not tell what to think, specially
because he spoke to him, though he could not go after him; saying, You will
never mend, till more of you be burned: but he held his peace, and set a good
face on^t, and so went by, and caught no hurt. Then sang Christian,

O world of wonders! (I can say no l^ss)
That I should be preserved in that d^stress
That I have met with here! O blessed be
That hand that from it has delivered me!
Dangers in darkness, Devils, Hell and Sin,
Did compassme, while I this V^le was in:
Yea, Snares, and Pits, and Traps, and Nets did lie
My path about, that worthless silly I
Might have been catch^t, int angled, and cast down:
But since I live, let JESUS wear the Crown.
Now as Christian went on his way, he came to a little ascent, which was cast
up on purpose, that Pilgrims might see before them: up there therefore
Christian went, and looking forward, he saw Faithful before him, upon his
Journey. Then said Christian aloud, Ho, ho, So-ho; stay and I will be your
Companion. At that Faithful looked behind him, to whom Christian cried again,
Stay, stay, till I come up to you: But fai^ful answered, No, I am upon my life,
and the Avenger of Blood is behind me. At this Christian was somewhat Christian
overtakes Faithful.
moved, and putting to all his strength, he quickly got up with Faithful, and
did also overrun him, so the last was first. Then did Christian
vain-gloriously smile, because he had gotten the start of his Brother: but not
taking good heed to his feet, he suddenly Christians fall, makes Faithful and
he golovingly together.
stumbled and fell, and could not rise again, until Faithful came up to help
him.

Then I saw in my Dream, they went very lovingly on together; and had sweet
discourse of all things that had happpened to them in their Pilgrimage; and
thus Christian began.


Chr. My honored and well beloved Brother Faithsul, I am glad that I have
overtaken you; and that God has so tempe^ed our spirits, that we can walk as
Companions in this so pleasant (...) part.


Fai. I had thought dear (...), to ^ave had your company quite from our Town,
but you did get the start of me, wherefore I was (...) to come thus much of the
way alone.


Chr. How long d^d y^u (...) in the City of Destruction, (...) you set out ^ter
me on your Pilgrimage?


Fai. Till I could stay no longer; for there was great talk pr^sently after you
was gone out, that our City would in short time with Fire from Heaven be burned
down to the ground. Their talk about the (...) from (...) they came.



Chr. What! Did your Neighbors talk so?


Faith. Yes, ^twas for a while in every bodies mouth.


Chr. What, and did no more of them but you come out to escape the danger?


Faith. Though there was, as I said, a great talk thereabout, yet I do not
think they did firmly believe it. For in the heat of the discourse, I heard
some of them deridingly speak of you, and of your desperate Journey, (for so
they called this your Pilgrimage) but I did believe, and do still, that the end
of our City will be with Fire and Brimstone from above: and therefore I have
made mine escape.


Chr. Did you hear not talk of Neighbor Pliable?


Faith. Yes Christian, I heard that he followed you till he came at the Slough
of Dispond; where, as some said, he fell in; but he would not be known to have
so done: but I am sure he was soundly bedabled with that kind of dirt.


Chr. And what said the Neighbors to him?


Faith. He has since his going back How Pliable was accounted of when he got
home.
been had greatly in derision, and that among all sorts of People: some do mock
and despise him, and scarce will any set him on work. He is now seven times
worse then if he had never gone out of the City.


Chr. But why should they be so set against him, since they also despise the
way that he forsook?


Faith. Oh, they say, Hang him, he is Taurn-Coat, he was not true to his
profession I think God has stired up even his Enemies to hiss at him, and make
him a Proverb, because he Jer. 29. 18 19.
has forsaken the way.


Chr. Had you no talk with him before you came out?


Faith. I met him once in the Streets, but he leered away on the other side, as
one ashamed of what he had done; so I spoke not to him.


Chr. Well, at my first setting out, The Dog and Sow.
I had hopes of that Man; but now I fear he will perish in the over thr^w of
the City, for it is happened to him according to the true Proverb, The Dog is
turned to his Vomit again, and the Sow that was Washed to her wallowing in the
mirc.


Faith. They are my fears of him too: But who can hinder that which will be?

Well Neighbor Faithful, said Christian, let us leave him; and talk of things
that more immediately concern our selves. Tell me now, what you have met with
in the way as you came; for I know you have met with some things, or else it
may be writ for a wonder.


Faith. I escaped the Slough that I perceive you fell into, and got up to the
Gate without that danger; only Faithful assaulted by Wanton.
I met with one whose name was Wanton, that had like to have done me a mischief.


Chr. 'Twas well you escaped her Net; Joseph was hard put to it by her, and he
escaped her as you did, but it had like to have cost him his life. But what did
she do to you?


Faith. You cannot think (but that you know something) what a flattering tongue
she had, she lay at me hard to turn aside with her, promising me all manner of
content.


Chr. Nay, she did not promise you the content of a good conscience.


Faith. You know what I mean, all carnal and fleshly content.


Chr. Thank God you have escaped her: The Pro: (...) 14.
abhorred of the Lord shall fall into her Ditch.


Faith. Nay, I know not whether I did wholly escape her, or no.


Chr. Why, I tro you did not consent to her de^res?


Faith. No, not to defile my self; for I remembered an old writing that Pre. 5.
5.
I had seen, which says, Her steps Job 3^. 1.
take hold of Hell. So I shut mine eyes, because I would not be bewitched with
her looks: then she railed on me, and I went my way.


Chr. Did you meet with no other as-sau^ He is (...) by Adam the first.
as you came?


Faith. When I came to the foot of the Hill called Di^iculty, I met with a very
aged Man, who asked me, What I was, and whither bound? I told him, That I was a
Pilgrim, going to the Coele^ C^ty: Then said the old Man, T^ou look like an
honest fellow; W^le thou be co^nt to dwell with me, for the wages that I shall
give thee? Then I asked him his name, and where he dwelt? He said his name was
Adam the first, and do dwell in the Town of Ephesians. 4. 22.
^eceit. I asked him then, What was his work? and what the wages that he would
give? He told me, That his work was many delights; and his wages, that I should
be his Heir at last. I further asked him, What House he kept, and what other
Servants he had? so he told me, That his House was maintained with all the
dainties in the world, and that his Servants were those of his own begetting.
Then I asked, If he had any children? He said that he had but three Daughters,
The 1 John 216.
lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, and that I
should marry them all, if I would. Then I asked, How long time he would have me
live with him? And he told me, As long as he lived himself.


Chr. Well, and what conclusion came the Old Man, and you to, at last?


Faith. Why, at first I found my self somewhat inclinable to go with the Man,
for I thought he spoke very fair; But look^ng in his foreh^d as I talked with
him, I saw there written, Put off the old Man with his deeds.


Chr. And how then?


Faith. Then it came burning hot into my mind, whatever he said, and however he
flattered, when he got me home to his House, he would sell me for a Slave. So I
bid him sorbear to talk, for I would not come near the door of his House. Then
he reviled me, and told me that he would send such a on^ after me, that should
make my way bitter to my soul: So I turned to go away from him: But just as I
turned my self to go thence, I felt him take hold of my flesh, and give me such
a deadly twitch back, that I thought he had pulled part of me after himself;
T^is made me cry, Romans 7. 24.
O wret^d Man! So I went on my way up the Hill.

Now when I had got about half way up, I looked behind me, and saw one coming
after me, swift as the wind; so he overtook me just about the place where the
Settle stands.


Chr. Just there, said Christian, d^d I sit down to rest me; but being overcome
with sleep, I there lost this Roll out of my bosom.


Faith. But good Brother here me out: So soon as the Man over-took me, he was
but a word and a blow: for down he knocked me, and laid me for dead. But when I
was a little come to my self again, I asked him wherefore he served me so? he
said, Because of my secret inclining to Adam the first; and with that, he
struck me another deadly blow on the breast, and beat me down backward, so I lay
at his foot as dead as before. So when I came to my self again, I cried him
mercy; but he said, I know not to show mercy, and with that knocked me down
again He had doubtless made a hand of me, but that one came by, and bid him
forbear.


Chr. Who was that, that bid him forbear?


Faith. I did not know him at first, but as he went by, I perceived the holes
in his hands, and his side; then I concluded that he was our lord So I went up
the Hill.


Chr. That Man that overtook you, was Moses, The temper of Moses.
he spares none, neither knows he how to show mercy to those tha^ transgress
his Law.


Faith. I know it very well, it was not the first time that he has met with me.
It Was he that came to me when I dwelt securely at home, and that told me, He
would burn my House over my head, if I staid there.


Chr. But did not you see the House that stood there on the top of that Hil^ on
the side of which Moses met you?


Faith. Yes, and the Lions too, before I came at it; but for the Lions, I think
they were a sleep, for it was about Noon; and because I had so much of the day
before me, I passed by the Porter, and came down the Hill.


Chr. He told (...) indeed that he saw you go by, but I wish you had called at
the House; for they would have showed you so many (...), that you would scarce
(...) forgot them to the day of your death. But pray tell me, did you meet no
body (...) the Valley of Humility?


Faith. (...), I (...) with one Discontent, Faithful (...) (...) Discontent.
who would willingly have persuaded me to go back again with (...): his reason
was, (...) that the (...) was (...) without Honor; he told me moreover, That
there to go, was the way to disobey all my (...), as Pride, Arogancy,
Self-Conceit, worldly Glory, with others, who he knew, as he said, would be
very much offended, if I made such a Fool of my self, as to wade through this
Valley.


Chr. Well, and how did you answer him? (...) (...) (...) Discontent



Faith. I told him, That although all these that he named might claim kindred
(...) me, and that rightly, (for (...) they were my Relations, according to the
(...)) yet since (...) came a Pilgrim, they have disowned me, as I also have
rejected them; and therefore they were to me now, no more then if they had
never been of my Lineage; I told him moreover, That as to this Valley, he had
quite miss-represented the thing: for before Honor is Humility, and a haughty
spirit before a fall. Therefore said I, I had rather go through this (...) to
the Honor that was so accounted by the wisest, then choose that which he
esteemed most worth our asfections.


Chr. Met you with nothing else in He is (...) (...) (...)
that Valley?


Faith. Yes, I met with Shame; But of all the Men that I met (...) in my
Pilgrimage, he I think bears the wrong name: the other would be said nay, after
after a little argumentation (and some what else) but this bold faced (...),
would never have done


Chr. Why, what did he say to you?


Faith. What! why he objected against Religion it self; he said it was a
pitiful low (...) business for a Man to mind Religion; he said that a tender
conscience was an un-manly thing, and that for a Man to watch over his words
and ways, so as to tie up himself from that hectoring liberty, that the brave
spirits of the times accustom themselves unto, would make me the Ridicule of
the 1 Cor. 1. 26. cha. (...). 18.
times. He ob ected also, that but few of the Mighty, Rich, or Wise, were ever
of my (...); nor any of them, before they were persuaded to be Phi. 3. 7, 8
Fools, and to be of a voluntary fondness, to venture the loss of (...), for
(...) body else knows what. He moreover objected the base and low estate and
condition of (...) that were chiefly the Pilgrims of the (...); in which they
lived, (...) their ignorance, and want of understanding in all natural Science.
Yea, he did hold me to it at (...) (...) (...), about a great (...) (...) (...)
(...) then here I relate; as, that it was a shame to sit whining and mourning
(...) a Sermon, and a (...) to come sighing and (...) home. That it was a shame
to ask my (...) forgiveness for petty faults, or to make restitution where I
had taken from any: He said also that Religion made a man grow strange to the
great, because of a few vices (which he called by finer names) and made him own
and respect the base, because of the same Religious fraternity. And is not
this, said he, a shame?


Chr. And what (...) you say to him?


Faith. Say! I could not tell what to say at the first. Yea, he put me so to
it, that my blood came up in my face, even this Shame (...) it up, and had
almost beat me quite off. But at last I began to consider, That that which is
(...) esteemed among Men, is had in abomination with God. And I thought again,
This Shame tells me what men are, but it tells me nothing what God, or the word
of God is. And I thought moreover, That at the day of docm, we shall not be
doomed to death or life, according to the (...) spirits of the world; but
according to the Wisdom and Law of the Highest. Therefore thought I, what God
fays, is best, is best, though all the Men in the world are against it. Seeing
then, that God prefers his (...), seeing God prefers a tender Conscience,
seeing they that make themselves Fools for the Kingdom of Heaven, are wisest;
and that the poor that loves Christ, is richer then the (...) Man in the world
that hates him; Shame depa^t, thou art an ^y to my Salvation: shall I entertain
thee against my Sovereign Lord? How then shall I look him in the face at his
coming? Should I Mar. 8. 8.
now be (...) of his wavs and Servants, how can I expect the blessing? But
indeed this Shame was a (...) (...), I could scarc^ shake him out of my
company; yea, he would be haunt^g of me, and continually (...) me in the car,
with some one or other of the (...) that a^nd R^ion: but at last I told him,
'Twas but in vain to attempt further in th^s business; for those things that he
disdained, in those did I see most glory: And so at last I got past this
importunate one.

The trials that those men do meet withal
That a^e obediont to the Heavenly call,
Are manifold, and suited (...) the flesh,
And come, and come, and come again afresh;
That now, or sometime else, we by them may
Be taken, overcome, and cast away.
O let the Pilgrims, let the Pilgrims then,
Be vigilant, and quit themselves like men.

Chr. I am glad, my Brother, that thou did withstand this Villain so bravely;
for of all, as thou say, I think he has the wrong name: for he is so bold as
to follow us in the Streets, and t^ attempt to put us to shame before all men;
that is, to make us ashamed of that which is good: but if he was not himself
audacious, he would never at empt to do as he does, but let us still resist
him: for notwithstanding all his Bravadoes, he promoteth the Fool, and none
else. The Wise shall Inherit Glory, said Solomon, but shame shall be the
promotion Pro 3 35:
of Fools.


Faith. I think we must cry to him for help against shame, that would have us
be valtant for the Truth upon the Earth.


Chr. Iou say true. But did you meet no body else in that Valley?


Faith. No not I, for I had Sunshine all the rest of the way, through that,
and also through the Valley of the shadow of death.


Chr. 'Twas well for you, I am sure it ^ed f^r otherwise with me. I had for a
long s^ason, as soon almost as I entered into that Valley, a dreadful Combat
with that foul and Apollyon: Yea, I thought verily he would have killed me;
especially when he got me down, and crushed me under him, as if he would have
crushed me to pieces. For as he threw me, my Sword flew out of my hand; nay he
told me, He was sure of me: but I crie^ to God, and he heard me, and delivered
me out of all my troubles. Then I entered into the Val^ey of the shadow of
death, and had no light for almost half the way through it. I thought I should
a been killed there, over, and over; But at last, day brake, and the Sun rise,
and I went through that which was behind with far more ease and q^iet

Moreover, I saw in my Dream, that as they went on, Faithful, as he chanced to
look on one side, saw a Man whose name is Talkative, walking at a distance
besides them, (for in this place, there was room enough Talkative described.
for them all to walk) He was a tall Man, and something more comely at a
distance then at hand. To this Man, Faithful addressed himself in this manner.


Faith. Friend, Whither away? Are you going to the Heavenly Country?


Talk. I am going to that same place.


Faith. That is well: Then I hope we may have your good Company.


Talk. With a very good will, will I be your Companion.


Faith. Come on then, and ^et us go Faithful and Talkative enter discourse.
together, and let us spend our time in discoursing of things that are
profitable.


Talk To talk of things that ar^ good, to me is very acceptable, wi^ you, or
with any other; and I am glad that I have met with those that incline to so
good a work. For to speak the truth, there are but few that care thus to spend
their time (as they are in their travels) but choose much rather to be speaking
of things to no profit, and this has Talkaives (...) of bad discourse.
been a trouble to me.


Faith. That is indeed a thing to be l^mented, for what things so wort by of
the use of the tongue and mouth of men on E^th, as are the things of the God of
^ven?


Talk. I like you wonderful well, for your saying is full of conviction; and I
will add, What thing so pleasant, and what so profitable, as to talk of the
things of God?

What things so pleasant? (that is, if a man has any delight in things that
are wonderful) for instance: If a man does delight to talk of the History or
the Mystery of things, or if a man does love to talk of Miracles, Wonders or
Signs, wh^re shall he find things Recorded so delightful, and so sweetly
penned, as in the holy Scripture?


Faith. That Is true: but to be profited by such things in our talk, should be
that which we design.


Talk. That is it that I said: for to talk of such things is most pro^itable,
for by so doing, a Man may get knowledge of many things, as of the vanity of
earthly things, and the be fit of things above: (thus in general) but more
particularly, By this a man may learn the necessity of the Newbirth, the
insufficiency of our works, the need of Christ's righteousness, etc. Talkatives
sine discourse.
Besides, by this a man may learn by talk, what it is to repent, to believe, to
pray, to suffer, or the like: by this also a Man may learn what are the great
promises and consolations of the Gospel, to his own comfort. Further, by this a
Man may learn to refute false opinions, to vindicate the truth, and also to
instruct the ignorant.


Faith. All this is true, and glad am I to hear these things from you.


Talk. Alas! the want of this is the cause that so few understand the need of
faith, and the necessity of a work of Grace in their Soul, in order to eternal
life: but ignorantly live in the works of the Law, by which a man can by no
means obtain the Kingdom of Heaven.


Faith. But by your leave, Heavenly knowledge of these, is the gift of God; no
man attaineth to them by humane industry, or only by the talk of them.


Talk. All this I know very well, for a man can receive nothing except it be
given him from Heaven; all is of Grace, not of works: I could give you an
hundred Scriptures for O brave Talkative
the confirmation of this


Faith. Well then, said Faithful, what is that one thing, that we shall at this
time found our discourse upon?


Talk. What you will: I will talk of O brave Talkative
things Heavenly, or things Prophanes; things Moral, or things Evang (...);
things Sacred, or things Prophanes; things past, or things to come; thing
foreign, or things at home; things more Essential, or things Circumstantial:
provided that all be done to our profit.


Faith. Now did Faith^ul begin to wonder; and stepping to Christian, ( for he
walked all this while by himse^,) he Faithful (...) by Talkative.
said to him, ( but softly) What a brave Companion have we got! Surely this man
will make a very excellen^ Pilgrim.


Chr. At this Christian modestly Christian makes a discovery (...) Talkative,
telling Faithful who he was.
smiled, and said, This man with whom you are so taken, will (...) with this
tongue of his, twenty of them that know him not.


Faith: Do you know him then?


Chr. Know him! Yes, better th^n he knows himself.


Faith. Pray what is he?


Chr. His name is Talkative, he dwells in our Town; I wonder that you should
be a stranger to him, only I consider that our Town is large.


Faith. Whose Son is he? And whereabout does he dwell?


Chr. He is the Son of one Saywell, he dwelt in Prating-row; and he i^ known of
all that are acquainted with him, by the name of Talkative in Prating-row: and
notwithstanding his fine tongue, he is but a sorry fellow.


Faith. Well, he (...) to be a very pretty man.


Chr. That is, to them that have not through acquaintance with him, for he is
b^st abroad, n^ar home he is ugly (...): your saying, That he is a (...),
brings to my mind what I have observ^d in the work of the Painter, whose
Pictures shows best at a distance; but very near, more unpleasing.


Faith. But I am reddy to think (...) do but jest, because you smiled.


Chr. God-forbid that I should fest, (though I smiled) in this matter, or that
I should accuse any falsely; I will give you a further discovery of him: This
man is for any company, and for any talk; as he talks now with you, so will
he ^alk when he is on the Ale-bench: and the more drink he has in his crown,
the more of these things he has in his mouth: Religion has no place in his
heart, or house, or conversation; all he has, lies in his tongue, and his
Religion is to make a noise therewith.


Faith Say you so! Then am I in this man greatly d^eived


Chr Deceived! you may be sure Mat. 23. 1 Cor. 4. 20.
of it. Remember the Proverb, They say and do not: but the Kingdom of Talkative
talks, but does not.
God is not in word, but in power. He ^alketh of Prayer, of Repentance, of
Faith, and of the New birth: but he knows but only to talk of them. I have been
in his Family, and have observed him both at home and abroad; and I know what I
say of him His house is empty o^ Religion.
is the truth. His house is as empty of Religion, as the white of an Egg is of
savor. There is there, neither Prayer, nor sign of Repentance for sin: Yea,
the bruit in his kind serves God far better then he. He is the very stain,
reproach, and shame of Religion to all that know him; it can He is a ^air to
Religion.
hardly have a good word in all that end of the Town where he dwells, through
him. Thus say the common Romans 2. 24. 25.
People that know him, A Saint abroad, The proverb that goes of him
and a Devil at home: His poor Family finds it so, he is such a churl, such a
railer at, and so unreasonable with his Servants, that they neither know how to
do for, or speak to him. Men that have any dealings with him, say it is better
to deal with a Men shun to deal with him.
Turk then with him, for sairer dealing they shall have at their hands. This
Talkative, if it be possible, will go beyond them, defraud, beguile, and
overreach them. Besides, he brings up his Sons to follow his stops; and if he
finds in any of them a foolish timorousness (for so he calls the first
appearance of a tender conscience) he calls them fools and blockheads; and by
no means will employ them in much, or speak to their commendations before
others. For my part I am of opinion, that he has by his wicked life caused many
to stumble and fall; and will be, if God prevent not, the ruin of many more.


Faith. Well, my Brother, I (...) bound to believe you; not only because you
say you know him, but also because like a Christian, you make your reports of
men. For I cannot think that you speak these things of ill will, but because it
is even so as you say.


Chr. Had I known him no more than you, I might perhaps have thought of him as
at the first you did: Yea, had he received this report at their hands only that
are enemies to Religion, I should have thought it had been a slander: (A Lot
that often falls from bad men's mouths upon good men's Names and Professions:).
But all these things, yea and a great man^ more as bad, of my own knowledge I
can prove him guilty of. Besides, good men are ashamed of him, they can neither
call him Brother nor Friend; the very naming of him among them, makes them
blush, if they know him.


Fa. Well, I see that Saying and Doing are two things, and hereafter I shall
better observe this distinction.


Chr. They are two things indeed, and are as diverse as are the Soul T^
Car-ka^s of Religion.
and the Body: For as the Body without the Soul, is but a dead Carcass; so,
Saying, if it be alone, is but a dead Carcass also. The Soul of Religion is the
practick part: Pure Religion and undefiled, before God and the Jam. 1. 27. see
(...). 2, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Father, is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspoted from the World. This Talkative is not aware of, he
thinks that bearing and saying will make a good Christian, and thus he
deceives his own Soul. Hearing is but as the sowing of the Seed; talking is
not sufficient to prove that fruit is indeed in the heart and life; and let us
assure our selves, that at the day of Doom, men shall be judged according to
their fruits. It will See Mat. 13. and chapter 25.
not be said then, Did you believe? but, Were you Doers, or Talkers only? and
accordingly shall they be judged. The end of the World is compared to our
Harvest, and you know m^n at Harvest regard nothing but Fruit. Not that any
thing can be accepted that is not of Faith: But I speak this, to show you how
insignificant the profession of Talkative, will be at that day.


Fa. This brings to my mind that of Levit. 11.
Moses, by which he describes the beast Deuteronomy. 14.
that is clean. He is such an one that parts the Hoof, and cheweth the (...):
Not that parts the Hoof only, (...) that cheweth the Cudonly. The Hare
cheweth the Cud, but yet is unclean, because Faithful convinced of the bad^ of
Tal^etive.
he parts not the Hoof. And this truly resembles Talkative; he cheweth the
Cud, he seeks knowledge, he cheweth upon the Word, but he divides not the
Hoof, he parts not with the way of sinners; but as the Hare, retains the
foot of a Dog, or Bear, and therefore he is unclean.


Chr. You have spoken, for ought I know, the true Gospel sense of those Texts,
and I will add an other thing. Paul calls some men, yea and those great
Talkers too, sounding 1 Cor. 13. 1. 2, 3. (...). 14. 7
Brass, and Tinckling Cymbals; that is, as he Expounds them in another Talka^
like (...) things that (...) (...) (...).
place, Thin^s without life, giving sound. Things without life, that is,
without the true Faith and Grace of the Gospel; and consequently, things that
s^all never be placed in the Kingdom of Heaven among those that are the
Ch^ldren of life: Though their sound by their talk, be as if it were the Tongue
or voice of an Angel.


Fait. Well, I was not so fond of his Company as first, but I am as sick of it
now. What shall we do to be rid of him?


Chr. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, and you shall find that he will soon
be sick of your Company too, except God shall touch his heart and turn it.


Fait. What would you have me to do?


Chr. Why, go to him, and enter into some serious discourse about the power of
Religion: And ask him plainly (when he has approved of it, for that he will)
whether this thing be set up in his Heart, House or Conversation.


Fait. Then Faithful stepped forward again, and said to Talkative: Come, what
cheer? how is it now?


Talk. Thank you, Well. I thought we should have had a great deal of Talk by
this time.


Fait. Well, if you will, we will fall to it now; and since you left it with me
to state the question, let be this: How does the saving grace of God discover
it self, when it is in the heart of man?


Talk. I perceive then that our talk must be about the power of things; Well,
it is a very good question, and Talkatives ^alfe discovery of a work of grace.
I shall be willing to answer you. And take my answer in brief thus. First,
Where the Grace of God is in the heart, it causes there a great outcry
against sin. Secondly


Fait. Nay hold, let us consider of o^e at once: I think you should rather say,
It shows it self by inclining the So^l to abhor its sin.


Talk. Why, what diff^nce is there between crying out against and abhoring of
sin?


Fait. O^! a great deal; a man may cry out against sin, of policy; but he
c^nnot To c^y (...) agai^t (...), no si^n of Grace
abhor it, but by virtue of a G^dly antipathy against it: I have (...) (...)
cry out against sin in the (...) (...) (...) yet can abide it well enough in
(...) (...) (...), and house, and conversation. Joseph's Mistress cried out with
aloud voice, as if she had been very holy; but she would willingly,
notwithstanding that, have committed uncleanness with him. Some cry out against
sin, even as the Mother cries out against (...) (...) in her lap, when she
calls it (...) (...) naughty Girl, and then falls to hugging and kissing it.


Talk. You lie at the catch, I perceive.


Fait. No not I, I am only f^r seting things right. But what is the second
thing whereby you would prove a discovery of a work of grac: in the heart?


Talk. Great knowled^e of Gospel Mysteries. Great knowledge no sign of grace.



Fai^. This sign should have been first, but first or l^st, it is also false;
for, Knowledge, great knowledge, may be obtained 1 Cor. 13.
in the mysteries of the Gospel, and yet no work of grace in the Soul. Yea, if
a man have all knowledge, he may yet be nothing, and so consequently be no
child of God. When Christ said, Do you know all th^se things? And the Disciples
had a^swered, Yes: He adds, Blessed ar^ ve if vedo them. He does not lay
(...) (...) (...) in the knowing of them, but in (...) (...) (...) them. For
there is a know^ (...) (...) attended with doing: He (...) (...) his Masters
will, and (...) (...). A man may know ^ike an (...) (...) (...) (...) be no
Christian; therefore you sign is not true. Indeed to know, is a (...) that
pleases Talkers and Boasters; but to do, is that which pleases God. Not that
the heart can be good without knowledge, for without that the heart is naught:
There is therefore knowledge, Knowledge and knowledge.
and knowledge. Knowledge that rests in the bare speculation of things, and
knowled^e that is accompanied with the grace of ^aith and love, which puts a
(...) upon doing even the will of God from the heart: the first of these will
serve the Talker, but without the other the true Christian is not content. Give
me understanding, and I shall keep thy (...) know ledge attended wit^ endeavors
Law, yea I shall observe it with, my whole heart, Psalm. 119. 34.


Talk. You lie at the catch again, this is not for edification.


Fait. Well, if you please propound another sign how this work of grace
discovers it self where it is.


Talk. Not I, for I see we shall not agree.


Fait. Well, if you will not, will you give me leave to do it?


Talk. You may use your Liberty.


Fait. A work of grace in the soul di^covereth One good sign of gr^e (...)
it self, either to him that has it, or to standers by.

To him that has it, thus. It gives Joh. 16. 8.
him conviction of sin, especially of the R^m. 7. 24
Joh. 16. 9
defilement of his nature, and the sin of Mar. 16 16
unbelief, (for the sake of which he is Ps 38 18
sure to be damned, if he finds not Jer. 31. 19
mercy at Gods hand by faith in Jesus Call 2. 15.
Act 4. 12.
Christ.) T^is sight and sense of things Mat. 5 6.
workers in hi^ sorrow and shame for sin; Rev 21. 6.
he finds moreover revealed in hi^ the Savior of the World, and the absolute
necessity of closing with him for life, at the which he finds hungrings and
thirstings after him, to which h^grings, etc. the promise is made N^ according
to the strength or weakness of his faith in his Savior, so is his joy and
peace, so is his love to holiness, so are his desires to know him more, and
also to serve him in this World. But though I say it discovers it self thus
unto him; yet it is but seldom that he is able to conclude that this is a work
of Grace, because his corruptions now, and his abused reason, makes his mind to
mis-judge in this matter; therefore in him that has this work, there is
required a very sound Judgment, before he can with steddiness ^onclude that
this is a work of Grace.

To others it is thus discovered. To. 10. 1^.


(...). By an experimental confession of Phi. 1. 27.
Mat. 5. 9.
his Faith in Christ. 2. By (...) life answerable Jo. 24. 15.
to that confession, to wit, a life of Ps. 50. 23.
holiness; heart-holiness, family-holiness Job. 42. (...). 6.
(if he has a Family) and by Conversation-holiness Ezekiel. 29. 43.
in the World: which in the general teaches him, inwardly to abhor his Sin,
and himself for that (...), to suppress it in his Family, and to promote
holiness in the World; ^ot by talk only, as an Hypocrite or Talkative Person
may do: but by a practical Subjection in (...), and Love, to the power of the
word: And now Sir, as to this brief description of the work of Grace, and also
the discovery of it, if you have ou^t to object, object: if not, then give me
leave to propound to you a second question.


Talk. Nay, my part is not now to Another good sign of Grace.
object, but to hear, let me therefore have your second question.


Faith. It is this, Do you experience the first part of this description of it?
and does your life and conversation testify the same? or stands your
Religion in Word or in Tongue, and not in Deed and Truth? pray, if you incline
to answer me in this, say no more then you know the God above will say Amen to;
and also, nothing but what your Conscience can justify ^ou in. For, not he
that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commen^ death. Besides,
to say I am thus, and thus, when my Conversation, and all Talkative not pleased
with Faithfuls question.
my Neighbors tell me, I lie, is great wickedness.


Talk. Then Talkative at first began to blush, but recovering himself, Thus he
replied, You come now to Experience, to Conscience, and God: and to appeals to
him for justification of what is spoken: This kind of discourse I did not
expect, nor am I disposed to give an answer to such questions, because, I count
not my self bound thereto, unless you take upon you to be a Catechizer; and,
though you should so do, yet I may refuse to make you my Judge: But I pray will
you tell me, why you ask me such questions?


Faith. Because I saw you forward to The reasons why Faithful put to him that
question. Faithfuls plain dealing to Talkative.
talk, and because I knew not that you had ought else but notion. Besides, to
tell you all the Truth, I have heard of you, that you are a Man whose Religion
lies in talk, and that your Conversation gives this your Mouth-profession, the
lie. They say You are a spot among Christians, and that Religion fares the
worse for your ungodly conversation, that some already have stumbled at your
wicked ways, and that more are in danger of being destroyed thereby; your
Religion, and an Alehouse, and Covetousness, and uncleanness, and swearing,
and lying, and vain Company-keeping; etc. will stand together The proverb is
true of you, which is said of a Whore; to wit, That she is a shame to all
Women; so you are ashame to all Professors


Talk. Since you a^e ready to take Talkative flings a^ from Faithful.
up reports, and to judge so rashlas you do; I cannot but conclude you are some
peevish, or melancholy Man, not fit to be discou^sed with; and so adieu.


Chr. Then came up C^ristian, and said to his Brother, I told you how it would
happen, your words and his lusts could not agree; he had rather leave your
company, then reform his life: but he is gone as I said, let him go; the loss
is no man's but A g^od ri^nce
his own, he has saved us the trouble of going from him; for (...) continuing,
as I suppose he will do, as he is, he would have been but a blot in our
Company: besides, the Apostle says, From such withdraw thy self.


Faith. But I am glad we had this little discourse with him, it may happen that
he will think of it again; however, I have deals plainly with him; and so am
clear of his blood, if he perishes.


C^r You did well to talk so plainly to him as you did, there is but little of
this faithful dealing with men now a days; and that makes Religion so stink in
the nostrills of many, as it does: for they are these Talkative Fools, whose
Religion is only in word, and are debauched and vain in their Conversation,
that (being so much admitted into the Fellowship of the Godly) do stumble the
World, blemish Christianity, and grieve the Sincere. I wish that all Men would
deal with such, as you have done, then should they either be made more
conformable to Religion, or the company of Saints would be too hot for them.

How Talkative at first lifts up his Plumes!
How bravely does he speak! how he presumes
To drive down all before him! but so soon
As Faithful talks of Heart-work, like the Moon
That Is past the full, into the wain he (...)
And so (...), (...) he that Heart work k^ows.
Thus they went on talking of what they had seen by the way; and so made that
way easy, which would otherwise, no doubt, have been tedious to them: for now
they went through a Wilderness.

Then I saw in my Dream, that when they were got out of the Wilderness, they
presently saw a Town before them, and the name of that Town is Vanity; and at
the Town there is a ^air kept, called VanityFair: It is kept all the Year long,
it bears the name of Vanity Fair, because the Town where it is kept, is lighter
then Vanity; and also, because Isa 40. 17 Eccl. 1. ch^p. 2. 11 17.
all that is there sold, or that comes thither, is Vanity. As is the saying of
the wise, All that comes is vanity.

This Fair is no new erected business, but a thing of Ancient standing; I will
show you the original of it.

Almost five thousand years agone, there were Pilgrims walking The Antiquity of
this Fair.
to the Celestial City, as these two honest persons are; and (...), Apollyon,
and Legion, with their Companions, perceiving by the path that the Pilgrims
made, that their way to the City lay through this Town of Vanity, they
contrived, here to set up a Fair; a Fair wherein should be sold of all ^orts of
Va^ty, and that it should last all the year long. Therefore at this Fair are
The Merchandise o^ this Fair.
all such Merchandise sold, As Houses, Lands, Trades, Places, Honors,
Preferments, Titles, Countries, Kingdoms, Lusts, Pleasures and Delights of all
sorts, as Whores, Bauds, Wives, Husbands, Children, Masters, Servants, Lives,
Blood, Bodies, Souls, Silver, Gold, Pearls, p^ecious Stones, and what not.

And moreover, at this Fair there is at all times to be seen Juglings, chea^,
Games, Plays, Fools, Apes, Knaves, and Rogues, and that of all sorts.

Here are to be seen, and that for nothing, Thefts, Murders, Adultries,
False-swearers, and that of a blood-red color.

And as in others fairs of less moment, there are the several Rows and Streets,
under their proper names, where such and such Wares are vended: So here
likewise, you have the proper Places, Rows, Streets, ( viz. Countries, and
Kingdoms,) where the Wares of this Fair are ^oonest to be found: Here is the
Britain ^he Streets of this fair
^ow, the French Row, the Itali^ Row, the Spanish Row, the German Row, where
several sorts of Vanities are to be sold. But as in other fairs some one
Commodity is as the chief of all the fair, so the Ware of Rome and her
Merchandise is greatly promoted in this fair: Only our English Nation, with
some others, have taken a d^slike thereat.

Now, as I said, the way to the 1 Cor. 5. 10. Christ went t^rough this fair.
Caelestial City lies just through this Town, where this lusty Fair is kept; and
he that will go to the City, and yet not go through this Town, must n^ds go out
of the World. The Prin^e of Princes himself, when here, went through this Town
to his own Country, and that upon a Fai^-day too: Yea, and as I think, it was
^eelzebub M^t. 4. 8.
the chief Lord of this Fair, Luke 4, 5. 6, 7.
that invited him to buy of his Va^; yea, would have made him Lord of the Fair,
would he but have done him Reverence as he went through the Town. Yea, because
he was such a person of Honor, Reelzebub had him from Street to Street, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the World in a little time, that he might, if
possible, alure that Blessed One, to cheapen and buy some of his Christ bought
nothing in this fair.
Vanities. But he had no mind to the Merchandise, and therefore left the Town,
without laying out so much as one Farthing upon these Vanities. This Fair
therefore is an Ancient thing, of long standing, and a very great Fair.

Now these Pilgrims, as I said, must The Pilgrims enter the fair
needs go through this fair: Well, so they did; but behold, even as they entered
into the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, and the Town it self as
it The fair in a hubbub about them
were in a Hubbub about them; and that for several reasons: For,

First, The Pilgrims were clothed with such kind of Rai^ent, as was The first
cause of the (...).
diverse from the Rai^ent of any that Traded in that fair. The people therefore
of the fair made a great gazing upon them: Some said they were Fools, some they
were Bedlams, and some they are Outlandish-men.

Secondly, And as they wondered 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8.
at their Apparel, so they did likewise 2d Cause of the hubbub.
at their Speech, for few could understand what they said; they naturally spoke
the Language of Can^an, but they that kept the fair, were the men of this
World: So that from one end of the fair to the other, they seemed Barbarians
each to the other.

Thirdly, But that which did not a little amuse the Merchandizers, was, that
these Pilgrims set very light by all their Wares, they cared not, so much as to
look upon them: and if they called upon them to buy, they would put their
fingers in their ears, and cry, Turn away mine eyes from Psalm. 119. 37.
beholding vanity; and look upwards, signifying that their Trade and Traf^ick
Phil. 3. 19. 20.
was in Heaven.

One chanced mockingly, beholding the carriages of the men, to say unto them,
What will ye buy? but they, looking gravely upon him, said, We buy the Truth.
At that, there was Pr. 23, 2^,
an occasion taken to despise the men the more; some mocking, some ^aunting,
They are mocked.
some speaking reproachfully, and some calling upon others to smite them. At
last things came to an hubbub (...) (...) (...) a (...).
and great stir in the fair, in so much that all order was confounded. Now was
word pr^sently brought to the great one of the fair, who quickly came down, and
deputed some of his most trusty friends to take these men into examination,
about whom They are examined.
the fair was almost overturned. So the men were brought to examination; and
they that sat upon them, asked them whence they came, whether they went, and
what they did there in such an unusual Garb? The They te^t who they are and
whence they came.
men told them, that they were Pilgri^s and Strangers in the World, and that
they were going to their own Country, which was the Heavenly Jerusalem; and
that they had giv^n none occasion to the men of the Town, nor yet to the
Merchandizers, thus to abuse them, and to let them in their Journey. Except it
was, for that, when one asked them what they would buy, they said they would
buy the Truth. But they that were They are not believed.
appointed to examine them, did not believe them to be any other then Bedlams
and Mad, or else such as came to put all things into a confusion in the fair.
Therefore they took them and beat them, and besmeared them They are put in the
Cage.
with dirt, and then put them into the Cage, that they might be made a
Sp^ctacle to all the men of the fair. There therefore they lay for some time,
and were made the objects of any man's sport, or malice, or revenge. Their
be^aviour in the Cage.
The great one of the fair laughing still at all that befell them. But the men
being patient, and not rendering railing for railing, but contrary wise
blessing, and gi^ng good words for bad, and kin (...) for injuries done: Some
(...) in the fair that were more (...), (...) less The men of the fair do fall
out among them selves about these two men.
prejudiced then the ^est, b^gan to check and blame the base^ ^rt for their
continual abuses done (...) them to the men: They therefore in angry manner let
fly at them again, counting them as bad as the men (...) the Cage, and telling
them that ^ey seemed confederates, and should be made partakers of their
misfortun^s. The other replied, That for ought they could see, the men were
quiet, and sober, and intended no body any harm; and that there were many that
Traded in their fair, that were more worthy to be put into the Cage, yea, and
Pillory too, th^n were the men that they had abused. Thus, after diverse words
had passed on both sides, (the men themselves behav ng themselves all the while
very wisely and soberly before them,) they fell to some Blows, and did harm one
to They are made the Authors of this disturbance.
another. Then were these two poor men brought before their Examiners again,
and there charged as being guilty of the late Hubbub that had been in the fair.
So they beat them They are led up and down the fair in Chains for a terror to
others.
pitifully, and hanged Irons upon them, and led them in Chains, up and down
the fair, for an example and a terror to others, lest any should further speak
in their behalf, or join themselves unto them. But Christian and Faithful
behaved themselves yet more wisely, and received the ignominy and shame that
was cast upon them, with so much meekness and Some of the men o^ the fair w^n
to them.
patience, that it won to their side (though but few in comparison of the rest)
several of the men in the fair: This put the other party yet into a greater
rage, insomuch that they concluded the death of these two men. Wherefore they
threatened that the Cage nor Their adversaries resolve to kill them.
Irons should serve their turn, but that they should die, for the abuse they
had done, and for deluding the men of the fair.

Then were they remanded to the Cage again until further order should taken
with them. So they put them They are again put into the Cage and after brought
to Trial.
in, and made their feet ^ast in the Stocks. Then a convenient time being
appointed, they brought them forth to their Trial in order to their
Condemnation. When the time was come, they were brought before their Enemies
and arraigned; the Judge's name was Lord Hategood. Their Indictment was one and
the same in substance, though somewhat varying in form, the Contents whereof
was this.

That they were enemies to, and sturbers T^eir Indi^ment.
of their Trade; that they had made Commotions and Divisions in the Town, and
had won a party to their own most dangerous opinions, in contempt of the Law of
their Prince.

Then Faithful began to answer, Faithfuls answer for himself.
That he had only set himself against that which had set it self against him
that is higher then the highest. And said he, As for disturbance, I make none,
being my self a man of Peace; the Party that were won to us, were won by
beholding our Truth and Innocence, and they are only turned from the worse to
the better. And as to the King you talk of, (...) he is Beelzebub, the Enemy of
our Lord, I defy him and all his Angels.

Then Proclamation was made, that they that had ought to say for their Lord the
King against the Prisoner at the Bar, should sorthwith appear and give in their
evidence. So there came in three Witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition, and
Picktbank. They was then asked, If they knew the Prisoner at the Bar? and what
they had to say for their Lord the King against him.

Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect; My Lord, I have known this man
a long time, and will attest upon my Oath before this honorable Bench, That he
is --


Jud^e. Hold, give him his Oath; So they swear him. Then he said, My Lord, This
man, notwithstanding his plausible name, is one of the vilest men in our
Country; He neither regards Prince nor People, Law nor Custom: but does all
that he can to possess all men with certain of his disloyal notions, which he
in the general calls Principles of Faith and Holiness. And in particular, I
heard ^im once my self affirm, That Christianity, and the Customs of our Town
of Vanity, were Diametrically opposi^e, and could not be reconciled. By which
saying, my Lord, he does at once, not only condemn all our laudable doings, but
us in the doing of them.


Judge. Then did the Judge say to him, Have thou any more to say?


Env. My Lord I could say much more, only I would not be tedious to the Court.
Yet if need be, when the other Gentlemen have given in their Evidence, rather
then any thing shall be wanting that will dispatch him, I will enlarge my
Testlmony against him. So he was bid stand by. Then they called Superstition,
and bid him look upon the Prisoner; they also asked, What he could say for
their Lord the King against him? Then they swear him, so he began.


Super. My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man, nor do I desire to
have further knowledge of him; However this I know, that he is a very pestilent
fellow, from some discourse that the other day I had with him in this Town; for
then talking with him, I heard him say, That our Religion was naught, and such
by which a man could by no means please God: which sayings of his, my Lord,
your Lordship very well knows, what necessarily thence will follow, two wit,
That we still do worship in vain, are yet in our Sins, and finally shall be
damned; and this is that which I have to say.

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf of their Lord
the King against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Pick. My Lord, and you Gentlemen Pickth^nks T^imony.
all, This fellow I have known of a long time, and have heard him speak things
that ought not to be spoke. For (...) (...) rai^ed on our noble (...) (...),
and has spoke (...) (...) of his honorable Sins are (...) Lords and Great
ones.
(...), whose names are the Lord Oldm^n, the Lord (...) ac^ght, the Lord
Luxurious, the Lord Desire of V^in-(...), my old Lord Lechery, Sir Having
Greedy, with all the rest of our (...); and he has said moreover, that if all
men were of his mind, if possible, there is not one of these noble Men should
have any longer a being in this Town. Besides, he has not been afraid to rail
on you, my Lord, who are now appointed to be h^s Judge, calling you an ungod^y
Villian, with many other such like vilify^ng terms, by which he has
bespatter^d most of the G^ntry of our Town. When this Pickthank had told h^s
^ale, the Judge directed his speech to the Prisoner at the Bar, saying, Thou
Runagate, Heretic, and Traitor, have thou h^ard what th^se hone it Gentlemen
F^ithfuls defense of him^f.
have witness^d against thee?


Faith. May I speak a few words in my own defense?


Judge. Sirrah, Sirrah, thou deservest to live no longer, but to be slain
imm^diately upon the place; yet that all men may see our gentlen^ss toward
th^e, let us see what thou have to say.


Faith. 1. I say then in answer to what Mr. Envy has spok^n, I never said
ought but this, That what Rule, or L^ws, or Custom, or People, were flat
against the Word of God, are diametrically opposite to Christianity. If I have
said a miss in this, convince me of my error, and I am ready here before you
to make my recantation.

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. (...), and his charge against me, I said only
this, That in the worship of God there is required a divine Faith; but there
can be no divine Faith, without a divine Revelation of the will of God:
therefore whatever is thrust into the worship of God, that is not agreeable to
a divine Revelation, cannot be done but by an humane Faith, which Faith will
not profit to Eternal life.

3. As to what Mr. Pickthank has said, I say, (avoiding terms, as that I am
said to rail, and the like) That the Prince of this Town, with all the
Rablement his Attendants, by this Gentlemen named, are more fit for a being in
Hell, then in this Town and Country; and so the Lord have mercy upon me.

The^ the Judge called to the Jury The Judge his (...) to the Jury.
(who all this while stood by, to hear and observe) Gentlemen of the Jury, you
see this man about whom so great an uproar has been made in this Town: you
have also heard what these worthy Gentlemen have witnessed against him; also
you have heard his reply and confession: It lies now in your breasts to hang
him, or save his life. But yet I think meet to instruct you into our Law.

There was an Act made in the days of Pharaoh the Great, Servant to our Exodus 1.
Prince, That lest those of a contrary Religion should multiply and grow too
strong for him, their Males should be thrown into the River. There was also an
Act made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another of Dan. 3.
his Servants, That whoever would not fall down and worship his golden Image,
should be thrown into a fiery Furnace. There was also an Act made in the days
of Darius, That Dan. 6.
who so, for some time, called upon any God but his, should be cast into the
Lions Den. Now the substance of these Laws this Rebel has broken, not only in
thought (which is not to be born) but also in word and deed; which must
therefore needs be intolerable.

For that of Pharaoh, his Law was made upon a supposition, to prevent mischief,
no Crime being yet apparent; but here is a Crime apparent. For the second and
third, you see he disputes against our Religion; and for the Treason he has
confessed, he deserves to die the death. Then

Then went the Jury out, whose names were Mr. Blind-man, Mr. Nogood, Mr.
Malice, Mr. Love lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr. Enmity,
Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable, who every one gave
in his private Ve^dict against him among themselves, and afterward unanimously
concluded to bring him in guilty before the Judge. And first Mr. Blindman, the
foreman, said, I see ^learly that this man is an Heretic. Then said Mr.
No-good, Away with such a fellow from the Earth. Ay, said Mr. Malice, for I
hate the very looks of him. Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure him.
Nor I, said Mr. Liveloose, for he would always be condemning my way. Hang him,
hang him, said Mr. Heady. A sorry Scrub, said Mr. High-mind. My heart rises
against him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a Rogue, said Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good
for him, said Mr. Cruelty. Lets dispatch him out of the way, said Mr.
Hate-light. Then said Mr. Implacable, Might I have all the World given me, I
could not be reconciled to him, therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty
of death: And so they did, therefore he was presently Condemned, To be had from
the place where he The Cruel death of Faithful.
was, to the place from whence he came, and there to be put to the most cruel
death that could be invented.

They therefore brought him ou^, to do with him according to their Law; and
first they Scourged him, then they Buffetted him, then they Lanced his flesh
with Knives; after that, they Stoned him with Stones, then pricked him with
their Swords, and last of all they burned him to Ashes at the Stake. Thus came
Faithful to his end. Now, I saw that there stood behind the multitude, a
Chariot and a couple of Horses, waiting for Faithful, who (so soon as his
adversaries had dispatched him) was taken up into it, and straightway was
carried up through the Clouds, with sound of Trumpet, the nearest way to the
Celestial Gate. But as for Christian, he had some respit, Christian is still
ali^e.
and was remanded back to prison, so he there remained for a space: But he that
overrules all things, having the power of their rage in his own hand, so
wrought it about, that Christian for that time escaped them, and went his way.

Well Faithful, thou have faithfully professed
Unto thy Lord: with him thou shall be blessed;
When Faithless ones, with all their vain delights,
Are crying out under their hellish plights
Sing, Faithful, sing; and let thy name survive,
For though they killed thee, thou art yet alive.
Now I saw in may Dream, that Christian went not forth alone, for there was one
whose name was Hopeful, Christian has another Companion.
(being made so by the beholding of Christian and Faithful in their words and
behavior, in their sufferings at the fair) who joined himself unto him, and
entering into a brotherly covenant, told him that he would be his Companion.
Thus one died to make. Testimony to the Truth, and another rises out of his
(...) to be a Companion with Christian. This There is more of the men of the
fair will follow
Hopeful also told Christian, that there were many more of the men in the fair
that would take their time and follow after.

So I saw that quickly after they were got out of the fair, they overtook one
that was going before them, whos^ name was By-ends; so they said ^ey overtake
byends.
to (...); What Countryman, Sir? and how far go you this way? He told them,
That he came from the Town of Fair-speech, and he was going to the Coeles^ial
City, (but told them not his name.)

From Fair-speech, s^d Christian; is there (...) that be good live ther^?


By-ends. Yes, said By-ends, I hope.


Chr. Pray Sir, what man I call you?


By-ends. I am a Stran^ to you, By-ends (...) to (...) (...) name.
and you to me, if you (...) going this way, I shall be glad of your Company;
if not, I must be content.


Chr. This Town of Fair-speech, I have heard of it, and, as I remember, they
say us a Wealthy pl^ce.


Byends. Yes, I will assure you that it is, and I have very many Rich Kind^d
there.


Chr. Pray who are your Kindred there, if a man may be so bold?


By-ends. To tell you Truth, I am a Gentleman of good Quality; yet my Great
Grandfather was but a Water-man, looking one way, and Rowing another; and I
got most of my Estate by the same occupation.


Chr. Are you a Married man?


By-ends. Yes, and my Wife is a The wife and Kindred of By-ends.
very Virtuous woman, the Daughter of a Virtuous woman: She was my Lady
Fainings Daughter, therefore she came of a very Honorable Family, and is
arrive^ to such a ^tch of Breeding, that she knows how to carry it to all, even
to Prince and Peasant. Where Byends differs from others in Religion.
It Is true, we somewhat differ in Religion from those of the stricter sort, yet
but in two small points: First, we never strive against Wind and Tide.
Secondly, we are always most zealons when Religion goes in his Silver
Slippers; we love much to walk with him in the Street, if the Sun shines, and
the people applaud it.

Then Christian stepped a little a toside to his Fellow Hopeful, saying, It runs
in my mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech, and if it be he, we have as
very a Knave in our Company, as dwells in all these parts. Then said Hopeful,
Ask him; methinks he should not be ashamed of his name. So Christian came up
with him again, and said, Sir, you talk as if you knew something more then all
the World does, and if I take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half a guess of
you: Is not your name Mr. ^y ends of Fair-speech?


By-ends. That is not my name, but indeed it is a Nickname that is given me by
some that cannot abide me, and I must be content to bear it as a reproach, as
other good men have born theirs before me.


Chr. But did you never give an ^ccasion to men to call you by this name?


By-ends. Never, never! The worst How Byends got his name.
that ever I did to give them an occasion to give me this name, was, That I had
always the luck to j^mp in my Judgment with the present way of the times,
whatever it was, and my chance was to get thereby; but if things are thus cast
upon me, let me count them a blessing, but let not the malicious load me
therefore with reproach.


Chr. I thought indeed that (...); (...) the man that I had heard of, and to
tell you what I think, I fear this name belongs to you more properly then you
are willing we should think it does.


By-ends. Well, If you will thus imagine, I cannot help it. You shall find me a
fair Company-keeper, if you ^.
will still admit me your a^ociate.


(...). If you will go with us, you (...) go (...) Wind and Tide, the which, I
(...), (...) against your (...) You mu^ also ^wn Religion in his (...), as well
a^ when in his Silver S^ppers, and sta^a by him, (...), when bound in Irons, as
well as when he walks (...) Streets with applause.


By-ends. You must not impose, nor Lord it over my Faith; leave me to my
liberty, and let me go with you.


Chr. Not a step further, unless you will do in what I propound, as we.

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old Principles, since they are
harmless and profitable. If I may not go with you, I must do as I did before
you overtook me, even go by my self, until some overtake me that will be glad
of my Company.

Then Christian and Hopeful outwent him, and went till they came The ease that
Pilgrims have is but little in this life
at a delicate Plain, called Ease, where they went with much content; but that
plain was but narrow, so they were quickly got over it. Now at the Lucre Hill
dangerus Hill.
further side of that plain, was a little Hill called Lucre, and in that Hill a
Silver-Mine, which some of them that had formerly gone that way, because of the
rarity of it, (...) ^ed aside to see; but going too n^ar the brink of the pit,
the ground b^ing deceitful under them, b^oke, and they were slain; some al^o
had be^n maimed there, and could not to their dying day be their own (...)
again.

Then I (...) (...) ^y Dr^am, that a little (...) the roa^, (...) against the
Silver-Mi^, stood (...), Gentlemanlike,) to call to (...) to come and (...):
Who said to Christian and his Fellow, Ho, turn (...) hither, and I will show
you a thing.


Chr. What thing so deserving, as to turn us out of the way?


De. Here is a Silver- Mine, and some digging in it for Treasure; if you will
come, with a little pains you may richly provide for your selves.


Hopef. Then said Hopeful, Let us Hopeful tempted to go, but Christian bolds
him back.
go see.


Chr. Not I, said Christian, I have heard of this place before now, and how
many have there been slain; and besides, that Treasure is a snare to those that
seek it, for it hinders them in their Pilgrimage. Then Christian called to
Demas, saying, Is not the place dangerous? has it not hindered Hos. 4. 18.
many in their Pilgrimage?


De. Not very dangerous, except to those that are careless: but withal, he
blushed as he spoke.


Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful, Let us not stir a step, but still keep on
our way.


Hope. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes up, if he has the same
invitation as we, he will turn in thither to see.


Chr. No doub^ thereof, for his principles lead him that way, and a hundred to
one but he dies there.


De. Then Demas called again, saying, But will you not come over and see?


Chr. Then Christian roundly answered, saying, Demas, Thou art an Christian
roundeth up Demas.
Enemy to the right ways of the Lord of this way, and have been already 2 Timothy
4. 10.
condemned for thine own turning aside, by one of his Majesty's Judges; and why
seek thou to bring us into the like condemnation? Besides, if we at all turn
aside, our Lord the King will certainly hear thereof; and will there put us to
shame, where we would stand with boldness before him.

Demas cried again, That he also was one of their fraternity; and that if they
would ^arry a little, he also himself would walk, with them.


Cor. Then said Christian, What is thy name? is it not it by the which I have
called thee?


Ce. Yes, my name is Demas, I am the Son of Abraham.


Chr. I know you, Gehazi was your Great Grandfather, and Judas 2 Kings 5 10.
your Father, and you have trod their steps. It is but a devilish prank that
Mat. 26. 14, 15.
thou usest: Thy Father was hanged for a Traitor, and thou deservest no chap.
17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
better reward. Assure thy self, that when we come to the King, we will do him
word of this thy behavior. Thus they went their way.

By this time By-ends was come again within sight, and ^eat the first By-ends
goes over to Demas.
beck went over to Demas. Now whether he fell into the Pit, by looking over the
brink thereof; or whether he went down to dig, or whether he was smothered in
the bottom, by the damps that commonly arise, of these things I am not certain:
But this I observed, that he never was seen again in the way.

By-ends and Silver-Demas both agree;
One calls, the other runs, that he may be,
A sharer in his Lucre: so these two
Take up in this World, and no further go.
I saw then, that they went on A River Ps. 6^ 9.
their way to a pleasant River, which David the King called the River of Rev.
^2.
Ezekiel. 47.
God; but John, The River of the water of life: Now their way lay just upon the
bank of the River: here therefore Christian and his Companion walked with great
delight; They drank also of the water of the River, which was pleasant and
enlivening to their weary Spirits: besides, on the banks of thi^ River on
either side were green Trees, that bore all manner of Fruit; and the leaves of
the Trees Trees by the River. The Fruit and leaves of the Trees
were good for Medicine; with the Fruit of these Trees they were also much
delighted; and the leaves they eat to prevent Su^feits, and other Diseases that
are incident to those that hear their blood by Travels. On either side of the
River was also a Meadow curiously beautified with A Meadow in (...) they lie
down to sleep.
Lilies; And it was green all the year long. In this Meadow they lay down and
slept, for here they might lie down safely. When they awoke, they Ps. 22.
Isa. ^4. 30.
gathered again of the Fruit of the Trees, and drank again of the Water of the
River: and then lay down again to sleep. Thus they did several days and nights.

Behold ye how these Crystal streams do glide
(To comfort Pilgrims) by the Highway side;
The Meadows green, besides their fragrant smell,
Yield dainties for them: And he that can tell
What pleasant Fruit, yea Leaves, these Trees do yield,
Will soon sell all, that he may buy this Field.
So when they were disposed to go on (for they were not, as yet, at their
Journeys end) they eat and drank, and departed.

Now I beheld in my Dream, that they had not journied sar, but the River and
the way, for a time, parted. At which they were not a little sorry, yet they
durst not go out of the way. Now the way from the River was rough, and their
seet tender by reason of their Travels; So the soul of the Pilgrims was much
discouraged, Numb. 21. 4
because of the way. Wherefore still as they went on, they wished for better
way. Now a little before them, there was on the left hand of the Road, a
Meadow, and a Style to go over into it, and that Meadow is called
By-Path-Meadow. Then said Christian to his fellow, If this Meadow lies By
PathMeadow. One temptation does make way for another
along by our way side, lets go over into it. Then he went to the Style to see,
and behold a Path lay along by the way on the other side of the sense. It Is
according to my wish said Christian, here is the easiest going; come good
Hopeful, and lets us go over.


Hop. But how if this Path should lead us out of the way? Strong Christians may
lead weak ones out of the way.



Chr. That Is not like, said the other; look, does it not go along by the way
side? So Hopeful, being per swaded by his fellow, went after him over the
Style. When they were gone over, and were got into the (...), they found it
very (...) sor (...) feet; and withal, they looking besore them, espied a Man
walking as they did, (and his name was Vain-confidence) so they called after
him, and asked him whither that way led? he said, To the Celestial Gate. Look,
said Christian, did not I tell you so? by this you may see we are right: so
they followed, and he went before them. But behold the night came on, and it
grew very dark, so that they that were behind, lost the sight of him that went
before.

He therefore that went before ( Vain-confidence by name) not seeing the way
before him, fell into a deep Pit, which was on purpose there Isa. 9. ^6 A Pit
to catch the vainglorious in.
made by the Prince of those grounds, to catch vainglorious fools withal; and
was dashed in pieces with his fall.

Now Christian and his fellow heard him fall. So they called, to know the
matter, but there was none to answer, only they heard a groaning. Then said
Hopeful, Where are we now? Then was his fellow silent, as mistrusting that he
had led h m out of the way. And now it began Reasoning between Christian and
Hopeful
to rain, and thunder, and lighten in a very dreadful manner, and the water
rose (...).

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying, Oh that I had kept on my way!


Chr. Who could have thought that this path should have led us out of the way?


Hope. I was afraid on it at very first, and therefore gave you that gentle
caution. I would have spoke plaine^, but that you are older then I.


Chr. Good Brother be not osfended, Christians (...) for leading of his Broout
of the way.
I am sorry I have brought thee out of the way, and that I have put thee into
such eminent danger; pray my Brother forgive me, I did not do it of an evil
intent.


Hope. Be comforted my Brother for I forgive thee; and believe too, that this
shall be for our good.


Chr. I am glad I have with me a merciful Brother: But we must not stand thus,
let us try to go back again.


Hope. But good Brother let me go before.


Chr. No, if you please, let me go first; that if there be any danger, I may be
first therein, because by my means we are both gone out of the way.


Hope. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first, for your mind being troubled,
may lead you out of the way again. Th^n for their encouragement, they heard the
voice of one saying, Let thine heart be toward the Highway, even the way that
thou wentest, Jer. (...) 1.
turn again: But by this time the Waters They are iu danger of drowning as they
go back.
were greatly risen, by reason of which, the way of going back was very
dangerous. (Then I thought that it is easier going out of the way when we are
in, then going in when we are out.) Yet they adventured to go back; but it was
so dark, and the flood was so high, that in their going back, they had like to
have been drowned nine or ten tim^s.

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again to the Style that
night. Wherefore, at last, lighting under a little shelter, they sat down there
till the day brake; but being weary, they fell asleep. Now They sleep in the
grounds of Giant Despair.
there was not far from the place where they lay, a Castle, called
Doubting-Castle, the owner whereof was Giant Despair, and it was in his grounds
they now were sleeping; wherefore he getting up in the morning ea^ly, and
walking up and down in his Fields, caught Christian and He finds them in his
ground, and carries them to Doubting Castle,
Hopeful asleep in his grounds. Th^n with a grim and surly voice he bid them
awake, and asked them whence they were? and what they did in his grounds? They
told him, they were Pilgrims, and that they had lost their way. Then said the
Giant, You have this night trespassed on me, by trampling in, and lying on my
grounds, and therefore you must go along with me. So they were forced to go,
because he was stronger then they. They also had but little to say, for they
knew themselves in a fault. The Giant therefore drove them before him, and put
them into his Castle, The Grievousness of their Imprisonment
into a very dark Dungeon, nasty and stinking to the spirit of these two men:
Here then they lay, from Wednesday morning till Saturday night, Ps. 88. 18.
without one bit of bread, or drop of drink, or any light, or any to ask how
they did. They were therefore here in evil case, and were far from friends and
acquaintaoe. Now in this place, Christian had double sorrow, because 'twas
through his unadvised haste that they were brought into this distress.

Well, on Saturday about midnight they began to pray, and continued in Prayer
till almost break of day.

Now a little before it was day, good Christian, as one half amazed, brake out
in this passionate Speech, What a fool, qu^th he, am I the to lie in a stinking
Dungeon, when I may A K^y in Christians (...) called Promise, opens any Lock in
Doubt-^g Castle.
as well walk at liberty? I have a Key in my bosom, called Promise, that will,
I am persuaded, open any Lock in Doubting Castle. Then said Hopeful, That Is
good News; good Brother pluck it out of thy bosom and try: Then Christian
pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try at the Dungion door, whose bolt
(as he turn^d the Key) gave back, and the door flew open with ease, and
Chri^tian and Hopeful both came out. Then he went to the outward door that
leads into the Castle yard, and with hi^ Key opened the door also. After he
went to the Iron Gate, for that must be opened too, but that Lock went damnable
hard, yet the Key did open it; then they thrust open the Gate to make their
escape with speed, but that Gate, as it opened, made such a creaking, that it
waked Giant Despair, who hastily rising to pursue his Prisoners, felt his Limbs
to fail, fo that he could by no means go after them. Then they went on, and
came to the Kings high way again, and so were safe, because they were out of
his Jurisdiction.

Now when they were gone over the Style, they began to contrive with themselves
wh^t they should do at that Style, to prevent those that should come after,
from falling into the hands of Giant Despair. So they consented to er^ct there
a Pillar, and to engrave upon the side thereof, Over this Style is the way to
Doubting- Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair, wh^ despises the King of the
C^lestial Country, and seeks to destroy his holy Pilgri^s. Many therefore that
followed after, read what was written, and escaped the danger. This done, they
sang as follows.

Out of the way we went, and then (...) found
What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground:
And let them that come after have a care,
Lest heedlesness makes them, as we, to fare:
Lest they, for trespassing, his prisoners are,
Whose Castle's Doubting, and whose name's Despair.
They went then, till they came to the delectable Mountains, which Mountains
belong to the Lord of that The delectable mountains
Hill, of which we have spoken before; so they went up to the Mountains, to
behold the Gardens and Orchards, the Vineyards, and Fountains They a^e
refreshed in the mountains:
of water, where also they drank, and washed themselves, and did freely eat of
the Vineyards. Now there was on the tops of these Mountains, Shepherds feeding
their flocks, and they stood by the highway side. The Pilgrims therefore went
to them, and leaning upon their staves, (as is common with weary Pilgrims, when
they stand to talk with any by the way,) they asked, Whose delectable Mounta^ns
are these? and whose be the sheep that feed upon them?


Shep. These Mountains are Immanuels Land, and they are within sight of his
City, and the sheep also are his, and he laid down his life for them. Joh. 10.
11



Chr. Is this the way to the Celestial City?


Shep. You are just in your way.


Chr. How far is it thither?


Shep. Too far for any, but those that shall get thither indeed.


Chr. Is the way safe, or dangerous?


Shep. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe, but transgressors shall fall
therein. Hos. 14. 9:



Chr. Is there in this place any relief for Pilgrims that are weary and faint
in the way?


Shep. The Lord of these Mountains has given us a charge, Not to be Heb. 13.
1, 2.
forgetful to entertain strangers: Therefore the good of the place is even
before you.

I saw also in my Dream, that when the Shepherds perceived that they were
way-fairing men, they also put questions to them, (to which they made answer as
in other places,) as, Whence came you? and, How got you into the way? and, By
what means have you so persevered therein? For but few of them that begin to
come hither, do show their face on these Mountains. But when the Shephe^ds
heard their answers, being pleased therewith, they looked very lovingly upon
them; and said, Welcome to the de^ectable Mountains.

The Shepherds, I say, whose names were, Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and
Sincere, took them by the hand, and had them to their Tents, and made them
pa^take of that which was ready at present. They said moreover, We would that
you should stay here a while, to acquaint with us, and yet more to solace your
selves with the good of these delectable Mountains. They told them, That they
were content to stay; and so they went to their rest that night, because it was
very late.

Then I saw in my Dream, that in the morning, the Shepherds called up Christian
and Hopeful to walk with them upon the Mountains: So they went forth with them,
and walked a while, having a pleasant prospect ^n every side. Then said the
Shepherds one to another, Shall we show these Pilgrims some wonders? So when
they had concluded to do it, they had them first to the top of an Hill The
Mountain of Error.
called Error, which was very steep on the furthest side, and bid them look
down to the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and saw at the bottom
several men dashed all to pieces by a fall that they had from the top. Then
said Christian, What means this? The Shepherds answered; Have you not heard
of them that were made to ^rr, by harkening to Hymeneus, and Philetus, as
concerning the Faith of the Resurrection of the Body? They answered, Yes. Then
said the Shepherds, Those that you see lie dashed in pieces at the bottom of
this Mountain, are they: and they have continued to this day unburied (as you
see) for an example to others to take heed how they clamber too high, or how
they come too near the brink of this Mountain.

Then I saw that they had them to the top of another Mountain, and Mount
Cautio^:
the name of that is Caution; and bid them look a far off. Which when they did,
they perceived as they thought, several men walking up and down among the Tombs
that were there. And they perceived that the men were blind, because they
stumbled sometimes upon the Tombs, and because they could not get out from
among them. Then said Christian, What means this?

The Shepherds then answered, Did you not see a little below these Mountains a
Style that led into a Meadow on the left hand of this way? They answered, Yes.
Then said the Shepherds, From that Style the^e goes a Path that leads directly
to Doubting-Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair; and these men (pointing to
them among the Tombs) came once on Pilgrimage, as you do now, even till they
came to that same Style. And because the right way was rough in that place,
they chose to go out of it into that Meadow, and there were taken by Giant
Despair, and cast into Doubting-Castle; where, after they had a while been kept
in the Dungeon, he at last did put out their eyes, and led them among those
Tombs, where he has left them to wander to this very day; that the saying of
the wise Man might be fulfilled, He that wandereth Pr. 21. 26.
out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the dead.
Then Christian and Hopeful looked one upon another, with tears gu^ing out; but
yet said nothing to the Shepherds.

Then I saw in my Dream, that the Shepherds had them to another place, in a
bottom, where was a door in the side of an Hill; and they opened the door, and
bid them look in. They looked in therefore, and saw that within it was very
dark, and smoaky; they also thought that they heard there a lumbring noise as
of fire, and a cry of some tormented, and that they smelt the scent of
Brimstone. Then said Christian, What means this? The Shepherds told them,
saying, This is a By-way to Hell, a way that A by-way to Hell.
Hypocrites go in at; namely, such as sell their Birthright, with Esau: such
as sell their Master, with Judas: such as blaspheme the Gospel, with Alexander:
and that lie and dissemble, with Ananias and Saphira his wife.


Hopef. Then said Hopeful to the Shepherds, I perceive that these had on them,
even every one, a show of Pilgrimage as we have now; had they not?


Shep. Yes, and held it a long time too.


Hopef. How far might they go on Pilgrimage in their day, since they
notwithstanding were thus miserably cast away?


Shep. Some further, and some not so far as these Mountains.

Then said the Pilgrims one to another, We had need cry to the Strong for
strength.


Shep. Ay, and you will have need to use it when you have it, too.

By this time the Pilgrims had a desire to go forwards, and the Shepherds a
desire they should; so they walked together toward the end of the Mountains.
Then said the Shepherds one to another, Let us here show to the Pilgrims the
Gates of the Celestial City, if they have skill to look through our
Perspective Glass. The Pilgrims then lovingly accepted the motion: So they had
them to the top of an high Hill called Clear, and gave them their Glass to
look. Then they essayed to look, but the remembrance of that last thing that
the Shepherds had showed them, made their hand shake, by means of which
imp^diment, they could not look steddily through The fruit of (...) fear.
the Glass; yet they thought they saw something like the Gate, and also some of
the Glory of the place,

Tous by the Shepherds, Secrets are revealed,
Which from all other men are kept concealed:
Come to the Shepherds then, if you would see
Things deep, things bid, and that mysterious be.
When they were about to depart, one of the Sh^pherds gave them a note of the
way, Another of them, bid them beware of the flatterer, The third, bid them
take heed that they sleep not upon the Enchanted Ground, and the fourth, bid
them God speed. So I awoke from my Dream.

And I slept, and Dreamed again, and saw the same two Pilgrims going down the
Mountains along the Highway toward the City. Now a little below these
Mountains, on the left hand, lies the Country of Conceit, The Country of
Conceit, out of which came Ignorance.
from which Country there comes into the way in which the Pilgrims walked, a
little crooked Lane. Here therefore they met with a very brisk Lad, that came
out of that Country; and his name was Ignorance. So Christian asked him, From
what parts he came? and whither he was going?


Ign. Sir, I was born in the Country Christian and Ignorance has some talk.
that lies off there, a little on the left hand; and I am going to the
Celestial City.


Chr. But how do you think to get in at the Gate, for you may find some
difficulty there?


Ign. As other good People do, said he.


Chr. But what have you to show at that Gate, that may cause that the Gate
should be opened to you?


Ign. I know my Lords will, and I have been a good Liver, I pay every man his
own; I Pray, Fast, pay Tithes, and give Alms, and have left my Country, for
whither I am going.


Chr. But thou came not in at the Wicket-gate, that is at the head of this
way, thou came in hither through that same crooked Lane, and therefore I
fear, however thou may think of thy self, when the reckoning day shall come,
thou will have laid to thy charge, that thou art a Theif and a Robber, instead
of admitance into the City.


Ignor. Gentlemen, ye be utter He says to every one, that be is a foul.
strangers to me, I know you not, be content to follow the Religion of your
Country, and I will follow the Religion of mine. I hope all will be well. And
as for the Gate that you talk of, all the World knows that that is a great way
off of our Country. I cannot think that any man in all our parts does so much
as know the way to it; nor need they matter whether they do or no, since we
have, as you see, a fine pleasant green Lane, that comes down from our Country
the next way into it.

When Christian saw that the man Pr. 26. 12.
was wise in his own conceit, he said to Hopeful, whisperingly, There is more
hopes of a fool then of him. And said moreover, When he that is a fool walks
by the way, his wisdom Eccl. 10. 3.
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool. What, shall we talk
How to carry it to a fool.
further with him? or out-go him at present? and so leave him to think of what
he has heard already; and then stop again for him afterward, and see if by
degrees we can do any good of him?

Let Ignorance a little while now muse
On what is said, and let him not refuse
Good Counsel to embrace, lest he remain
Still Ignorant of what is the chiefest gain.
God says, Those that no understanding have,
(Although he made them) them he will not save.

Hop. It is not good, I think, to say all to him at once, let us pass him by,
if you will, and talk to him anon, even as he is able to bear it.

So they both went on, and Ignorance he came after. Now when they had passed
him a little way, they entered into a very dark Lane, where they met a man whom
seven Devils had bound with seven strong Mat. 12. 45. Prove. 5. 22.
Cords, and were carrying of him back to the door that they saw in the side of
the Hill. Now good Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful his
Companion: Yet as the Devils led away the man, Christian looked to see if he
knew him, and he thought it might be one Turn away that dwelt The destruction
of one Turnaway.
in the Town of Apostasy. But he did not perfectly see his face, for he did
hang his head like a Thief that is found: But being gone past, Hopeful looked
after him, and espied on his back a Paper with this Inscription, Wanton
Professor, and damnable Apostate. Then said Christian Christian tells his
Companion a story of LittleFaith.
to his Fellow, Now I call to remembrance that which was told me of a thing
that happened to a good man hereabout. The name of the man was Little-Faith,
but a good man, and he dwelt in the Town of Sincere. The thing was this; at the
entering in of this passage there comes down from Broad-way-ga^e a Lane called
Broad-way gate.
Dead-mans-lane; so called, because Dead man's Lane.
of the Murders that are commonly done there. And this Little-Faith going on
Pilgrimage, as we do now, chanced to sit down there and slept. Now there
happened, at that time, to come down that Lane from Broadway-gate three. Sturdy
Rogues, and their names were Faint-heart, Mistrust, and Guilt, (three brothers)
and they espying Little-faith wherehe was, came galloping up with speed: Now
the good man was just awaked from his sleep, and was getting up to go on his
Journey. So they came all up to Littlefaith robbed by Faintheart, Mistrust and
Guilt.
him, and with threatening Language bid him stand. At this, Little faith looked
as white as aClout, and had neither power to fight nor fly. Then said
Faintheart, Deliver thy Purse; but he making no haste to do it, (for he was
loath to lose his Money,) Mistrust ran up to him, and thrusting his hand into
his Pocket, pulled out thence a bag of Silver. Then he cried They g^t away
(...) Silver, and knocked him down.
out, Thieves, thieves. With that, Guilt with a great Club that was in his
hand, struck Little-Faith on the head, and with that blow felled him flat to
the ground, were he lay bl^eding as one that would bleed to death. All this
while the Thieves stood by: But at last, they hearing that some were upon the
Road, and fearing lest it should be one Great-grace that dwells in the City of
Good-confidence, they betook themselves to their heels, and left this good man
to shift for himself. Now after a while, Little^aith came to himself, and
getting up, made shift to scrabble on his way. This was the story.


Hopef. But did they take from him all that ever he had?


Christ. No: the place where his Littlefaith ^st not his best things.
Jewels were, they never ransak t, so those he kept still; but as, I was told,
the good man was much afflicted for his loss. For the Thieves got most of his
spending Money. That which they got not (as I said) were Jewels, also he had a
little odd Money left, 1 Pet, 4. 18.
but scarce enough to bring him to his Journeys end; nay, if I was not
misinformed) he was forced to beg Littlefaith forced to beg to his Journeys
and.
as he went, to keep himself alive, (for his Jewels he might not sell.) But
beg, and do what he could, he went (as we say) with many a hungry belly, the
most part of the rest of the way.


Hopef. But is it not a wonder they got not from him his Certificate, by which
^e was to receive his admittance at the Celestial gate?


Chr. No, they got not that: though thy mist it not through any good cunning of
his, for he being dismayed with their coming upon He kept not his best things
by his own ^unning.
him, had neither power nor skill to hide any thing; so 'twas more by good
Providence then by his Endeavor, that they mist of that good 2 Timothy 1. 14.
thing.


Hopef. But it must needs be a comfort to him, that they got not this Jewel
from him.


Chr. It might have been great comfort to him, had he used it as he 2 Pet. 1. 9.
should; but they that told me the story, said, That he made but little use of
it all the rest of the way; and that because of the dismay that he had in their
taking away his Money: indeed he forgot it a great part of the rest of the
Journey; and besides, when at any time, it came into his mind, and he began to
be comforted therewith, then would fresh thoughts of his loss come again upon
him, and those thoughts would swallow up all.


Hope. Alas poor Man! this could not but be a great grief unto him.


Chr. Grief! Ay, a grief indeed! He is pitied by both.
would it not a been so to any of us, had we been used as he, to be Robbed and
wounded too, and that in a strange place, as he was? It Is a wonder he did not
die with grief, poor heart! I was told, that he scattered almost all the rest
of the way with nothing but doleful and bitter complaints. Telling also to all
that over-took him, or that he over-took in the way as he went, where he was
Robbed, and how; who they were that did it, and what he lost; how he was
wounded, and that he hardly escaped with life.


Hope. But it is a wonder that his necessities did not put him upon selling, or
pawning some of his Jewels, that he might have wherewith to relieve himself in
his Journey.


Chr. Thou talkest like one upon whose head is the Shell to this very Christian
s^ibbeth his fellow for unadvised speaki^g.
day: For what should he pawn them? or to whom should he sell them? In all that
Country where he was Robbed, his Jewels were not accounted of, nor did he want
that relief which could from thence be administered to him; besides, had his
Jewels been missing at the Gate of the Celestial City, he had (and that he
knew well enough) been excluded from an Inheritance there; and that would have
heen worse to him then the appearance and villainy of ten thousand Thieves.


Hope. Why art thou so tart my Brother? Esau sold his Birthright, and Heb. 12.
16.
that for a mess of Pottage; and that Birthright was his greatest Jewel: and
if he, woy might not Little-Faith do so too?


Chr. Esau did sell his Birth right A dis^ourse about Esau and LittleFaith.
indeed, and so do many besides; and by so doing, exclude themselves from the
chief blessing, as also that Caytiff did. But you must ^ut a difference betwixt
Esau and Little-Faith, and also betwixt their Estates. Esau's Birthright was
Typical, but Littlefaith's Jewels were not so. Esau's belly was his God, but
Little-faith's belly was not so. Esau's want lay in his fleshly appetite,
Little-faith's did not so. Besides, Esau could see no ^ther Esau was ruled by
his lusts.
then to the fulfilling of his Lusts. For I am at the point to dye, said he,
Genesis (...): 32.
and what good will this Birthright do me? But Little-faith, though it was his
lot to have but a little faith, was by his little faith kept from such
extravagancies; and made to see and priz^ his Jewels more, then to fell them,
as Esau did his Birthright. Esau never had faith
You read not any where that Esau had faith, no not so much as a little:
Therefore no marvel, if where the flesh only bears sway (as it will in that Man
where no faith is to resist) if he sells his Birthright, and his Soul and all,
and that to the Devil of Hell; for it is with such, as it is with the Ass, Who
in her occasions cannot be Jer. 2. 24.
turned away. When their minds are set upon their Lusts; they will have them
what ever they cost. But Littlefaith Littlefaith could not live upon Esaus
P^ttage.
was of another t^mper, his mind was on things Divine; his livelihood was upon
things that were Spiritual, and from above; Therefore to what end should he
that is of such a temper sell his Jewels, (had there been any that would have
bought them) to fill his mind with empty things? Will a man give a penny to
fill his belly with Hay? or A comp^rison between the Turtledove and the Crow.
can you persuade the Turtle-dove to live upon Carrion, like the Crow? Though
faithless ones, can for carrial Lusts, pawn, or morgage, or sell what they
have, and themselves o^t right to boot; yet they that ^ave faith, saving faith,
though but ^ttle of it, cannot do so. Here therefore, my Brother, is thy
mistake.


Hopef. I acknowledge it; but yet your severe reflection had almost made me
angry.


Chr. Why, I did but compare thee to some of the Birds that are of the brisker
sort, who will run to and fro in ^roden paths with the shell upon their heads:
but pass by that, and consider the matter under debate, and all shall be ^ell
betwixt thee and me.


Hopef. But Christian, These three fellows, I am persuaded in my heart, are but
a company of Cowards: would they have run else, think you, as they did, at the
noise of one that was coming o^ the road? Why did not Little-faith Hopeful
(...).
pluck up a great heart? He might, methinks, have stood one brush with them,
and have yielded when there h^d been no remedy.


Chr. That they are Cowards, many have said, but few have found it so in the
time of Trial. As for a great No great heart for God, where there is but little
faith
heart, Little-faith had none; and I perceive by thee, my Brother, had thou
been the Man concerned, thou art but ^or a brush, and then to yield. And
verily, since this is the height of We have more courage when o^t, then when we
a^e in
thy Stomach now they are at a distance from us, should they appear to thee, as
they did to him, they might put thee to second thoughts.

But consider again, they are but Journey-men Thieves, they serve under the
King of the Bot omless pit; who, is need be, will come in to their aid himself,
and his voice is as the Psalm 5. 8.
roaring of a Lion. I my self have Christian (...) (...) (...) expe^ience in
tois case.
been Engaged as this Little-faith was, and I found it a terrible thing. These
three Villains set upon me, and I beginning like a Christian to resist, they
gave but a call, and in came their Master: I would, as the saying is, have
given my life for a penny; but that, as God would have it, I was clothed with
Armor of proof. Ay, and yet though I was so harnessed, I found it hard work to
quit my self like a man; no man can tell what in that Combat attends us, but he
that has been in the Battle himself.


Hopef. Well, but they ran you see, when they did but suppose that one
Great-Grace was in the way.


Chr. True, they often fled, both they and their Master, when Greatgrace grace
has but appeared, and no The Kings Champion.
marvel, for he is the Kings Champion: But I t^o, you will put some differen^e
between L^-(...) and the Kings Champion; all the Kings Subjects are not his
Champions: nor can they, when tried, do such feats of War as he. Is it meet to
think that a little child should handle Goliath as David did? o^ that there
should be the strength of an Ox in a Wren? Some are strong, some are weak, some
have great faith, some have little: this man was one of the weak, and therefore
he went to the walls


Hopef. I would it had been Greatgrace, for their sakes.


Chr. If it had been he, he might have had his hands full: For I must tell you,
That though Great-grace is excellent good at his Weapons, and has and can, so
long as he keeps them at Swords point, do well enough with them: yet if they
get within him, even Faint-heart, Mistrust, or the other, it shall go hard but
they will throw up his heels. And when a man is down, you know what can he do.

Who so looks well upon (...) face, shall see those Scars and Cuts there, that
shall easily give demonstration of what I say. Yea once I heard he should say,
(and that when he was in the Combat) We despaired even of life: How did these
sturdy Rogues and their Fellows make David groan, mourn, and roar? Yea Heman,
and Hezekiah too, though Champions in their day, were forced to bestir them,
when by these assaulted; and yet, that notwithstanding, they had their Coats
soundly brushed by them. Peter upon a time would go try what he could do; but,
though some do say of him that he is the Prince of the Apostles, they handled
him so, that they made him at last afraid of a sorry Girl.

Besides, their King is at their Whistle, he is never out of hearing; and if at
any time they be put to the worst, he, if possible, comes in to help them: And,
of him it is said, The Sword of him that lays at him Job. 41. ^6
cannot hold the Spear, the Dart, nor the Habergeon; he este^th Iron as Straw,
and Brass as ro^en Wood. The Arr^w Leviathans (...).
cannot make him fly, Slingstones are (...) with him into stubble, Darts are
counted as stubble, h^ laugheth at the shaking of a Spear. What can a man do in
this case? It Is t^, if a man co^ld at every turn have Jobs Horse, and had skill
and courage to (...) him, he might do notable things. For (...) (...) (...) t^t
is i^ Jo^s Ho^e
his neck is clothed with Thund^r, he w^l (...) (...) afraid as the (...), the
glory o^ his Nosrils is (...), he paweth in the Valley, (...) in his strength,
and goes ou^ to m^et the armed men. He m^th (...) ^r, and is not (...), n^ther
tu^neth b^k from the Sword. The quiv^r (...) ^st him, the glit^ring Sp^r, and
the shield. He swalloweth the gro^d with fierceness and rage, (...) bel^veth he
that it is the sound of t^ T^mpet. He says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha; and
Jo^. 39. 19
he smells the Battle a far off, the thundering of the Captains, and the
shoutings.

But for such footmen as thee and I are, let us never desire to m^et with an
en^my, nor va^nt as if we could do better, when we hear of others that they
have been foiled, nor be tickled at the thoughts of our own manhood, for such
commonly come by the worst when tried. Witness Peter, of whom I made mention
before. He would ^wagger, Ay he would: He would, as his vain mind prompted him
to say, do better, and stand more for his Master, then all men: But who so
(...), and run down with these Villains, as he?

When therefore we h^ar that such Robberi^s are done on the Kings Highway, two
things become us to do: first to go out Harnessed, and to be sure (...) (...)
Shield with us: For it was for want of that, that he that laid so Iustily at
Leviatha^ could not make him yield. For indeed, if that be wanting, he fears us
not at all. Therefore he that had skill, has said, Ephesians. 6. 16.
Above all take the Shield of ^aith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked.

It Is good also that we desire of the '(...) good (...) (...) a Convoy
King a Convoy, yea that he will go with us himself. This made David rejoice
when in the Valley of the Ex 33. 15.
shaddows of death; and Moses was rather for dying where he stood, then to go
one step without his God. O my Brother, if he will but go along Psalm. 3 5, 6,
7, 8.
with us, what need we be afraid of Psalm. 27. 1, 2, 3.
ten thousands that shall set themselves against us, but without him, the proud
helpers fall under the slain. Isa. 10. 4.


I for my part have been in the fray before now, and though (through the
goodness of him that is best) I am as you see alive: yet I cannot bo^st of my
manhood. Glad shall I be, if I meet with no more such brunts, though I fear we
are not got beyond all danger. However, since the Lion and the Bear has not as
yet devoured me, I hope God will also deliver us from the next uncircumcised
Philistine.

Poor Little-faith! Have been among the Thieves!
Wast robbed! Remember this, Who so believes
And gets more faith, shall then a Victor be
Over ten thousand, else scarce over three.
So they went on, and Ignoranc^ followed. They went then till they came at a
place where they saw a way put it self into their way, and seemed withal, to
lie as straight as A way, ^d away.
the way which they should go; and here they knew ^ot which of the two to take,
for both seemed straight before them; therefore here they stood still to
consider. And as they were thinking about the way, b^hold a man black of flesh,
but covered with a very light Robe, came to them and asked them, Why they stood
there? They answered, They were going to the Celestial City, but knew not
which of these ways to take. Follow me, said the man, it is thither that I am
going. So they followed him in the way that but now came Christian and his
^llow deluded.
into the road, which by degr^es turned, and turned them so from the City that
they desired to go to, that in little time their faces were turned away from
it; yet they followed him. But by and by, before they were aware, he led them
both w^thin the compass of a Net, in which they were both so entangled They are
taken in a Net.
that they knew not what to do; and with that, the white Robe fell off the
black man's back; then they saw where they were. Wherefore there they lay crying
sometime, for they could not get themselves out.


C^. Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do I see my self in an They (...)
their conditions.
error. Did not the Shepherds bid us beware of the flatterers? As is the
saying of the Wise man, so we Pro. 29. 5.
have found it this day: A man that flattereth his Neighbor, spreads a Net
for his feet.


Hopef. They also gave us a note of directions about the way, for our more sure
finding thereof: but therein we have also forgotten to read, and have not kept
our selves from the Paths of the destroyer. Here David was wiser then we; for
says he, Concerning the works of men, by Psalm. 1^ 4.
A (...) one ^mes to them with a w^p (...) band.
the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the Paths of the destroyer. Thus
they lay bewailing themselves in the Net. At last they espied a shining One
coming toward them, with a whip of small cord in his hand. When he was come to
the place where they were, He asked them whence they came? and what they did
there? They told him, That they were poor Pilgrims going to Sion, but were led
out of their way, by a black man, clothed in white, who bid us, said they,
follow him; for he was going thither too. Then said he with the Whip; it is
Flatteror, a false Apostle, Pro. 29. (...).
Da 11. 32.
that has transformed himself into an 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
Angel of light. So he rent the Net and let the men out. Then said he to them,
Follow me, that I may set you in your way again; so he led them back to the
way, which they had left to follow the Flatterer. Then he asked them, saying,
Where did They are examined, and ^onvicted of forgetf^lness.
you lie the last night? They said, with the Shepherds upon the delectable
Mountains. He asked them then, If they had not of them Shepherds a note of
direction for the way? They answered, Yes. But did you, said he, when you was
at a stand, pluck out and read your note? They answered, No. He asked them why?
They said Deceivers fine spoken.
they forgot. He asked moreover, If To, ^6. 18.
the Shepherds did not bid them beware of the Fla^terer? They answered, Yes:
But we did not imagine, said they, that this fine-spoken man had been he.

Then I saw in my Dream, that he commanded them to lie down; which Deu. 25. 2.
2 Chronicles. 6. 25, 27.
when they did, he chastized them ^ore, to teach them the good way ^in they
should walk; and as Rev, 3. 19
(...) ch^stized them, he said, As (...) as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be
They are whipped, and sent on their way.
zealous therefore, and repent. This done, he bids them go on their way, and
take good heed to the other directions of the Shepherds. So they thanked him
for all his kindness, and went softly along the right way.

Come hither, you that walk along the way;
See how the Pilgrims fare, that go a stray!
They catched are in an intangling Net,
'Cause they good Counsel lightly did forget:
It Is true, they rescued were, but yet you see
They Are scourged to boot: Let this your caution be.
Now after a while, they perceived afar off, one coming softly and alone, all
along the Highway to meet them. Then said Christian to his fellow, Yonder is a
man with his back toward Sion, and he is coming to meet us.


Hopef. I see him, let us take heed to our selves now, left he should prove a
Flatterir also. So he drew nearer and nearer, and at last came up unto them.
His name was Atheist, The Atheist meets them
and he asked them whether they were going.


Chr. We are going to the Mount Sion.

Then Atheist fell into a very great He Laughs at them.
Laughter.


Chr. What is the meaning of your Laughter?


Atheist. I Laugh to see what ignorant persons you are, to take upon you so
tedious a Journey; and yet are like to have nothing but your travel for your
pai^s.


Chr. Why man? Do you think we They reason together:
shall not be received?


Athist. Received! There is no such place as you Dream of, in all this World.


Chr. But there is in the World to come.


Atheist. When I was at home in mine own Country, I heard as you now affirm,
and ^om that hearing went out to see, and have been seeking this City this
twenty years: But Jer. 22: 13:
find no more of it, then I did the first Ec. 10. 15.
day I set out.


Chr. We have both heard and believe that there is such a place to be found.


Atheist. Had not I, when at home, believed, I had not come thus far to seek:
But finding none, (and yet I The Atheist takes u^ his content in this World.
should, had there been such a place to be found, for I have gone to seek it
further then you) I am going back again, and will seek to refresh my self with
the things that I then cast away, for hopes of that which I now see is not.


Chr. Then said Christian to Hopeful Christian proves hu Brother.
his Fellow, Is it true which this man has said?


Hopef. Take heed, he is one of the Flatterers; remember what it has Hopefuls
gracious answer.
cost us once already for our harkning to such kind of Fellows. What! no Mount
Sion! Did we not see from the delectable Mountains the Ga^ 2 Cor. ^7.
of the City? Also, are we not now to walk by Faith? Let us go on, said
Hopeful, left the man with the Whip overtakes us again.

You should have taught me that Lesson, which I will round you in the ^ars w.
thall; Cease, my Son, to hear the Prove. 19. ^7.
Instruction that causes to err from the Heb. 10. 39.
words of knowledge. I say my Brother, cease to hear him, and lot us believe to
the saving of the Soul.


Chr. My Brother, I did not put the question to thee, for that I doubted of the
Truth of our belief my self: But to prove A ^ruit of an honest heart.
thee, and to fetch from thee a fruit of the honesty of thy heart. As for this
man, I know that he is blinded by the god of this World: Let thee and I go on,
knowing that we have belief of the Truth, and no lie is of the Truth. 1 John 2.
11



Hopef. Now do I rejoice in hope of the Glory of God: So they turned away from
the man; and he, Laughing at them, went his way.

I saw then in my Dream, that they They are come to the enchanted ground
went till they came into a certain Country, whose Air naturally tended to
make one drowsy, if he came a stranger into it. And here Hopeful began to be
very dull and heavy of sleep, wherefore he said unto Christian, I do now begin
to grow so drowsy, that I can sc^cely hold Hopeful begins to be drowsy
up mine eyes; let us lie down here and take one Nap.


Chr. By no means, said the other, Christian keeps him awake.
lest sleeping, we never awake more.


Hopef. Why my Brother? sleep is sweet to the Laboring man; we may be
refreshed if we take a Nap.


Chr. Do you not remember that one of the Shepherds bid us beware of the (...)
ground? He meant by that, that we should beware of sleeping; wherefore 1 These.
5. 6
let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.


Hopef. I acknowledge my self in He is (...).
fault, and had I been here alone, I had by sleeping run the danger of of
death. I see it is true that the wise man says, Two are better then one. Eccl.
4. 9.
Hitherto has thy Company been my mercy; and thou shall have a good reward for
thy labor.


Chr. Now t^en, said Christian, To prevent drowsine^s they fall to good
discourse.
to prevent drowsiness in this place, let let us fall into good discourse.


Hopef. With all my heart, said the other.


Chr. Where shall we begin? Good discourse prevents (...)



Hopef. Where God began with us. But do you begin, if you please.


When Saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither,
And hear how these two Pilgrims talk together:
Ye a, let them learn of them, in any wise,
Thus to keep open their drowsy slumbring eyes.
Saints fellowship, if it be managed well,
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell.
Chr. Then Christian began and said, I will ask you a question. How came you to
think at first of doing as you do now?


Hopef. Do you mean, How came I at first to look after the good of my Soul?


Chr. Yes, that is my meaning.


Hopef. I continued a great while in the delight of those things which were
seen and sold at our fair; things which, as I believe now, would have (had I
continued in them still) drownded me in perdition and destruction.


Chr. What things were they?


Hopef. All the Treasures and Riches of the World. Also I delighted much in
Rioting, Revelling, Drinking, Swearing, Lying, Uneleanness, Sabbathbreaking,
and what not, that tended to destroy the Soul. But I found at last, by hearing
and considering of things that are Divine, which indeed I heard of you, as also
of beloved Faithful, that was put to death for Romans 6. 21 22, 23.
his Faith and good-living in Vanityfair, That the end of these things is Ephesians.
5. 6.
death. And that for these things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience.


Chr. And did you presently fall under the power of this conviction?


Hopef. No, I was not willing presently to know the evil of sin, nor the
damnation that follows upon the commission of it, but endeavored, when my mind
at first began to be shaken with the word, to shut mine eyes against the light
thereof.


Chr. But what was the cause of your carrying of it thus to the first workings
of Gods blessed Spirit upon you?


Hopef The causes were, 1. I was ignorant that this was the work of God upon
me. I never thought that by awaknings for sin, God at first begins the
conversion of a sinner. 2. Sin was yet very sweet to my flesh, and I was loath
to leave i^. 3. I could not tell how to part with mine old Companions, their
presence and actions were so desirable unto me. 4. The hours in which
convictions were upon me, were such troublesome and such heart-affrighting
hours, that I could not bear, no not so much as the remembrance of them upon my
heart.


Chr. Then as^it seems, sometimes you got rid of your trouble.


Hopef. Yes verily, but it would come into my mind again, and then I should be
as bad, nay worse, then I was before.


Chr. Why, what was it that brought your sins to mind again?


Hopef. Many things, As,

1. If I did but meet a good man in the Streets; or,

2. If I have heard any read in the Bible; or,

3. If mine Head did begin to Ache; or,

4. I were told that some of my Neighbors were sick; or,

5. If I heard the Bell Toull for some that were dead; or,

6. If I thought of dying my self; or,

7. If I heard that sudden death happened to others.

8. But especially, when I thought of my self, that I must quickly come to
Judgment.


Chr. And could you at any time with ^ase get off the guilt of sin, when by any
of these ways it came upon you?


Hopef. No, not latterly, for then they got faster hold of my Conscience And
then, if I did but think of going back to sin (though my mind was turned
against it) it would be double torment to me.


Chr. And how d^dyou you do then?


Hopef. I thought I must endeavor to mend my l^e, for else thought I, I am
sure to be damned.


Chr. And did you endeavor to mend?


Hopef. Yes, and fl^d from, not only my sins, but sinful Company too; and
betook me to Religious Duties, as Praying, Reading, w^eping for Sin, speaking
Truth to my Neighbors, etc. Th^se things I did, with many others, too much h^e
to relate.


Chr. And did you think your self well then?


Hopef. Yes, for a while, but at the last my trouble cam^ tumbling upon me
again, and that over the neck of all my Reformations.


Chr. How came that about, since you was now Reformed?


Hopef. There were several things brought it upon me, especially such sayings
as these; All our righteousnesses ^sa 64. 6.
are as filthy rags. By the works of the Gala. 2. 16.
Law no man shall be justified. When you have done all things, say, We are
unprofitable: Luke 17. 10
with many more the like. From whence I began to reason with my self thus: If
all my righteousnesses are filthy rags, if by the deeds of the Law, no man can
be justified; And if, when we have done all, we are yet unprofitable: Then it is
but a folly to think of Heaven by the Law. I further thought thus: If a man
runs an 100 l. into the Shopkeepers debt, and after that shall pay for all
that he shall fetch, yet his old debt stands still in the Book uncrossed; for
the which the Shopkeeper may sue him, and cast him into Prison till he shall
pay the debt.


Chr. Well, and how did you apply this to your self?


Hopef. Why, I thought thus with my self; I have by my sin^ run a great way
into Gods Book, and that my now reforming will not pay o^f that score;
therefore I should think still under all my present amendments, But how shall I
be freed from that damnation that I have brought my self in danger of by my
former transgressions?


Chr. A very good application: but pray go on.


Hope Another thing that has troubled me, even since my late amendments, is,
that if I look narrowly into the b^t of what I do now, I still see sin, n^w
sin, mi^ng it self with the best o^ that I do. So that now I am forced to
conclude, that notwithstanding my former fond conceits of my self and duties, I
have committed sin enough in on^ duty to send me to Hell, though my former life
had be^ fault ^ss.


Chr. And what did you do then?


Hopef. Do! I could not tell what to do, till I brake my mind to Faithful; for
he and I were w^ll acquainted: And he told me, That unless I could obtain the
righteousness of a man that never had sinned, neither mine own, nor all the
righteousness of the World could save me.


Chr. And did you think he spoke true?


Hopef. Had he told me so when I was pleased and satisfied with mine own
amendments, I had called him Fool for his pains: but now, since I see my own
infirmity, and the sin that cleaves to my best performance, I have been forceed
to ^e of his opinion.


Chr. But did you think, when at first he suggested it to you, that there was
such a man to be found, of whom it might justly be said, That he never
committed sin?


Hopef. I must confess the words at first sounded strangely, but after a little
more talk and company with him, I had full conviction about it.


Chr. And did you ask ^im what man this was, and how you must be justifi^d by
him?


Hopef. Yes, and he told me it was H^b. 10.
the Lord Jesus, that dwells on the Romans 4.
right hand of the most High: And Col 1.
thus, said he, you must be justified by 1 Pet. 1.
him, even by trusting to what he has done by himself in the days of his
flesh, and suffered when he did hang on the Tree. I asked him further, How that
man's righteousness could be of that efficacy, to justify another before God?
And he told me, He was the mighty God, and did what he did, and died the death
also, not for himself, but for us; to whom his doings, and the worthiness of
them should be imputed, if I believed on him.


Chr. And what did you do then?


Hope. I mad^ my objections against my believing, for that I thought he was not
willing to save me.


Chr. And what said Faithful to you then?


Hopes He bid me go to him an^ see: Then I said, It was presumption: but he
said, No: for I was invited to Mat. 11. 18
come. Then he gave me a Book of Jesus his i^diting, to encourage me the more
^ely to come: And he said concerning that Book, That every jot and tittle there
of stood firmer Mat. 24. 35
then Heaven and earth. Then I asked him, What I must do when I came? and he
told me, I must entreat upon Ps. 95. 6.
my knees with all my heart and soul, Dan. 6. ^o
the Father to reveal him to me. Then Jer. 29. 12, 13.
I asked him furth^r, How I must make my supp^ication to him? And h^ sa^d, Go,
and thou shall find him upon a mercy-seat, where he sits all Ex. 25. 22.
the year long, to give pardon and Lev. (...).
forgiveness to them that come. I Nn. 7. 89.
Heb 4. 6.
told him that I knew not what to say when I came: and he bid me say to this
effect, God be merciful to me a sinner, and make me to know and believe in
Jesus Christ; for I see that if his righteousness had not been, or I have not
faith in that righteousness, I am utterly cast away: Lord, I have heard that
thou art a merciful God, and have ordained that thy Son Jesus Christ should be
the Savior of the World; and moreover, that thou art willing to bestow him
upon such a poor sinner as I am, (and I am a sinner indeed) Lord take therefore
this opportunity, and magnify thy grace in the Salvation of my soul, through
thy Son Jesus Christ, Am^n.


Chr. And did you do as you were bidden?


Hopef. Yes, over, and over, and over.


Chr. And did the Father reveal his Son to you?


Hopes. Not at the first, nor second, nor third, nor fourth, nor fifth, no, nor
at the sixth time neither.


Chr. What did you do then?


H^pef. What! why I could not tell what to do.


Chr. Had you not thoughts of leaving off praying?


Hopef. Yes, an hundred times, twice told.


Chr. And what was the reason you did not?


Hopef. I believed that that was true which had been told me, to wit, That
without the righteousness of this Christ, all the World could not save me: And
therefore thought I with my self, If I leave off, I die; and I can but die at
the Throne of Grace. And withal, this came into my mind, If it tarry, wait for
it, because Habb. 2. 3.
it will surely come, and will not tarry. So I continued Praying until the
Father showed me his Son.


Chr. And how was he revealed unto you?


Hopef. I did not see him with my bodily eyes, but with the eyes of Ephesians. 1. 18,
19.
min^ understanding; and thus it was. One day I was very sad, I think sader
then at any one time in my life; and this sadness was through a fresh ^ight of
the greatness and vileness of my sins: And as I was then looking for nothing
but Hell, and the everlasting damnation of my ^oul, suddenly, as I thought, I
saw the Lord Jesus look down from Heaven upon me, and saying, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Act. 16. 30 31.
Christ, and thou shall be saved.

But I replied, Lord, I am a great, a very great sinner; and he answered, 2
Cor. 12. 9
My grace is sufficient for thee. Then I said; But Lord; what is believing, And
then I saw from that saying, [ He, the Joh. 6. 35.
comes to me sh^l never hunger, and (...) that believes on (...) shall never
thirst] That believing and coming was all one, and that he that came, that is,
run out in his heart and affections after salvation by Christ, he indeed
believed in Christ. Then the water stood in mine eyes, and I asked further, But
Lord, may such a great sinner as I am, be indeed accepted of thee, and be saved
by thee? And Joh. 6. 38
I heard him say, And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Then I
said, But how, Lord, must I consider of thee in my coming to thee, that my
faith may be placed aright upon 1 Ti. 1. 15
thee? Then he said, Christ Jesus (...) Romans 10. 4. chap. 4.
into the World to save sinners. He is the Heb 7. 24, 25.
(...) of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. He died for
(...) sins, and rose again for our justification; He loved us, and washed us
fr^ our si^s in his own blood: He is (...) (...) between God and us. He ever
li^ to (...) intercession for us. From all which I gathered, that I must look
for righteousness in his person, and for satisfaction for my sins by his blood;
that what he did in obedience to his Fathers Law, and in submitting to the
penalty thereof, was not for himself, but for him that will accept it for his
Salvation, and be thankful. And now was my heart full of joy, mine eyes full of
tears, and mine affections running over with love to the Name, People, and Ways
of Jesus Christ.


Chr. This was a Revelation of Christ to your soul indeed: But tell me
particularly what effect this h^d upon your spirit.


Hopef. It made me see that all the World, notwithstanding all the
righteousness thereof, is in a state of condemnation. It made me see that God
the Father, though he be just, can justly justify the coming sinner: It made
me greatly ashamed of the vileness of my former life, and confounded me with
the sense of mine own Ignorance; for there never came thought into mine heart
before now, that showed me so the beauty of Jesus Christ. It made me love a
holy life, and long to do something for the Honor and Glory of the name of the
Lord Jesus. Yea I thought, that had I now a thousand gallons of blood in my
body, I could spill it all for the sake of the Lord Jesus.

I then saw in my Dream, that Hopeful looked back and saw Ignorance, whom they
had left behind, coming after. Look said he to Christian, how far yonder
Youngster l^reth behind.


Chr. Ay, Ay, I see him; he cares not for our Company.


Hopef. But I tro, it would not have hurt him, had he kept pace with us
hitherto.


Chr. That Is true, but I warrant you he thinks otherwise


Hope. That I think he does, but Young Ignorance comes up again:
however let us tarry for him. So they did.

Then Christian said to him, Come away man, why do you stay so behind?


Igno. I take my pleasure in walking Their talk:
alone, even more a great deal then in Company, unless I like it the better.

Then said Christian to Hopeful (but softly) Did I not tell you, he cared ^t
for our Company: But however, come up, and let us talk away the time in this
solitary place. Then directing his Speech to Ignorance, he said, Come, how do
you? how stands it between God and your Soul now?


Ignor. I hope well, for I am al ways ^ull of good motions, that come into my
mind to comfort me as I walk.


Chr. What good motions? pray tell us.


Ignor. Why, I think of God and Heaven.


Chr. So do the Devils and damned Souls.


Ignor. But I think of them, and desire them.


Chr. So do many that are never like to come there: The Soul of the Sluggard
desires and has nothing.


Ignor. But I think of them, and leave all for them.


Chr. That I doubt, for leaving of all is an hard matter, yea a harder matter
then many are aware of. But why, or by what, art thou persuaded that thou have
left all for God and Heaven?


Ignor. My heart tells me so.


Chr. The wise man says, He that Pr. 28. 29.
trusts his own heart is a fool.


Ignor. That is spoken of an evil heart, but mine is a good one.


Chr. But how do thou prove that?


Ignor. It comforts me in the hopes of Heaven.


Chr. That may be, through its deceitfulness, for a man's heart may (...) ster
comfort to him in the hopes of that thing, for which he yet has no ground to
hope.


Ignor. But my heart and life agree together, and therefore, my hope is well
grounded.


Chr. Who told thee that thy heart and life agrees together?


Ignor. My heart tells me so.


Chr. Ask (...) Fellow if I be a Thief: Thy heart tells thee so! Except the
word of God bears witness in this matter, other Testimony is of no value.


Ignor. But is it not a good heart that has good thoughts? And is not that a
good li^e that is according to Gods Commandments?


Chr. Yes, That is a good heart that has good thoughts, and that is a good
life that is according to Gods Commandments: But it is one thing indeed to have
(...), and another thing only to think so.


Ignor. Pray what count you good thoughts, and a life according to Gods
Commandments?


Chr. There are good thoughts of diverse kinds, some respecting our selves,
(...) God, some Christ, and some other things.


Ignor. What be good thoughts respecting our selves?


Chr. Such as agree with the Word of God.


Ignor. When does our thoughts of our selves agree with the Word of God?


Chr. When we pass the same Judgment upon our selves which the Word passes, To
explain my self. The Word of God says of persons in a nat^ral condition, There
is none Righteous, there is none that does good. It says Romans 3.
also, That every imagination of the Genesis 6. 8.
heart of man is only evil, and that continually. And again, The imagination of
man's heart is evil from his Youth. Now then, when we think thus of our selves,
^aving sense thereof, then are our thoughts good ones, because according to the
Word of G^d.


Ignor. I will never believe that my heart is thus bad.


Chr. Therefore thou never badst one good thought concerning thy self in thy
life. But let me go on: As the Word passes a (...) upon our HEART, so it (...)
a Judgment upon (...) WAYS; and when our thoughts of our HEARTS and WAYS agree
with the Judgm^nt which the W^rd gives of both, then are both good, because
agreeing thereto.


Ignor. Make out your meaning.


Chr. Why, the Word of God says, That man's ways are crooked ways, not Ps. 125.
5.
good, but perverse: It says, they are Pro. 2. 15.
Romans 3.
naturally out of the good way, that they have not known it. Now when (...) man
thus thinks of his ways, I say when (...) does sensibly, and with
hea^d-^militation thus think, then has (...) good thoughts of his own ways,
because his thoughts now agree with the judgment of the Word of God.


Ignor. What are good thoughts concerning God?


Chr. Even (as I have said concerning our selves) when our thoughts of God do
agree with what the Word says of him. And that is, when we think of his: (...)
and Attribut^r at the Word has taught: Of which I cannot now discourse at
large. But to speak of him with reference to us, Then we have right thoughts of
God, when we think that he knows us better then we know our selves, (...) can
see (...) in (...), when and where we can see none in our selves; when we think
he knows (...) in-most thoughts, and (...) our heart with all its depths is
always open unto his eyes: Also when we think that all our Righteousness (...)
in his Nostrils, and that therefore (...) cannot abide to see us stand before
^im in any confidence even of all our best performances.


Ignor. Do you think that I am such a fool, as to think God can see no further
then I? or that I would come to God in the best of my performances?


Chr. Why, how do (...) think on this matter?


Ignor. Why, to be short, I think I must believe in Christ for Justification.


Chr. How! think thou (...) believe in Christ, when thou see not thy need of
him! Thou neither see thy original, or actual (...), but have such an opinion
of thy self, and of (...) thou do, as plainly renders thee to be one that
did never ses a necessity of Christ's personal righteousness to justify thee
before God: How then do thou say, I believe in Christ?


Ignor. I believe well enough for all that.


Chr. How do thou believe?


Ignor. I believe that Christ died for sinners, and that I shall be justified
before God from the curse, through his gracious acceptance of my obedience to
his Law: Or thus, Christ makes my Duties that are Roligious, acceptable to his
Father by virtue of his Merits; and so shall I be justified.


Chr. Let me give an answer to this confession of thy faith.

1. Thou believe with a Fantastical Faith, for this faith is no where
described in the Word.

2. Thou believe with a False Faith, because it takes Justification from the
personal righteousness of Christ, and applies it to thy own.

3. This faith makes not Christ a Justifier of thy person, but of thy actions;
and of thy person for thy actions sake, which is false.

4. Therefore this faith is deceitful, even such as will leave thee under
wrath, in the day of God Almi. ^ty. For true Justifying Faith puts the soul (as
sensible of its lost condition by the Law) upon flying for refuge unto Christ's
righteousness: (Which righteousness of his, is not an act of grace, by which he
makes for Justification thy obedience ac^epted with God, but his personal
obedience to the Law in doing and suffering for us, what that required at our
hands) This righteousness, I say, true faith accepts, under the skirt of
which, the soul being shrouded, and by it presented as spotless before God, it
is accepted, and acquit from condemnation.


Ignor. What! would you have us trust to what Christ in his own person has done
without us! This conceit would loosen the reins of our lust, and tolerate us
to live as we list: For what matter how we live, if we may be Justified by
Christ's personal righteousness from all, when we believe it?


Chr. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy name is, so art thou; even this thy
answer demonstrateth what I say. Ignorant thou art of what Justifying
righteousness is, and as ignorant how to secure thy soul through the faith of
it, from the heavy wrath of God. Yea, thou also art ignorant of the true
effects of saving. faith in this righteousness of Christ, which is, to bow and
win over the heart to God in Christ, to love his Name, his Word, Ways, and
People; and not as thou ignorantly imaginest.


Hop. Ask him if ever he had Christ revealed to him from Heaven?


Ignor. What! you are a man for revelations! I believe that what both you, and
all the rest of you say about that matter, is but the fruit of distracted
brains.


Hop. Why man! Christ is so hid in God from the natural apprehensions of all
flesh, that he cannot by any man be savingly known, unless God the Father
reveals him to them.


Ignor. That is your faith, but not mine; yet mine I doubt not, is as good as
yours: Though I have not in my head so many whimzies as you.


Chr. Give me leave to put in a word: You ought not so slightly to speak of
this matter: for this I will boldly affirm (even as my good ComCompanion has
done) that no man Mat 11. 18
1 Co. 12. 3.
can know Jesus Christ but by the Re^ Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.
of the Father: yea, and says too, by which the soul lays hold upon Christ
(if it be right) must be wrought by the exceeding greatness of his mighty
power; the working of which faith, I perceive, poor Ignorance, thou art
ignorant of. Be awakened th^n, see thine own wretchedness, and fly to the Lord
Jesus; and by his righteousness, which is the righteousness of God, (for he
himself is God) thou shall be deli^ from cond^mnation.


Igno. You go so fast, I cannot keep The tal^ broke up.
pace with you; do you go on before, I must stay a while behind.

Well Ignorance, will thou yet foolish be,
To flight good Counsel, ten times given thee?
And if thou yet refuse it, thou shall know
Ere long the evil of thy doing so:
Remember man in time, stoop, do not fear,
Good Counsel taken well, saves; there sore hear:
But if thou yet shall slight it, thou will be
The loser (Ignorance) (...) warrant (...).

Chr. Well, come my good Hopeful, I perceive that thou and I must walk by our
selves again.

So I saw in my D^eam, that they went on a pace before, and I^norance he came
hobling after. Then said Christian to his companion, It p^ties me much for this
poor man, it will certainly go ill with him at last.


Hope. A^as, there are abundance in our Town in his condition; whole Families,
^ea, whole Streets, (and that of Pilgrims too) and if there be so many in our
parts, how many think you, must there be in the place where he was born?


Chr Indeed the Word says, He has blinded their eyes, lest they should see,
etc. But now we are by our selves, what do you think of such men? Have they at
no time, think you, convictions of sin, and so consequently fears that their
state is dangerous?


Hopef. Nay, do you answer that question your self, for you are the elder man.


Chr. Then I say sometimes (as I think) they may, but they being naturally
ignorant, understand not that such convictions tend to their good; and
therefore they do desperately seek to stifle them, and presumptuously continue
to flatter themselves in the way of their own hearts.


Hopef. I do believe as you say, that The (...) use of (...)
fear tends much to Men's good, and to make them right, at their beginning to go
on Pilgrimage.


Chr. Without all doubt it dot (...), if it Job (...). 29.
be right: for so says the word, The fear of (...). (...). (...).
the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Pro. 17 chapter 9. 10.



Hopef. How will you describe right fear?


Chr. True, or right fear, is discovered (...) (...).
by three things.

1. By its rise. It is caused by saving convictions for sin.

2. It drives the soul to lay fast hold of Christ for Salvation.

3. It begets and continues in the soul a great reverence of God, his word,
and ways, keeping (...) tender, and making it afraid to turn from them, to the
right hand, or to the left, to any thing that may dishonor God, break its
peace, grieve the Spirit, or cause the Enemy to speak reproachfully.


Hopef. Well said, I believe you have said the truth. Are we now almost got
past the Enchanted ground?


Chr. Why, are you weary of this discourse?


Hopef. No verily, but that I would know where we are.


Chr. We have not now above two Miles further to go thereon. But let us return
to our matter. Now the Ignorant know not that such convictions that tend to put
them in fear, are for their good, and therefore they seek to stifle them.


Hopef. How do they seek to stifle them?


Chr. 1. They think that those fears are wrought by the Devil (though indeed
they are wrought of God) and thinking so, they resist them, as things that
directly tend to their overthrow. 2. They also think that these fears tend to
the spoiling of their faith, (when alas for them, poor men that they are! they
have none at all) and therefore they harden their hearts against them. 3. They
presume they ought not to fear, and therefore, in despite of them, wax
presumptuously confident. 4. They see that these (...) tend to take away from
them the^ pitiful old self-holiness, and therefore they resist them with all
their might.


Hope. I know something of this my self; for before I knew my self it was so
with me.


Chr. Well, we will leave at this tim eour Neighbor Ignorance by himhimself,
and fall upon another profit able question.


Hopef. With all my heart, but you Talk abo^ (...) (...).
shall still begin.


Chr. Well then, Did you not know (...) (...) (...).
about ten years ago, one Temporary in your parts, who was a forward man in
Religion then?


Hope. Know him^ Yes, he dwelt in Graceless, a Town about two miles off of
Honesty, and he dwelt next door to one Turn-back.


Chr. Right, he dwelt under the sa^ roof with him. Well, that man was much
awakened once; I believe that then he had some fight of his sins, and of the
wages that was (...) thereto.


H^e. I am of your mind, for (my H^se not being above three mile^ from him) he
would ost times come to me, and that with many tears. Truly I pitied the man,
and was not altogether without hope of him; (...) one may (...) it is (...)
(...) one that cries, Lord, (...).


Chr. He told me (...), That (...) (...) resolved to go on (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...); but all of a (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) one (...), (...) (...)
he (...) (...) (...) to (...).


Hope. Now (...) we are (...) about him, let us a little enquire into the
reason of the (...) back^ding of him and such others


Chr. It (...) be (...) pro^, (...) (...) yo^ (...).


Hope. Well then, there are in my judgment four reasons for it.

1. Though the (...) of such (...) are awaken^d, yet their (...) are not
changed: there^ when the pow^ of guilt (...) away, that which provoked them to
be Religious, cease. Wherefore they (...) turn to their own course again:
even (...) we see the Dog that is sick of what he has eaten, so (...) as his
sickness (...), he vomits and (...) up all; not that he does this of a free
mind (if we may say a Dog has a mind) but because it troubles his Stomach, but
now (...) his (...) (...) over, and so his Stomach eased, his desires being not
at all alienate from his vomit, he turns him about and licks upall. And so it
is true which is written, The Dog is turned to his own vomit again. This 2 Pet.
2: 22.
I say being hot for Heaven, by virtue only of the sense and fear of the
torments of Hell, as their sense of Hell, and the fears of damnation chills and
cools, so their desires for Heaven and Salvation cool also. So then it comes to
pass, that when their guilt and fear is gone, their desires for Heaven and
Happiness die; and they return to their course again. Pro. 19. 25


2ly. Another reason is, They have slavish fears that do over-master them. I
speak now of the fears that they have of men: For the fear of m^n brings a
snare. So then, though they seem to be hot for Heaven, so long as the flames of
Hell are about their ears, yet when that terror is a little over, they betake
themselves to second thoughts; namely, that it is good to be: wise, and not to
run (for they know not what) the hazard of loosing all; or at least, of
bringing themselves into unavoidable and un-necessary troubles: and so they
fall in with the world again.

3ly. The shame that attends Religion, lies also as a block in their way; they
are proud and haughty, and Religion in their eye is low and contemptible:
Therefore when they have lost their sense of Hell and wrath to come, they
return again to their former course.

4ly. Guilt, and to meditate terror, are grievous to them, they like not to
see their misery before they come into it. Though perhaps the sight of it
first, if they loved that sight, might make them fly whither the righteous
fly and are safe; but because they do, as I hinted before, even shun the
thoughts of guilt and terror, therefore, when once they are rid of their
awakenings about the terrors and wrath of God, they harden their hearts gladly,
and choose such ways as will harden them more and more.


Chr. You are pretty near the business, for the bottom of all is, for want of a
change in their mind and will. And therefore they are but like the Fellon that
stands before the Judge, he quakes and trembles, and seems to repent most
heartily; but the bottom of all is, the fear of the (...), not of any
detestation of the offense; as is evident, because, let but this man have his
liberty, and he will be a T^ief, and so a Rogue still; whereas, if his mind was
changed, he would be otherwise.


Hope. Now I have showed you the reasons of their going back, do you show me
the manner thereof.


Chr. So I will willingly. How the Apostate goes back.


1. They draw off their thoughts all that they may, from the remembrance of
God, Death, and Judgment to come.

2. Then they cast off by degrees private Duties, as Closet-Prayer, curbing
their lusts, watching, sorrow for sin, and the like.

3. Then they shun the company of lively and warm Christians.

4. After that, they grow cold to public Duty, as Hearing, R^ading, Godly
Confe^ence, and the like.

5. Then they beginto pick holes, as we say, in the Coats of some of the Godly,
and that devisishly; that they may have a seeming color to throw Religion (for
the sake of some infirmity they have spied in them) behind their backs.

6. Then they begin to adhere to, and associate themselves with carnal loose
and wanton men.

7. Then they give way to carnal and wanton discourses in secret; and glad are
they if they can see such things in any that are counted honest, that they may
the more boldly do it through their example.

8 After this, they begin to play with little sins openly.

9. And then, being hardened, they show themselves as they are. Thus being
lanched again into the gulf of misery, unless a Miracle of Grace prevent it,
they everlastingly perish in their own deceivings.

Now I saw in my Dream, that by this time the Pilgrims were got over the
Inchant^d Ground, and entering in the Country of Beulah, whose Isa. 62. 4.
Air was very sweet and pleasant, the Cant. 2. 10, 11, 12.
way lying directly through it, they solaced themselves there for a season.
Yea, here they heard continually the singing of Birds, and saw every day the
flowers appear in the earth: and heard the voice of the Turtle in the Land. In
this Country the Sun shines night and day; wherefore this was beyond the
Valley of the shadow of death, and also out of the reach of Giant Despair;
neither could they from this place so much as see Doubting-Castle. Here they
were within sight of the City they were going to: also here met them some of
the Inhabitants thereof. For Angels
in this Land the shining Ones commonly walked, because it was upon the Borders
of Heaven. In this Land also the contract between the Bride and the Bridgroom
was renewed: Isa. 62. 5.
Yea here, as the (...) rejoices over the Bride, so (...) God rejoice ver. 3.
over them. Here they had no want of Corn and Wine; for in this place they met
with abundance of what they had sought in all their Pilgrimage. Here they heard
voices from out of the City, loud voices; saying, Say ye to the daughter of
Zion, Behold thy Salvation comes, behold his reward ver. 11.
is with him. Here all the Inhabitants of the Country called them, ver. 12.
The holy People, The redeemed of the Lord, Sought out, etc.

Now as they walked in this Land, they had more rejoicing then in parts more
remo^e from the King^om to which they were bound; and drawing near to the City,
they had yet a more perfect view thereof. It was builded of Pearls and precious
Stones, also the Street thereof was paved with Gold, so that by reason of the
natural glory of the City, and the reflection of the Sunbeams upon it,
Christian, with desire sell sick, Hopeful also had a fit or two of the same
Disease: Wherefore here they lay by it a while, crying out because of their
pangs, If you see my Beloved, tell him that I am sick of love.

But being a little strengthened, and better able to bear their sickness, they
walked on their way, and came yet nearer and nearer, where were Orchards,
Vineyards and Gardens, and their Gates opened into the Highway. Now as they
came up to these places, behold the Gardener stood in Deuteronomy. 23. 24.
the way; to whom the Pilgrims said, Whose goodly Vineyards and Gardens are
these? He answered, They are the Kings, and are planted here for his own
delights, and also for the solace of Pilgrims. So the Gardener ha^ them into
the Vineyards, and bid them refresh themselves with the Dainties; he also
showed them there the Kings walks, and the Arbons where he delighted to be: And
here they ^arried and (...).

Now I beheld in my Dream, that they talked more in their sleep at this time,
then ever they did in all their Journey; and being in a muse there-about, the
Gardener sa d even to me, Wherefore muse^t thou at the matter? It is the nature
of the fruit of the Gra^es of these Vineyards to go down so sweetly, as to
cause the lips of them that are asleep to speak.

So I saw that when they awoke, they addressed themselves to go, up to the
City. But. as. I said, the reflections of the Sun upon the City Revel. 21. 18.
(for the City was pure Gold) was so, extremely glorious, that they could not,
as yet, with open sace behold: 1 Cor. 3. 18.
it, but through an Instrument made for that purpose. So I saw, that as they
went on, there met them two men, in ^aiment that shone like Gold, also, their
saces shone as the light.

These men asked the ^ilgrims whence they came? and they told them; they also
asked them, Where they had lodged, what (...), and dangers, what comforts and
pleasures they had met in the way? and they told them. Then said the men that
met them, You have but two (...) more to meet with, and then you are in the
City.

Christian then and his Companion asked the men to go along with them, so they
told them they would; but, (...) they, you must obtain it by your own faith. So
I saw in my Dream that they went on together till they came within sight of the
Gate.

Now I further saw that (...) them and the Gate was a ^iver, but Death.
there was no Bridge to go over, the River was very deep; at the sight
therefore of this River, the ^ilgrims were much (...), but the men Death is not
welcome to nature though (...) it we (...) out of this world into glory.
that went with them said. You must go through, or you cannot come at the Gate.

The ^ilgrims them began to enquire if there was no other way to the Gate; to
which they answered, Yes, but there has not any, save two, to wit, Enoch and
Elijah, been permitted to tread that path, since the foundation of the World,
nor shall, until the last Trumper shall 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.
sound. The Pilgrims then, especially Christian, began to (...) in his mind,
and looked this wav and that, but no way could be found by them, (...) which
they might escape the River. Then they (...) the men, if the Waters were all of
a depth. They said, No; (...) they could not help them in that Case, for said
they: ^.
You shall find it (...) or shallower, as you (...) in (...) (...) of (...)
place.

They then addressed themselves to the (...); and entering, Christian (...) to
sink, and (...) out to his good Friend (...); he said, I sink in deep Waters,
the Billows go over my head, all his Waves go over me, Selah.

Then said the other, Be of good cheer, my Brother, I feel the bottom, and it
is good. Then said Christian, Ah my friend, the sorrows of ^.
death have compassed me about, I shall not see the Land that flows with Milk
and Honey. And with that, a great darkness and (...) fell upon Christian, so
that he could not see before him; also here he in great measure lost his
senses, so that he could neither remember nor orderly talk of any of those
sweet refreshments that he had met with in the way of his Pilgrimage. But all
the words that he spoke, still tended to discover that he had horror of mind,
and hearty fears that he should die in that River, and never obtain entrance in
at the Gate: here also, as they that stood by, (...), he was much in the
troublesome thoughts of the sins that he had committed, both since and before
he began to be a Pilgrim. 'Twas also observed, that he was troubled with
apparitions of Hogoblins and Evil Spirits. For ever and anon he would intimate
so much by words. Hopeful therefore here had much ado to keep his Brothers
head above water, yea sometimes he would be quite gone down, and then ere a
while he would rise up again half dead. Hopeful also would endeavor to comfort
him, (...), Brother, I see the Gate, and men (...) by it to receive us. But
Christian would answer: It Is you, it is you they wait for, you have been Hopeful
ever since I knew you; and so have you, said he to Christian. Ah Brother, said
he, surely if I was right, he would now arise to help me; but sor my sins he
has brought me into the snare, and has left me. Then said Hopeful, My
Brother, you have quite forgot the Text, where its said of the wicked, There is
no band in Psalm. 33. 4, 5.
their death, but their strength is firm, they are not troubled as other men,
neithet are they plagued like other men. These troubles and (...) that you go
through in these Waters, are no sign that God has forsaken you, but are sent
to try you, whether you will call to mind that which heretofore you have
received of his goodness, and live upon him in your distresses.

Then I saw in my Dream, that Christian was as in a muse a while; To whom also
Hopeful added this word, Be of good cheer, Jesus Christ makes (...) whole: And
with Christian delivered from (...) tears in death
that, Christian brake out with a loud voice, Oh I see him again! and he tells
me, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and Isa. 40. 2.
through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. Then they both took courage,
and the enemy was after that as (...) as a stone, until they were gone over.
Christian therefore presently sound ground to stand upon; and so it followed
that the rest of the River was but shallow. Thus they got over. Now upon the
bank of the River, on the other side, they saw the two (...) men again, who
there waited for them. Wherefore being come up out of the River, (...) saluted
them saying, We are (...) Spirits, sent forth to minister The (...) do wait
(...) them so (...) as they are passed (...) (...) this world.
for those that shall be Heirs of Salvation. Thus they went along toward the
Gate, now you must note that the City stood upon a mighty hill, but the
Pilgrims went up that hill with ease, because they had these two men to lead
them up by the Arms; also they had left their Mortal Garments They (...) put
off mortality.
behind them in the River; for though they went in with them, they came out
without them. They therefore went up here with much agility and speed, though
the foundation upon which the City was (...) was higher then the Clouds. They
therefore went up through the R^gions of the Air, sweetly talking as they went,
being comforted, because they safely got over the River, and had such glorious
Companions to attend them.

The talk they had with the shining Ones, was about the Glory of the place, who
told them, that the beauty, and glory of it was inexpressible. Ther^, said
they, is the Mount Sion, Heb. 12. 2, 23. 24.
the Heavenly Jerusalem, the inumerable Rev. 2. 7.
Company of Angels, and the Rev 3 4.
Spirits of Just men made perfect: You are going now, said they, to the
Paradi^e of God, wherein you shall see the Tree of Life, and eat of the
never-fading fruits thereof: And when you come there you shall have white Robes
given you, and your walk and talk shall be every day with the King, even all
the days of Eternity. There you shall not see again, such things as R^v. 21. 1.
^ou saw when you were in the lower Region upon the Earth, to wit, sorrow,
sickness, affliction, and death, for the form^r things are passed away, You are
going now to Abraham, to Isa. 57. 1. 2
Jacob, and Jacob, and to the ProProphets; men that God has taken Isa 65. 14.
away from the evil to come, and that are now resting upon their Beds, each one
walking in his tighteousness. The men then asked, What must we do in the holy
place? To whom it was answered, You must there receive the comfort of all your
toil, and have joy for all your sorrow; you must reap what you have sown, even
the fruit of all your Prayers and Tears, and sufferings for the King by Gal. 6.
7.
the way. In that place you must wear Crowns of Gold, and enjoy the perpetual
sight and Visions of the Joh 3. 2.
Holy One, for there you shall see him as he is. There also you shall serve him
continually with praise, with shouting and thanksgiving, whom you desired to
serve in the World, though with much difficulty, because of the infirmity of
your flesh. There your eyes shall be delighted with seeing, and your ears with
hearing, the pleasant ^oice of the mighty One. There you shall enjoy your
friends again, that are got thither before you; and there you shall with joy
receive, even every one that follows into the Holy Place after you: There also
you shall be (...) (...). 4 13, 14, (...), 10.
with Glory and Majesty, and put into an equipage fit to ride out with (...)
(...)
the King of Glory. When he shall (...). (...)
come with sound of Trumpet in the 1 (...). 6 2, 3.
Clouds, as upon the wings of the Wind, you shall come with him; and when he
shall sit upon the Throne of Judgment, you shall sit by him; yea, and when he
shall pass Sentence upon all the workers of Iniquity, let them be Angels or
Men, you also shall have a voice in that Judgment, because they were his and
your Enemies. Also when he shall again return to the City, you shall go too,
with sound of Trumpet, and be ever with him.

Now while they were thus drawing toward the Gate, be hold a company of the
(...) Host came out to meet them: To whom it was said, by the other two shining
Ones, These are the men that have loved our Lord, when they were in the World;
and that have left all for his holy Name, and he has sent us to setch them,
and we have brought them thus far on their desired Journey; that they may go in
and look their Redeemer in the face with joy Then the Heavenly Host gave a
Rev^l. 19.
great shout, saying, Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage supper
of the Lamb: and th^s they came up to the Gate.

Now when they were come up to the Gat^, there was written over it, in Letters
of Gold, Blessed are Re. (...). 14.
they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of life;
and may enter in through the Gates into the City.

Then I saw in my Dream. that the shining men bid them call at the Gate, the
which when they did, some from above looked over the Gate; to wit, Enoch,
Moses, and Elijah, etc. to whom it was said, These Pilgrims, are come from the
Cit^ of Destruction, for the love that they bear to the King of this place: and
th^n the Pilgrims gave in unto them each man his Certificate, which they had
received in the beginning; Those therefore were carried into the King, who when
he had read them, said, Where are the men? to whom it was answered, They are
standing without the Gate, the King then commanded to open the Gate; That Isa.
26. 2.
the (...) Nation, said he, that (...) Truth may enter in.

Now I saw in my Dream, that these two men went in at the Gate; and lo, as
they ente^ed, they were transfigured, and they had Raiment put on that shone
like Gold. There was al o that met them with Harps and Crowns, and gave them to
them; The Ha^p to praise withal, and the Crowns in token of honor; Then I
heard in my Dream that all the Bells in the City Rang for joy: and that it was
said unto them, Enter ye into the joy of your Lord. I also heard the men
themselves, that they sang with a Rev. 5. 13. 14.
loud voice, saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be to him that (...)
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Now just as the (...) ^ere opened to let in the men, I look^d in after them;
(...) behold, the City shone like the Sun, ^he St^eets also were paved with
^old, and in them walked ma^y (...) with (...) on their h^ads, (...) in their
hands, and golden (...) to sing praises withal.

There were also of them that had wings, and they answered one another without
intermission, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord. And after that, they shut
up the Gates: which when I had seen, I wished my self among them.

Now while I was gazing upon all these things, I turned my head to look back,
an^ saw Ignorance come up to the River side; but he soon got over, and that
without half that dif^iculty which the other two men met with. For it happened
that there was then in that plac^ (...) Vain-hope a Ferry-man, that with his
Boat helped him over: so he, as the other I saw, did ascend the Hill to come up
to the Gate, only he came alone; neither did any man m^et him with the least
encouragement. When he was come up to the Gate, he looked up to the writing
that was above; and then began to knock, supposing that entrance should have
been quickly administered to him: But he was asked by the men that looked over
the top of the Gate, Whence came you? an^ what would you have? He answered, I
have eat and drank in (...) (...) of the King, and he has taught in our
Streets. Then they asked him for his Certificate, that they might go in and
show it to the King. So he sumbled in his bosom for one, and found none. Then
said they, Have you none? But the man answered never a word. So they told the
King, but he would not come down to see him; but commanded the two shining Ones
that conducted Christian and Hopeful to the City, to go out and take
Ignonorance and bind him hand and foot, and have him away. Then they took him
up, and carried him through the air to the door that I saw in the side of the
Hill, and put him in there. Then I saw that there was away to Hell, even from
the Gates of Heaven as well as from the City of Destruction. So I awoke, and
behold it was a Dream.


FINIS.
The Conclusion.
NOw Reader, I have told my Dream to thee;
See if thou (...) Interpret it to me;
Or to thy self, or Neighbor: but take ^eed
Of mis-interpreting: for that, instead
Of doing good, will but thy self abuse:
By mis-interpreting (...).
Take heed also, that thou be not extreme,
In playing with the outside of my Dream:
Nor let my figure, or (...) (...) (...)
Put thee into a (...) (...) a (...) (...)
Leave this for Boys and Fools (...) for thee,
Do (...) the substance of my (...) (...)
Put by the Curtains, (...) within (...) Vail;
Turn (...) my Metaphors and do not fail:
There, if thou seek them, such things to find,
As will be helpful to an honest mind.
What of my dross thou find there, be bold
To throw away, but yet preserve the Gold.
What if my Gold be wrapped up in Ore?
None throws away the Apple for the Core:
But if thou shall cast all away as vain,
I know not but 'twill make me Dream again.
THE END.

