Another Happy VICTORY OBTAINED By His Excellency the Earl of Essex, December.
21. with 7000. men consisting of five Regiments of Foot, commanded by these
Worthies, viz. The Lord Rochford, the Lord Roberts, Sir John Meldrum, Sir
William Constable. Together with 17. Troops of Horse commanded by the Lord
Fielding, Sr. Philip Stapleton, and Sir William Balfore. Against 9000 of the
Kings Army, who were coming from Oxford toward Wellingford and Reading, to
relieve the rest of their Forces that lay thereabouts. Declaring also, how His
Excellency obtained the Victory in slaying and taking prisoners two of his
Majesty's Foot Regiments, and putting to flight the greatest part of the Horse;
taking from them 5. piece of Ordnance, and store of Ammunition.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parliment, that this great
Victory be fortwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng, Cle. Pa.D.com.

December. 23. Printed for Henry Liech.

Another VICTORY OBTAINED By that vjctorious General, Robert Earl of Essex,
against the whole body of His Majesty's Army, December 21. between Oxford and
Windsor.
SIR,
ON the 21. of this month, his Excellency being advanced from Windsor, toward
Oxford, he met with a great and strong party of the Kings Army, who out of my
duty toward you, I thought necessary to relate unto you the exact Relation of
a great and blessed Victory, which God has given us upon the Army of the
Cavaleeres, (...) those evil persons, who upon wednesday the one and twenty
of this instant, engaged His Majesty in another dangerous and bloody Fight
against His faithful Subjects, in the Army raised by Auchoritie of
Parliament, for the preservation of his Crown and Kingdom; we marched from
Windsore on Tuesday the twentieth, upon intelligence that their Army was moved
from Oxford, and bending toward us our Train of Artillery was so unready,
through want of Draught Horses, that we were forced to leave it behind to
follow to follow us, and with it the Regiments of Colonel Hampden, and
Colonel Grantham; and staying for it, we could advance no further then to a
little Market-towne called Bradshaw near Oxfordshire, where we came with
eleven Regiments of Foot, two and forty Troops of Horse, and about seven
hundred Dragoones, in all about ten thousand men, there we intended to rest
for some certain time, and the rather, that our Artillery, and the Forces left
with it might come up to us. In the morning (...) we were going forward, we had
news (...) brought us, that the Enemy was two miles from us, upon a great
Hill: Whereupon we presently marched forth into a great Field under that Hill,
and made a stand some half a mile from the Foot of the Hill: Their Forces
appeared to be much greater then we could possibly have conceived them to be;
by the confession of the prisoners we have taken, they that say least, say Five
thousand. In this posture we stood, when the other Army advanced toward us,
the strength of their Horse were on their right wing opposite to our left, In
their left wing they had but ten Troops, but their Foot which appeared to us,
divided into five great bodies came up all in Front, and after some playing
with the Canon on both sides, that part of it which was on their left, and
toward our right Wing, came on very gallantly to the charge, and were as
gallantly received, and charged by Sir Philip Stapletons and Sir William
Balfores Regiments of Horse, assisted with the Lord Roberts and Sir Will.
Constables Regiments of Foot, in such a manner, that they forced all the
Musketeers of two of their best Regiments to run in and shroud themselves
within their Pikes, not daring to shoot a shoot, and so stood: When our rear
came up, and then charging all together, espepecially that aart of our Rear
which was placed upon the right hand, and so next unto them, which was tho Lord
Generals Regiment, and the Lord Brooks, led on by Colonall Ballard, who
commaaded that Brigado, forced that stand of Pikes, and wholly broke those two
Regiments, and slew and took almost every man of them.

The other Regiment of our Rear, commanded by Col. Ballard, charged those which
were before them, and then the whole body of the Kings foot, except 2. other
Regiments, ran away.

By this time it grew so late and dark, where we made good the field, and gave
them leave to retire.

But before we come to this, we will give you an account of what passed in the
other parts of our army, before our Rear came up to charge. Our battle at the
first wholly disbanded and ran away, wihtout ever striking stroke, or so much
as being charged by the enemy, though Col. Meldrum himself, and others that
commanded those Regiments, did as much as men could do to stay them.

Now for our Kear thus it was, before it toward the out side of it stood the
left wing of horse, advanced a little forward where they stood in a battalio
lined with commanded Musketeers; but upon the first charge of the enemy they
wheeled about, fighting pell mell, just upon Col. Hollis his Regiment and brake
through it.

In this fight Sir Will. Balfour behaved himself with most noble and discreet
courage, who in the beginning of the Day broke a Regiment of foot which had
green Colors, beat them to their Canon where they threw down their Arms and
ran away.

Then he pursued the Cavaleirs half a mile upon exceution, and afterward
returned to the Red Kegiment, where Sir Philip Stapleton was charging of them,
and at last charged them up to push of pike with his single Troop; and they
then, with the help of some of the Foot of our rear utterly broke it, as you
had it before.

Here is one remarkable and observable Passage, concerning that heroic spirit
Sir Phillp Stapleton, who when five Troops of the Enemies horse returned from
pursuit of our left Wing, and passed by the outside of our Rear upon the left
hand, went and charged them with his Troop and made them run: but they finding
a by place, got away, and returned to the rest of their broken Troops. If we
had time we could relate unto you many more remarkable passages.

The Kings foot are either slain, or most of them run away, and are now very
weak, and should have bin pursued by us, but that we must of necessity refresh
Our men for 3. or 4. days, and then we shall God willing, address our selves
to finish the work, And so we rest,

Your faithful Servant, William Balfore.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be printed
and published.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. parl. D. Com.


