Light for them that sit in Darkness: OR, A DISCOURSE OF JESUS CHRIST; AND That
he undertook to accomplish by himself the Eternal Redemption of Sinners.

ALSO, How the Lord Jesus addressed himself to this Work; with undeniable
Demonstrations that he performed the same.

Objections to the Contrary, Answered: BY JOHN BUNYAN.

Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us,
Gal. 3. 13. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near
the Royal Exchange in Corrthil. 1675.

The Author to the Reader.
Gentle Reader*
IT was the great care of the Apostle Paul to deliver his Gospel to the
Churches in its own simplicity, because, SO it is the Power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes. And if it was his care so to deliver it
to us, it should be ours to seek so to continue it: And the rather, because of
the Unaptness of the Minds even of the Saints themselves to retain it without
commixture. For, to say nothing of the Projects of Hell, and of the cunning
craftiness of some that lie in wait to d^ceive, even the Godly themselves, as
they are dull of hearing, so much more dull in receiving, and holding fast the
simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: from their Sense, and Reason, and
Unbelief, and Darkness, arise many imaginations, and high thoughts which exalt
themselves against the Knowledge of God, and the Obedience of Jesus Christ;
wherefore they themselves have much ado to stand complete in all the Will of
God. And were they not concerned in electing love, by which they are bound up
in the Bundle of Life, and blessed with the Enjoiment of Saving Grace, which
enlightneth their Souls, and maintains their Faith and Hope, they would not
only be assaulted, and afflicted with their own Corruptions, but as others,
overcome thereby.

Alas! How ordinary a thing is it for Professors to fall from the Knowledge they
have had of the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, and to be turned unto
Fables, Seducing-Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils through the Intoxications of
Delusions, and the Witchcrafts of false Preachers.

Now this their swerving from the Gospel, arises:

1. Either from their not-having, or (having) notretaining, the true Knowledge
of the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ: Or,

2. From their not believing the true Causes of his Coming into the World, with
his Doing, and Suffering there. Upon one, or both these accounts, I say, it is
that they everlastingly perish: for if they have not, and do not also retain
the Knowledge of his Person, they want the HE, on whom if they believe not, they
(...) die in their Sins: And if they know not the Reason of his Coming, Doing,
and Suffering, they are in the same condition also.

Now those Professors that have had some Knowledge of these things, and yet have
lost them, it has come thus to p^ss with them; because they first lost the
Knowledge of themselves, and of their Sins.

They know not themselves to be such, nothingones, as the Scripture reports
them to be, nor their Sins to be so heinous as the Law has concluded:
Therefore they either turn again with the Dog to his Vomit, or adhere to a few
of the Rags of their own Fleshly Righteousness, and so become pure in their own
Eyes, yet are not purged by Blood, from their Filthiness.

For the Person and Doings of Jesus Christ are only precious to them that get
and retain the true Knowledge of themselves, and the due Reward of their Sins by
the Law: These are desolate, being driven out of all, these embrace the Rock
instead of a Shelter; the Sensible Sinner receives him joyfully.

And because a miscarriage in this Great Truth, is the most dangerous and
damning Miscarriage: therefore should Professors be the more fearful of
swerving aside therefrom. The Man that rejects the true Knowledge of the
Person of the Lord Jesus, and the Causes of his Doing and Suffering in the
World, takes the next way to be guilty of that Transgression, that is not to be
purged with Sacrifice for ever. That FEARFUL Transgression, for which is left
NO Offering AT ALL, nor any thing to be expected by the Person transgressing,
but fearful Judgment, and fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversary.

Now for their sakes that have not sinned this Sin, for their sakes that are in
danger thereof, but yet not overcome; for their sakes have I written this
little Book, wherein is largely, and yet with few words, discovered the
Doctrine of the Person, and Doings and Sufferings of Christ with the true Cause
thereof; also a removal of those Objections that the crafty Children of
darkness have framed against the same.

And I have been the more plain and simple in my writing, because the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is in these days, more common than formerly, and the Way
unto it more beautified with color, and pretense of Truth. I may say of the
way to this Sin, it is, as was once the Way to Jerusalem, strewed with Boughs
and Branches, and by some there is eried a kind of Hosanna to them that are
treading these Steps to Hell. Oh the plausible Pretenses, the golden Names, the
feigned Holiness, the demure Behaviors mixed with damnable Hypocrisy, that
attends the Persons that have forsaken the Lord Jesus, that have despised his
Person, trampled upon him, and counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he
was Sanctified, an Unholy thing! They have crucified him to themselves, and
think that they can go to Heaven without him; yea, pretend they love him, when
they hate him; pretend they have him, when they have cast him off; pretend they
trust in him, when they bid defiance to his Undertakings for the World.

Reader, let me beseech thee to hear me patiently; read, and consider, and
judge. I have presented thee with that which I have received from God, and the
Holy Men of God, who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost do bear me
witness. Thou will say, all pretend to this: Well, but give me the hearing,
take me to the Bible, and let me find in thy Heart no favor, if thou find me
to swerve from the Standard.

I say again, receive my Doctrine, I beseech thee in Christ's stead receive it;
I know it to be the Way of Salvation. I have ventured my own Soul thereon with
gladness, and if all the Souls in the World were mine as mine own Soul is, I
would through God's Grace venture every one of them there. I have not writ at a
venture, nor borrowed my Doctrine from Libraries. I depend upon the sayings of
no man: I found it in the Scriptures of Truth, among the true sayings of God.

I have done when I have exhorted thee to pray, and give heed to the Words of
God as revealed in the Holy Writ. The Lord Jesus Christ himself give thee Light
and Life by Faith in him; to whom with the Father and the good Spirit of Grace
be Glory and Dominion now and for ever:

Joh. Bunyan.

Amen.
The ERRATA.
Page 3. line 16. for lightest, read highest.

Page 5. l. 25. after and, read it.

Page 11. l. 3. for then, read there.

Page 22. l. 1. for hate, read persecutest.

Page 40. l. 11. for Jesus, read Justice.

Page 61. l. 2. for mean, read mere.

Page 66. l. 6. for then, read thou.

Page 77. l. 27. for feigned, read unfeigned.

Page 121. l. 24. leave out if.

Pap. 161. l. 17. read 1 Pet. 1 12.

LIGHT for them that sit in DARKNESS.
Of this Man's Seed, has God according to his promise, raised unto Israel a
Savior, Jesus. Acts 13. 32.
THese Words are part of a Sermon, which Paul preached to the People that lived
at Antioch in Pisidia; where also inhabited many of the Jews. The Preparation
to his Discourse he thus begins; Men of Israel, and ye that fear God give
audience, ver. 16. by which having prepared their minds to attend, he proceeds
and gives a particular relation of Gods peculiar dealings with his People
Israel, from Egypt to the time of David their King; of whom he treats
particularly.

That he was the Son of Jessey, that he was a King, that God raised him up in
mercy, that God gave Testimony of him, that he was a Man after God's own heart,
that he should fulfill all his Will, ver. 22.

And this he did of purpose, both to engage them the more to attend, and
because they well knew that of the fruit of his Loins God had promised the
Messiah should come.

Having thus therefore gathered up their minds to hearken, he presents them
with his Errand; to wit, That the Messiah was come, and that the promise was
indeed fulfilled, that a Savior should be born to Israel.

Of this Man's Seed (says he) has God according to the promise raised unto
Israel a Savior, Jesus.

In this Assertion he concludes,

1. That the Promise had kept its due course in presenting a Savior to Israel;
to wit, in David's Loins; Of this Man's Seed. 2. That the time of the Promise
was come, and the Savior was revealed; God has raised unto Israel a Savior.
3. That Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Joseph was he: He has raised unto Israel
a Savior, Jesus.
From these things we may inquire for the explication of the Words.

1. What this Jesus is. 2. What it was for this Jesus to be of the Seed of
David. 3. What it was for Jesus to be of this Man's Seed according to the
promise. 4. And what it was for him to be raised unto Israel.
These things may give us light into what shall be spoken after.

Quest. 1. First, What this Jesus is.
He is God, and had Personal Being from before all Worlds; therefore not such
an one as took being when he was formed in the World; He is God's natural Son.
The Eternal Son of his Begetting, and Love. God sent forth his Son; he was, and
was his Son, before he was Revealed. What is his Name, and what is his Sons
Name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30. 4. Ezekiel. 21. 10. He has an Eternal
Generation, such as none can declare: not Man, not Angel, Isa. 53. 8. He was
the delight of his Father before he had made either Mountain or Hill. While as
yet he had not made the Earth, or the Fields, or the lightest part of the Dust
of the World* all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made that was made, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
It is he with whom the Father consulted when he was about to make Man; when he
intended to overthrow Babel, and when he sent Isaiah to harden the Hearts of
Israel, Pro. 8. 26. Joh. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 2, 3. Col. 1. 17. Genesis 1. 26. and 11. 7.
Isa. 6. 8. This is the Person intended in the Text. Hence also he testifies of
himself, that he came down from the Father; that he had Glory with him before
the World was. And what and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he
was before, John 16. 28. Chap. 17. 5. Chap. 6. 62.

Quest. Secondly, What was it for Jesus to be of David's Seed?
To be of David's Seed, is to spring from his Loins, to come of his Race
according to the Flesh: and therefore as he is David's God, so likewise is he
David's Son; the Root, and also the Offspring of David: And this the Lord
himself acknowledges; saying, I am the Root, or God, and the Offspring, and
Son of David, and the Bright and Morning Star, Revel. 22. 16. This is indeed
the great Mystery, the Mystery of Godliness. If David called him Lord, how is
he then his Son? see Luke 2. 4. Romans 1. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 8. Matt. 22. 45.

And hence it is that he is said to be wonderful, because he is both God and
Man in one Person. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Isa. 9. 6. Wonderful indeed! Wonderful God, Wonderful Man, Wonderful God-Man,
and so a Wonderful Jesus and Savior. He also has wonderful Love, bore
wonderful Sorrows for our wonderful Sins, and obtained for his a wonderful
Salvation.

Quest. 3. Thirdly, What it was for Jesus to be of this Man's Seed according to
the Promise.
1. This Word [Promise] does sometimes comprehend all the Promises which God
made to our Fathers from the first Promise to the last; and so the Holy Ghost
does call them. The Promise made unto the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same
to us their Children, Acts 13. 32, 33.

2. But the word Promise here, does in special intend that which God made to
David himself. Men and Brethren, said Peter, let me freely speak unto you of
the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with
us unto this day: therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn
with an Oath to him, that of the Fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh, he
would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne; he seeing this before, spoke of the
Resurrection of Christ, etc. Acts 2. 29, 30.

Quest. Fourthly, What it was for Jesus to be raised thus up of God to Israel.
Here we have two things to consider of.

1. Who Israel is. 2. What it was for Jesus to be raised up unto them.
1. Who Israel is. By Israel sometimes we should understand the whole Stock of
Jacob, the Natural Children of his Flesh; for that name they have of him; for
he obtained it when he wrestled with the Angel and prevailed ( Genesis 32.) and
remained with his Seed in their Generations.

2. By Israel we are to understand all those that God has promised to Christ.
The Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed, the elect Jews and
Gentiles. These are called the Israel of God, and the Seed of Abraham, whom
Jesus in special regarded in his undertaking the work of Man's Redemption, Romans
9. 6. Gal. 6. 16. Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16.

2. What it was for Jesus to be raised up unto them.

This word, raised up, is diversely taken in the Scripture.

1. It is taken for sending, as when he says, he raised them up Judges,
Saviors, and Prophets; he means, he sent them such, ( Judges 2. 16, 18. Chap.
3. 9, 15. Amos 2. 11.) and thus he raised up Jesus; that is, he sent him. I
came not, says he, of my self, but he sent me. But the Father which sent me
gave me a commandment, Jo. 12.

2. To be raised up intimates one invested with power and authority. Thus he
raised up David to be the King of Israel; he anointed him and invested him with
Kingly Power, 1 Samuel 16. 13. Acts 13. 22. And thus was Jesus Christ raised up:
Hence he is called, the Horn of Salvation: He has raised up for us an Horn of
Salvation in the House of his Servant David, Luke 2. 69.

3. To be raised up intimates quickening and strengthening, to oppose and
overcome all opposition. Thus was Jesus raised up from under Sin, Death, the
rage of the World, and Hell, that day that God raised him out of the Grave.

Thus therefore was Jesus raised up to Israel; that is, he was sent,
authorized, and strengthened to, and in the work of their Salvation, to the
completing of it.

The words thus opened, do lay before us these two Observations.

First, That in all Ages God gave his People a Promise, and so ground for a
believing remembrance that he would one day send them a Savior.

Secondly, That when Jesus was come into the World, then was that Promise of
God fulfilled.

To begin with the First, That in all Ages God gave his People a Promise, and
so ground for a believing remembrance, that he would one day send them a
Savior.

This Zacharias testifies when he was filled with the Holy Ghost; for speaking
of the Messiah, or the Savior, he says, That God spoke of him by the mouth of
all the Prophets which have been since the World began: To which I will add
that of Peter; Yea, and all the Prophets from Samuel, and these that follow
after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days, Luke 2.
69, 70. Acts 3. 24.

From these Texts it is evident that in every Generation or Age of the World,
God did give his People a Promise, and so ground for a believing-remembrance
that he would one day send them a Savior: for indeed the Promise is not only a
ground for a remembrance, but for a believing-remembrance: what God says is
sufficient ground for Faith, because he is Truth and cannot lie or repent. But
that is not all, his Heart was engaged, yea all his Heart, in the Promise which
he spoke, of sending us a Savior.

From this Observation I shall make inquiry into these three things.

1. What it is to be a Savior. 2. How it appears that God in all Ages gave his
People a Promise that he would one day send them a Savior. 3. That this was
ground for a believing remembrance that a Savior should one day come.
First, What it is to be a Savior.

This word Savior is easy to be understood, it being all one with Deliverer,
Redeemer, etc. A Savior, Jesus; both words are of the same signification, and
are doubled, perhaps to teach us, that the Person mentioned in the Text, is not
called Jesus only to distinguish him from other Men (for names are given to
distinguish) but also, and especially to specify his Office: his Name is
Savior, because it was to be his Work, his Office, his Business in the World.
His Name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins,
Matt. 1. 21.

Secondly, This word Savior is a word so large, that it has place in all the
undertakings of Christ; for whatever he does in his Mediation, he does as a
Savior. He interposeth between God and Man as a Savior. He engages against
Sin, the Devil, Death, and Hell, as a Savior, and triumphed over them by
himself as a Savior.

Thirdly, The word Savior, as I said, is all one with Redeemer, Deliverer,
Reconciler, Peacemaker, or the like; for though there be variation in the
terms, yet Savior is the intendment of them all. By Redeeming he becoms a
Savior, by Delivering he becomes a Savior, by Reconciling he becomes a
Savior, and by making Peace he becomes a Savior: But I pass this now,
intending to speak more to the same question afterward.

Secondly, How it appears that God in all Ages gave his People a Promise that
he would one day send them a Savior.

It appears evidently, for so soon as man had sinned, God came to him with an
heart full of Promise, and continued to renew, and renew, till the time of the
promised Messiah to be revealed was come.

He promised him under the name of the Seed of the Woman, after our first
Father had sinned: I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed, it shall break thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel
(Genesis 3. 15.) This the Apostle has his eye upon when he says, When the
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made
under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.

2. God renewed this Promise to Abraham, and there tells him Christ should be
his Seed; saying, In thy Seed shall all Families of the Earth be blessed, (Genesis
12. 3.) Now says Paul; To Abraham and his Seed was the Promise made; He says
not unto Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ,
(Gal. 3. 16.)

3. He was promised in the time of Moses under the name of a Prophet; I will
raise them up (says God to him) a Prophet of their Brethren like unto thee:
This Peter expounds of Christ, for Moses truly said unto the Fathers: A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me, him
shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
Acts. 3. 22.

4. He promised him to David under the Title of a Son; saying, I will be to him
a Father, and he shall be to me a Son: For this the Apostle expounded of the
Savior; saying, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: and again, I
will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son, 2 Samuel 7. 14. Heb. 1. 5.

5. He was promised in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of
Judah.

1. By the name of a Branch. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be
Beautiful and Glorious, Isa. 4. 2.

2. Under the name of the Son of a Virgin. Therefore the Lord himself shall
give you a Sign; Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and thou shall
call his Name Emmanuel. This Matthew expounds of Christ, Isa. 7. 14. Matt. 1.
22.

3. He was promised under the name of a Rod. Then shall come forth a Rod out of
the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his Roots, and the Spirit of
the Lord shall rest upon him. This answers the Text, David was the Son of
Jesse, and Christ the Son of David, Isa. 11. 1, 2.

4. He is promised under the Title of a King. Behold, a King shall rule in
righteousness; and a Man shall be for a hiding place from the Wind, and a
covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of Waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land, Isa. 32. 1, 2.

5. He was promised under the name of an Elect Servant. Behold, my Servant whom
I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him,
he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles: he shall not cry, nor lift up,
nor cause his voice to be heard in the Streets; a bruised Reed shall he not
break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3. Matt. 12. 18.

6. He was promised to Jeremiah under the name of the Lord our Righteousness.
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a Righteous
Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper: he shall execute Judgment in the
Earth, in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and
this is the name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord, our Righteousness,
Jer. 23. 5, 6.

7. He was promised by the Prophet Ezekiel under the name of David a Shepherd.
And I will set one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my Servant
David, he shall feed them: and he shall be their Shepherd, and I the Lord will
be their God, and my Servant David a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken
it. Ezekiel. 34. 24. Joh. 10. 1, 2, 3.

8. He was promised by the Prophet Daniel under the name of Messiah, or Christ,
the most Holy. And after threescore and two weeks shall the Messiah be cut off,
but not for himself. Dan. 9. 26.

9. He was promised by the Prophet Micha under the name of the Ruler of Israel.
But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall be come, that is to be Ruler in Israel, Mic. 5. 2.
Matt. 2. 6.

10. He was promised to Haggai as the desire of all Nations. I will shake all
Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this house
with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts, Hag. 2. 7.

11. He was promised by Zechariah under the name of Servant and Branch. For
behold, I will bring forth my Servant the Branch: and again, Behold the Man
whose name is the Branch, he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build
the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the Glory, Zech. 3. 8.

12. He was promised by Malachi under the name of the Lord, and the Messenger
of the Covenant. Behold, I send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before thee, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; even
the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come says
the Lord of Hosts, Malachi 3. 12.

Indeed the Scriptures of the Old Testament are filled with Promises of the
Messiah to come, Prophetical Promises, Typical Promises: For all the Types and
shadows of the Savior, are virtually so many Promises. Having therefore
touched upon the Prophetical, I will briefly touch the Typical Promises also;
for as God spoke at sundry times to the Fathers, so also in diverse manners,
Prophetically, Providentially, Typically, and all of the Messiah, Heb. 1. 1.

The Types of the Savior were various.

1. Sometimes he was typed out by Men. 2. Sometimes by Beasts. 3. Sometimes by
Insensible Creatures.
First, He was typed forth sometimes by Men.

1. Adam was his Type in many things, especially as he was the Head and Father
of the first World. He was the Figure of him that was to come, Romans 5. 14.

2. Moses was his Type as Mediator, and as Builder of the Tabernacle, Heb. 3.
2, 3.

Aaron was his Type as he was High Priest, and so was Melchisedec before him,
Heb. 5. 4, 5. Chap. 7. 1, 21.

4. Sampson was his Type in the effects of his death: for as Sampson gave his
life for the deliverance of Israel from the Philistines, Christ gave his Life to
deliver us from Sin and Devils.

5. Joshuah was his Type in giving the Land of Canaan to Israel, as Jesus will
give the Kingdom of Heaven to the Elect, Heb. 4. 8.

6. David was his Type in many things, especially in his subduing of Isreal's
Enemies, and feeding them; hence he is sometimes called David their King, and
David their Shepherd, Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24.

7. Solomon was his Type in his building the Temple, and in his Peaceable
Kingdom. Hence it is said, he shall build the Temple of the Lord; and again, Of
his Government and Peace there shall be no end.

Beasts were his Types. To instance some:

First, The Paschal-Lamb was his Type, Exodus 12.

1. In its Spotlesness. Christ was a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19.

2. In its being Roasted. It was a Figure of the cursed Death of Christ, (for
to be Roasted bespake one accursed, Jer. 29. 22.) Gal. 3. 13.

3. In that it was to be eaten. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood,
says Christ, has Eternal Life, John 6. 57.

4. In that its Blood was to be sprinkled upon the doors of their houses for
the destroying Angel to look on: The Blood of Christ is sprinkled upon the
Elect for the Justice of God to look on, Heb. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2.

5. By eating the Paschal-Lamb, the People went out of Egypt: by feeding upon
Christ by Faith, we come from under the Egyptian Darkness, Tyranny of Satan,
and c.

Secondly, The Red Cow was his Type, Numb. 19. 2, etc.

1. In that she was to be without blemish.

2. In that she was to be slain without the Camp. Jesus also that he might
sanctify the People with his own Blood, suffered without the Gate, Heb. 13. 12.

3. In that her Flesh was to be burnt, a Type of the grievous Death of Christ.

4. Her Ashes was to be carried into a clean place without the Camp; a Type of
the clean Sepulcher where the Body of Jesus was laid, John 19. 38, 39, 40, 41.

There was also diverse other Sacrifices, as Bulls, Goats and Birds; which were
Types of him, which I here omit.

Thirdly, Insensible Creatures were his Types.

As first, The Mannah in the Wilderness, ( Ex. 16.) and that,

1. As it came down from Heaven; for so did Christ, I came down from Heaven,
says he: and again, I am the Living Bread which came down from Heaven, John 6.
51.

2. The Mannah was to be eaten, so is Christ by Faith. If any man eat of this
Bread, he shall live for ever, and the Bread that I will give is my Flesh,
which I will give for the life of the World, John 6. 51.

3. The Mannah was to be gathered daily, so is Christ to be daily eaten.

4. The Mannah was all the Bread that Israel had in the Wilderness: Christ is
all the Bread that Believers have in this Life for their Souls.

5. The Mannah came not by Moses Law, neither comes Christ by our Merits. Moses
gave you not that Bread from Heaven, but my Father gives you the true Bread
from Heaven, John 6. 32.

Again, The Rock that gave them out Water for their Thirst, was a Type of him,
( Numb. 20.) They did all drink of the same Spiritual Drink, for they drank of
that Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor 10. 4.

This Rock was his Type in four* things.

1. It gave Drink to the People in the Wilderness when they were come out of
Egypt. Christ gives drink to them that forsake the World for him.

2. The Rock yielded Water by being smitten by Moses's Rod: Christ gives drink
even his Blood, by being stricken by Moses's Law, Numb. 20. 11. Isa. 53.

3. The water out of this Rock was given to the Thirsty. I will give to him
that is a-thirst, says Christ, of the Fountain of the water of Life freely,
Revel. 21. 6.

4. The Water of the Rock in the Wilderness ran after the People, They drank of
that Rock that followed them, he opened the Rock and the Waters gushed out,
they ran in dry places like a River. Christ also is said by that Type to follow
us: They drank of that Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, Psalm.
105. 41. 1 Cor. 10. 4.

Again, The Mount Moriah was his Type.

1. That Mount stood in Jerusalem; Christ also stands in his Church.

2. Upon that Rock was built the Temple. And upon this Rock, said Christ, will
I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, 2 Chronicles.
3. 1. Mat. 16. 18.

Other things might be urged, but these being virtually of the force of the
Promise, and also as a Key to open them, therefore I thought good to place them
here with the Promises; because, as they are standing with them, so they are
written to beget Faith in the same Lord Jesus Christ.

I come now to the third thing, to wit, That these Promises were ground for a
Believing Remembrance that a Savior should one day come.

There is a Remembering, and a Believing Remembering, or such a Remembering that
begets, and maintains Faith in the Heart. Jacob had a Believing
Remembrance, when he said, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord, Genesis 49.
18. And so had David when he cried, O that the Salvation of Israel was come out
of Zion, Psalm 53. 6. These, with Simeon and Anna, had not a Remembrance only,
but a Believing Remembrance, that God would send them a Savior. They had the
Promise not in the Book only, but in their Hearts: This Gospel was mixed in
them with Faith; therefore they with their Fellows remembered and believed, or
made the Promise the Ground of their Believing that God would one day send them
a Savior.

Let me make some use of this Doctrine.

Here we may see how much the Heart of God was set upon the Salvation of
Sinners, he studied it, contrived it, set his Heart on it, and promised, and
promised, and promised to complete it by sending one day his Son for a Savior,
Ephesians. 1. 3. 2 Samuel 14. 14. Tit. 1. 2.

No marvel therefore, if when he treats of the New Covenant, in which the
Lord Jesus is wrapped, and presented in a Word of Promise to the World, that he
says; I will do it assuredly with my whole Heart and with my whole Soul, Jer.
32. 41.

Now this is of singular comfort to sensible Sinners; yea, what greater ground
of consolation to such, than to hear that the God against whom they have
sinned, should himself take care to provide us a Savior

There are some poor Sinners in the World, that have given such way to
discouragement, from the sense of the greatness of their Sins, that they dare
not think upon God, nor the Sins which they have committed: But the reason is,
because they are ignorant that God's Heart was wrapped up in this good work of
providing and sending a Savior. Let such hearken now to the Call of God;
Return unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44. 22. Ho! turn again, hearken;
the Heart of God is much set upon Mercy, from the beginning of the World he
resolved and promised, ay, and swear we should have a Savior.

2. Doct. I now proceed to the second Observation.

That when Jesus was come into the World, then was the Promise of God
fulfilled; namely, That he would one day send us a Savior.

Take three Texts for the Confirmation of this Point.

1. This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the World.

These words were spoken of them that were present at that Miracle of Jesus,
when he sed Five Thousand with Five Barley Loaves which a Lad had about him in
the Company: For these Men, when they had seen the Marvel, being amazed at it,
made confession of him to be the Savior, Joh. 6.

2. Lord, I believe thou art the Christ the Son of God, which should come into
the World, John 9. 27.

3. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

For the explaining of this Observation, I will briefly handle three questions.

1. How this Jesus is to be distinguished from others of that Name. 2. What it
was for this Jesus to come into the World. 3. What it was for him to come to be
a Savior.
Quest. 1. For the first, The Jesus in the Text, is distinguished from all
others of that Name.
1. By the manner of his Birth, he was born of a Virgin, a Virgin espoused to a
Man whose Name was Joseph; but he knew her not till she had brought forth her
Firstborn Son, and he called his name Jesus, Mat. 1. 25.

2. He is distinguished from others of that Name, by the place of his Birth; to
wit, Bethlehem, the City of David, there he must be Born, there he was Born,
Joh. 7. 42. Mat. 2. 4, 5, 6.

3. He is distinguished by his Lineage, He came of the House and Lineage of
David, Luke 2. 4, 5, 6.

4. He is distinguished by the time of his Birth, to wit, the Time that the
Prophets prefixed, Gal. 4. 4.

5. But his common Distinction is, Jesus of Nazareth; by this Name he is
distinguished one and twenty times in the New Testament.

1. His Enemies called him Jesus of Nazareth, Mat. 26. 71. Mark. 14. 67. Joh.
18. 5. 2. His Disciples called him Jesus of Nazareth, Mat. 21. 11. Luke 24. 19.
Joh. 1. 45. Act. 2. 22* 3. The Angels called him Jesus of Nazareth, Mar. 16. 6.
4. And he calls Himself Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 22. 8. 5. Yea, and he goes
also by the Name of Jesus of Nazareth among the Devils, Mar. 1. 24. Luke 4. 34.
He was called Jesus of Nazareth, because he dwelt there with his Mother Mary
and her Husband. Nazareth was his City where he had been brought up, whither
for shelter Joseph carried him when he came up out of Egypt with him: in
Nazareth was his common Abode, until the time that John was cast into Prison,
Luke 4. 16. Mat. 2. 23. Chap. 4. 12, 13. Wherefore he might well say, I am
Jesus of Nazareth: Yea, though he was now in Heaven; for Heaven shall not make
us forget what Countrymen we were when we lived in the World. Jesus, you see
here, though Glorified in Heaven, yet forgets not what Countryman he was when
he dwelt in the World. I am Jesus of Nazareth, says he, I am the Jesus that
thou hate; and that thou may know I am he, I tell thee I dwelt once in the
City Nazareth in Galilee: Joseph and my Mother Mary brought me up there, and
there I dwelt with them many years. I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou
persecutest.

Quest. 2. Secondly, What was it for Jesus to come into the World?
Ans. 1. Not his coming in, or by his Spirit in his People; for so he was never
out of the World. 2. Neither is it his Appearance in his Ordinances. 3. Nor
that coming of his by which he destroys Antichrist. 4. Nor his Appearing in
his dreadful Providence or Judgments.
But by the coming of Jesus, according to the Text, we are to understand that,
or such a Coming, whereby he was manifest to be God-Man in one Person, God in
our Flesh without us, or distinct in his own Person by himself; Such a Coming
by which he was manifested to be in all points like as men are, Sin only
excepted. Such a Coming, wherein, or by which, the Son of God became also the
Son of Man.

For the further clearing of this, you find it expressly said, he was born into
the World; Mary, of whom was born Jesus. Now when Jesus was born, it is said,
Where is he that is born King of the Jews? Herod demanded of them where Christ
should be born, Mat. 1. 16. Chap. 2. 1, 2, 4. Luke 1. 35. Chap. 2. 11.

Now that this was fulfilled according to the very word of the Text, without
any juggle, evasion, or cunningly-devised Fable, consider:

1. He is called the Firstborn of this Woman, The Male Child that opened her
Womb, Luke 2. 7, 23.

2. He was not born till nourished in her Womb the full time, according to the
time of Life. And so it was that while they were at Bethlehem, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered, and she brought forth her Firstborn
Son, and wrapped him in swaddling Clothes, and laid him in a Manger, Luke 2. 4, 5,
6, 7.

3. She also continued in her Separation at the Birth of Jesus, as other women
at the Birth of their Children, until the days of her Purification according to
the Law of Moses were accomplished, Luke 2. 22.

4. Himself also, as other Hebrew Children, was brought to Jerusalem to present
him unto the Lord; As it is written in the Law of Moses, every Male that
opens the Womb shall be called Holy unto the Lord, Luke 2. 23, 24.

5. Thus Jesus also, as other Hebrew-Children, when the set Day was come, was
Circumcised. And when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the
Child, his Name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel before he was
conceived in the Womb, Luke 2. 21.

6. After this, he is often called the Young-Child, the Child Jesus; and
further it is said of him, that* he grew, that he increased in Wisdom and
Stature, Mat. 2. 20, 21. Luke 2. 40, 52.

Behold, with what diligence, even to a Circumstance, the Holy Ghost sets forth
the Birth of the Lord Jesus, and all to convince the incredulous World, of the
true Manner of the coming of the Savior into the World.

Secondly, The Reality of the Manhood of this Lord Jesus, is yet further
manifest, and that;

First, By those natural Infirmities that attend Human Flesh.

Secondly, By the Names the Prophets gave him in the Days of the Old Testament
and the New.

First, By those natural Infirmities that attend Human Flesh.

As 1. At his Birth he could not go, but as carried by his Parents. 2. He was
sensible of Hunger, Luke 4. 2. 3. He was sensible of Thirst, John 19. 28. 4. He
was sensible of Weariness, Joh. 4. 6. 5. He was nourished by Sleep, Mar. 4. 34.
6. He was subject to Grief, Mar. 3. 5. 7. He was subject to Anger, Mar. 3. 5.
8. He was subject to Weep, Joh. 11. 35. Luke 19, 41, 9. He had Joy as a Man and
rejoiced, Mat. 11. 27. Luke 10. 21.
These things, I say, Jesus was* subject to as a Man, as the Son of the Virgin.

Secondly, The Reality of his Manhood is yet made manifest by the Names the
Prophets gave him, both in the Old Testament and in the New.

As 1. He is called the Seed. The Seed of the Woman, the Seed of Abraham, the
Seed of David, by which is meant he was to come of their Children, Genesis 3. 15.
Chap. 12. Chap. 22. Gal. 3. 16, 17. Romans 1. 4.

2. Therefore it is added (where mention is made of the Fathers) of whom as
concerning the Flesh Christ came. He was made of the Seed of David according to
the Flesh: And hence again, he calls himself the Offspring of David;
therefore, I say, he is said to be of their Flesh, their Loins, and is called
their Son, Romans 1. 4. Chap. 9. 5. Acts 2. 30. Revel. 22. 16.

3. He therefore is frequently called a Man, and the Son of Man. Then shall you
see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven. When the Son of man shall
come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him. This Man, because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. It is therefore necessary
that this Man have somewhat also to offer, Mat. 26. 63. Chap. 25. 30, 31. Heb.
7. 24. Chap. 8. 3. Chap. 10. 12.

4. What shall I say, Himself gave undeniable Demonstration of all this, when
he said, he was dead; when he called to Thomas to put his Finger to, and behold
his Hands, to reach to him his Hand and thrust it into his Side, and bid him he
should not be faithless but believing. At another time when he stood in the
midst of the Eleven, as they were troubled with the thoughts of Unbelief, he
said, Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self, handle me, and see:
for a Spirit bath not Flesh and Bones, as ye see me have, Joh. 20. 27. Luke 24.
39.

Thus have I showed you what it was for Jesus to come into the World; namely,
To be born of a Woman, to take flesh, and to become God-man in one Person.

I come now to the third Question; but before I speak particularly to that, I
will produce further Testimony that we find upon record, concerning the Truth
of all this.

Particular Testimonies, that this Coming of Jesus is his Coming to Save us.
1. SImeon the Just gives Testimony of him. And the Holy Ghost was upon him,
and it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see Death
before he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the
Temple, and when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus to do for him after the
Custom of the Law, then took he him up in his Arms, and blessed God, and said,
Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation, Luke 2. 25, 26, 27, - 32.

The Testimony of Anna.
2. Anna a Prophetess, one of a great Age, which departed not from the Temple,
but served God with fasting and prayer night and day. And she coming in at the
same instant, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all them
that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2. 26, 27, 28.

The Testimony of John Baptist.
3. John Baptist as he fulfilled his Ministry, he cried concerning this Jesus,
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World. And he, says
John, that sent me to baptize with Water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit descending and abiding, or remaining, the same is he which
shall baptize with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bear record that this is the
Son of God, Joh. 1. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

The Testimony of the Star and Wisemen.
4. The Star that appeared at his Birth in the East, and that coasted through
the Heavens, till it came over the Place where the young Child Jesus was, that
Star gave Testimony that he was the Savior. This Star alarmed many, especially
the Wisemen of the East, who were brought by it from afar to worship him. And
lo, the Star which they saw in the East, went before them till it came and
stood over where the young Child was. And when they saw the Star they rejoiced
with exceeding joy. And when they were come into the House, they saw the young
Child with Mary his Mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had
opened their Treasures, they presented unto him Gifts, Gold, and Frankincense,
and Myrrh.

The Testimony of the Angels.
1. To Mary herself.

And in the sixth Month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a City of
Galilee named Nazareth, to a Virgin espoused to a Man whose Mame was Joseph,
and the Virgin's Name was Mary; and the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail
thou that art highly favored. And the Angels aid unto her, Fear not, Mary, for
thou have found favor with God. And behold, thou shall conceive in thy Womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus. He shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest. And the Lord God shall give unto him
the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for
ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 2. 26, 35.

2. The Angels Testimony to the Shepherds, as they were feeding their Flocks in
the Fields by Night.

And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the Glory of the Lord shined
round about them, and they were sore afraid; and the Angel said unto them, Fear
not, for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all
people; for unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, Luke 2. 8, 9, 10.

3. How the Angels Solemnized his Birth among themselves.

And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Host,
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace,
good will toward Men, Luke 2. 13, 14.

The Testimony of God the Father.
1. When he was Baptized.

And Jesus when he was Baptized went up straightway out of the Water; and lo,
the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like
a Dove, and lighting upon him; and lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 16, 17.

2. The Fathers Testimony of him at his Transfiguration.

And he took Peter, and James, and John, and went up into a Mountain to pray:
and as be prayed, the fashion of his Countenance was altered and his Raiment
was white and glittering, etc. And there appeared Moses and Liias talking with
him, and a Cloud from Heaven overshadowed them, at which the three Disciples
began to be afraid. Then there came a voice out of the Cloud, saying, This is
my beloved Son, hear him, Luke 9. 28, 29, 30, 35.

This is that Testimony of God which Peter speaks of, saying, We have not
followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty; for he
received from God the Father Honor and Glory when there came such a voice to
him from the Excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: And this voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him
in the Holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1. 26, 27, 28.

3. God gave Testimony of him by Signs and Wonders.

Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in
me, he does the Works. God also bearing them witness (that preached Salvation
by Jesus) both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will, Joh. 14. 10. Heb. 2. 4.

Concerning Jesus, how he put himself upon the Test among his Adversaries.
THe Lord Jesus also puts himself upon the Test among his Adversaries diverse
ways.

First, he urges the time of the appearing of the Messiah, to be come.

The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye and
believe the Gospel, (Mar. 1. 15.)

For this he had a threefold proof.

1. The Heathens had invaded and taken the Land, according to that of Daniel,
Dan. 9. 25, 26.

2. The Scepter was departed from Judah, according to that of Jacob, ( Genesis 49.
10.) to which also suited that Prophecy: Before the Child shall know to refuse
the evil and choose the good, the Land which thou abhorrest, shall be forsaken
of both her Kings.

3. The Roman Emperor had not only subdued the Nation, and put down the Kingly
Race of the Jews; but had set up and established his own Power over them. In
the fifteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilat was Governor
of Judea, Herod was Tetrarch of Galilee, Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and
Lysanias Tetrarch of Abilene, all Heathens, and of Tyberius his making.

Besides, The Kingly Race of Judah was at this time become so low by reason of
the Roman oppression, that the chief of them were put to get their living by
their own hands, even Joseph, the supposed Father of Jesus, was then become a
Carpenter: Poor man! when Jesus was born, he was fain to thrust into a Stable,
for there was in the Inn no room for such Guests as they. The Offering also
which was brought unto God the time when Jesus was presented unto the Lord, was
two Turtle-Doves, or two young Pigeons; a Sacrifice allowed only for them that
were Poor and could provide no bigger.

And if she be not able to bring a Lamb, then she shall bring two Turtle-Doves
or two young Pigeons, the one for a Burnt-Offring, the other for a
Sin-Offering, Levit. 12. 8. Besides, Jesus himself says, Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his
Head.

Now, I say, all these things were so apparent to the Jews, that they could not
object; they felt the Romans were come, they knew the Scepter was gone, they
smarted under the Roman Tyranny, and knew the Kingly Race of Judea was
over-thrown: How then could they object, that the time was not come for Christ
to be born?

Further, The People was generally convinced, that the time was come, and
therefore, says the Text; They were in expectation. And as all the People were
in expectation, and all men mused in their Hearts of John, whether he was the
Christ or not, Luke 3. 15. The unbiassed People observing the face of things,
could do no other but look for the Messiah. And hence it is, that the Lord
Jesus gives the Pharisees, those mortal E nemies of his, such sore rebukes;
saying, O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of the Sky, but can you not
discern the Signs of the Times? The Kingdom is lost, the Heathens are come, and
the Scepter is departed from Judea. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of
the Sky, and of the Earth, but how is it that ye do not discern this Time?
Mat. 16. 3. Luke 12. 56.

Secondly, He yet again puts himself upon the Test, by the Miracles which he
wrought before them.

Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in me, or else believe me
for the very works sake, (John 14. 11.)

For the Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I
do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me, John 5. 36.

This Proof they could not withstand, but granted that he did many Miracles
while they did nothing. Then gathered the Chief-Priests and Pharisees a
Counsel, and said, what do we? for this Man does many Miracles: if we let him
alone all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both
our Place and Nation, John 11. 47, 48.

Yea so did Jesus confound them, that by their own Records and Laws by which
they were to prove persons clean or unclean; they in reading their Lectures,
did justify him and overthrow themselves.

For instance, it was written in their Law; If he that has an Issue spit upon
him that is clean, that Spittle should make him unclean, ( Levit. 15. 8.) Now
Jesus whom they counted most unclean because he said he was the Son of God (as
they thought speaking Blasphemy) he spits upon people and makes them whole; he
spat and made clay with the Spittle and with that clay made a Blind Man see,
Joh. 9. 6. Also he spit on the Eyes of another and made him see, Mar. 8. 23,
24, 25. Again he spit, and with his Spittle touched the Tongue of one that was
Dumb, and made him speak immediately, Mar. 7. 33, 34, 35. Thus he proved himself
clear of their Accusations, and maintained before them, that by their Law he
was guiltless, and the Son of God; for the Miracles which he wrought were to
prove him so to be.

Again, In their Law it was written, that whosoever touched the Altar of Incense
should be Holy, ( Exodus 29. 37.) A Woman with a Bloody Issue touches him, and
is whole of her Plague. Yea, they brought to him many diseased Persons; and
besought him that they might only touch the Hem of his Garment; and as many as
touched, were made perfectly whole, Mar. 5. 28, 29. Mat. 14. 35, 36.

Thus was he justified before them out of their own Law, and had his Glory
manifest before their Faces, to their everlasting confusion and contempt.

Indeed, the Jews did make one Objection against Jesus Christ, that seemed to
them to have weight in it: and that was because he first began to appear and
manifest his Glory in Canaan of Galilee. At this, I say, they stumbled, it was
their sore temptation; for still as some affirmed him to be the Christ, others
as fast objected, shall Christ come out of Galilee? art thou also of Galilee?
search and look, for out of Galilee arises no Prophet, John 2. 1, 11. Chap. 7.
40, 41, 42.

But this their stumble might arise either;

1. From the cruelty of Herod: Or,

2. From their own not observing and keeping in mind the Alarm that God gave
them at his Birth.

1. It might arise or be occasioned through the Cruelty of Herod; for Jesus was
born in Bethlehem the City where David dwelt: But when Herod sent out to kill
him, and for his sake killed all the young Children in Bethlehem; then was
Joseph warned by an Angel of God, to take the young Child and his Mother and
fly into Egypt, and so he did, and was there till the Death of Herod, Mat. 2.
1, 13, 16, 19, 20.) After this the Angel comes to them in Egypt, and bids them
take the young Child and return into the Land of Israel; wherefore they arose
and went: but hearing that Herod's Son that Tyrant ruled in the room of his
Father, they were afraid to go to Bethlehem, but turned aside into the Parts of
Galilee, where they remained till the time of his showing to Israel.

2. This stumble of theirs might arise from their not observing and keeping in
mind the Alarm that God gave them of his Birth.

1. God began to give them the Alarm at the Birth of John the Baptist, where
was asserted that he was to go before the Face of the Lord Jesus, and to
prepare his Ways. And fear came upon all that dwelt round about them; and all
these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill-Countries of Judea,
Luke 1. 65.

2. Again, What a continuation of this Alarm was there also at the Birth of
Jesus, which was about three months after John Baptist was born. Now come the
Angels from Heaven, now comes a strange Star over the Country to lead the Men
of the East to the Stable where Jesus was born; now was Herod, the Priests, the
Scribes, and also the City Jerusalem awakened and sore troubled: for it was
noised by the Wisemen, that Christ the King and Savior was born. Besides, The
Shepherds, Simon, and Anna gave notice of him to the People; they should
therefore have retained the Memory of these things, and have followed God in
all his dark Providence, until his Son of Righteousness should arise among
them with healing under his Wings.

3. I may add another cause of their stumble. They did not understand the
Prophecies that went before of him.

1. He was to come to them out of Egypt. Out of Egypt have I called my Son,
Mat. 2. 15.

2. He turned aside into Cana of Galilee, and dwelt in the City of, Nazareth;
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, he shall be called
a Nazaren, Mat. 2. 23.

3. That saying also was to be fulfilled. The Land of Zebulon, and the Land of
Nepthaly, by the way of the Sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the
People that sat in Darkness saw a great Light, and to them that sat in the
region and shadow of Death, Light is sprung up, Mat. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

At these things then they stumbled, and 'twas a great Judgment of God upon
them.

Besides, There seemed to be a Contradiction in the Prophecies of the
Scriptures concerning his Coming. He was to be born in Bethlehem, and yet to
come out of Egypt: How should he be the Christ, and yet come out of Galilee,
out of which arises no Prophet? Thus they stumbled.

Hence note, That though the Prophecies and Promises be full and plain as these
were, that he should be born in Bethlehem; yet men's Sins may cause them to be
fulfilled in such obscurity, that instead of having benefit thereby, they may
stumble and split their Souls thereat.

Take heed then, hunt not Christ from plain Promises with Herod, hunt him not
from Bethlehem, lest he appear to your amazement and destruction from Egypt, or
in the Land of Zebulon. But thus much to the Second Question; to wit, What it
was for Jesus to come into the World.

I come now to the Third Question.

Quest. 3. What it was for him to come to be a Savior.
For the further handling of this Question I must show:

1. What it is to be a Savior. 2. What it is to come to be a Savior. 3. What
it is for Jesus to come to be a Savior.
To these three briefly.

First, What it is to be a Savior.

1. A Savior supposes some in misery, and himself one that is to deliver them.

2. A Savior, is either such an one Ministerially, or Meritoriously.

Ministerially, is when one person engages, or is engaged by virtue of respect
or command from Superiors, to go and obtain by conquest or the Kings
Redemption, the Captives or Persons grieved by the Tyranny of an Enemy. And
thus was Moses and Joshuah, and the Judges and Kings of Israel, Saviors.

Thou deliveredst them into the Land of their Enemies who vexed them, and in
the time of their trouble when they cried unto thee, thou heardest them from
Heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies thou gave them Saviors, who
saved them out of the Hand of their Enemies, Nehem. 9. 27.

Thus was Jesus Christ a Savior, he was engaged by virtue of respect and
command from God, to obtain by conquest and redemption, the Captives or Persons
grieved; God sent his Son to be the Savior of the World, John 4. 14.

Meritoriously, is when the Person engaging, shall at his own proper cost and
charge give a sufficient value or price for those he redeemeth.

Thus those under the Law were redeemed by the Money called the Redemption-Mony.
And Moses gave the Money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to his Sons,
Numb. 3. 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52.

And thus was Jesus Christ a Savior; he paid full price to Divine Justice for
Sinners, even his own precious Blood. Forasmuch as you know that you were not
redeemed from your vain Conversation, received by tradition from your Fathers,
with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1 18, 19.

And forasmuch as in man's redemption, the Undertaker must have respect, not
only to the paying of a price, but also to the getting of a Victory; for there
is not only Jesus to satisfy, but Death, Devil, Hell, and the Grave to conquer:
therefore has he also by himself gotten the Victory over these.

1. He has abolished Death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. 2. He has destroyed the Devil, Heb.
2. 14, 15. 3. He has been the destruction of the Grave, Hos. 13. 14. 4. He
has gotten the Keys of Hell, Revel. 1. 17, 18, 19.
And this I say, he did by himself at his own proper cost and charge, when he
triumphed over them upon his Cross, Col. 2. 14, 15.

Quest. 2. Secondly, What it is to come to be a Savior?
1. To come to be one, supposes one, ordained, and fore-prepared for that
work. Then said he lo, I come a Body, have thou prepared me, Heb. 10.

2. To come to be a Savior, supposes, one commissionated, or authorized to
that Work. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me
(authorized me) to preach the Gospel to the Poor: He has sent me to bind up
the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of
sight to the Blind, and to set at liberty them that are bruised, Luke 4. 18.

And upon this account it is, that he is so often called CHRIST, or the
Anointed one; the Anointed Jesus, or Jesus the Anointed Savior. Thou art the
Christ the Son of God, that should come into the World. This Jesus whom I
preach unto you is Christ: He testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ, and
he confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving by the Scriptures that
this is the very Christ, Joh. 11. 27. Acts 17. 3. Chap. 18. 5. Chap. 9. 22. The
very Anointed of God, or he whom God authorized and qualified to be the Savior
of the World.

3. To come to be a Savior, supposes a resolution to do that work before he
goes back. I will ransom them from the power of the Grave; I will redeem them
from death: O Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy Destruction,
Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes, Hos. 13. 14.

And as he resolved, so he has done.

1. He has purged our Sins, Heb. 1. 2, 3. 2. He has perfected for ever (by
one Offering) them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. 3. He has obtained
Eternal Redemption for them, Heb. 9. 12. See further, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Heb. 9. 26.
Col. 2. 15. Heb. 6. 18, 19, 20.
Quest. 3. I come now to the Third Question, What it is for Jesus to come to be
a Savior.
1. Ans. It is the greatest discovery of man's misery and inability, to save
himself therefrom, that ever was made in the World. Must the Son of God himself
come down from Heaven? or can there be no Salvation? can not one Sinner save
another? cannot man by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom
for him? cannot an Angel do it? cannot all the Angels do it? no; Christ must
come and die to do it.

2dly. It is the greatest discovery of the Love of God, that ever the World
had. For god SO to love the World, as to send his Son! For God SO to commend
his love to the World, as to send it to them in the Blood of his Son! Amazing
Love! John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8.

3dly. It is the greatest discovery of the Condescension of Christ that ever
the World had.

1. That he should not come to be ministered unto, but to minister; and to give
his Life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. 2. That he should be manifest for this
purpose, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. 3. That he
should come that we might have life, and that we might have it more abundantly,
John 10. 10. 4. That the Son of God should come to seek and to save that which
was lost, Luke 19. 10. 5. That he should not come to judge the World, to but to
save the World, John 12. 47. 6. That Christ Jesus should come into the World
save Sinners of whom I am chief, 1. Tim. 1. 15. 7. That he should love us and
wash us from our Sins in his own Blood, Revel. 1. 5. What amazing Condescension
and Humility is this! Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.
How Jesus Christ addressed himself to the Work of our Redemption.
I Come then in the next place to show you HOW Jesus Christ addressed himself
to the Work of man's Redemption.

The Scripture says, he became poor: That he made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a Servant, that he humbled himself unto death,
even the Death of the Cross. But particularly:

1. He took upon him our Flesh. 2. He was made under the Law. 3. He took upon
him our Sins. 4. He bore the Curse due to our Sins.
First, He took upon him our Flesh. I showed you before that he came in our
Flesh, and now I must show you the Reason of it: namely, Because, That was the
way to address himself to the Work of our Redemption.

Wherefore, when the Apostle treated of the Incarnation of Christ, he adds*
withal the reason, to wit, That he might be capable to work out the Redemption
of men.

There are three things to be considered in this 1st Head.

1. that he took our Flesh; for this Reason, That he might be a Savior. 2. How
he took flesh, that he might be our Savior. 2. That it was necessary that he
should take our Flesh, if indeed he will be our Savior.
For the First, That he took our Flesh, for this Reason, That he might be a
Savior: For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the Flesh, Romans 8. 3, 4.

The Sum of the Words is, forasmuch as the Law could do us no good, by reason
of the inability that is in our flesh to do it (for the Law can do us no good
until it be fulfilled) and because God had a desire that good should come to
us, therefore did he send his Son in our likeness, clothed with flesh, to
destroy by his doing the Law, the tendency of the Sin that dwells in our flesh.
He therefore took our flesh, that our Sin, with its effects, might by him be
condemned and overcome.

The Reason therefore why he took flesh, is, Because he would be our Savior.

For as much then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and blood, he also
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the Power of Death, that is the Devil, and deliver them, who through fear
of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15.

In these words it is asserted, that he took our flesh for certain Reasons.

1. Because the Children, the Heirs of Heaven, are Partakers of Flesh and
Blood. For as much then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he
also himself took part of the same. Had the Children, the Heirs, been without
flesh, he himself had not taken it upon him: had the Children been Angels, he
had taken upon him the Nature of Angels; but because the Children were
Partakers of Flesh, therefore, leaving Angels, or refusing to take hold of
Angels, he took Flesh and Blood, the Nature of the Children; that he might put
himself into a capacity to save and deliver the Children. Therefore it follows,
That through death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is
the Devil.

This therefore was another Reason, that he might destroy the Devil.

The Devil had bent himself against the Children: he is their Adversary, and
goes forth to make war with them. The Devil your Adversary: And he went to
make war with the Remnant of her Seed, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Revel. 12. Now the Children
could not destroy him, because he had already cast them into sin; defiled their
Nature, and laid them under the Wrath of God, Therefore Christ puts himself
among the Children, and into the Nature of the Children; that he might, by
means of his Dying in their Flesh, destroy the Devil; that is, take away Sin,
his Work, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil; for sin is the great
Engine of Hell, by which he overthrows all that perish: Now this did Christ
destroy, by taking on him the similitude of Sinful Flesh; of which more anon.

That he might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil, and
deliver them. This was the thing in chief intended, that he might deliver the
Children, that he might deliver them from death, the Fruit of their Sin; and
from Sin, the Sting of that Death. That he might deliver them, who through the
Fear of Death, were all their Lifetime subject to bondage.

He took flesh therefore, because the Children had it; he took it that he might
die for the Children, he took it that he might deliver the Children from the
Works of the Devil; that he might deliver them. No Deliverance had come to the
Children if the Son of God had not taken their Flesh and Blood. Therefore he
took our Flesh that he might be our Savior.

Again, In a Savior there must be not only Merit, but Compassion and Sympathy;
because the Children are yet to live by Faith, are not yet come to the
Inheritance. It behoved him therefore in all things to be made like unto his
Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People, Heb. 2.
17, 18.

Two Reasons are rendered in this Text, why he must take Flesh; namely, that he
might be their Priest, to offer Sacrifice, to wit, his Body and Blood for them;
and that he might be merciful and faithful, to pity and preserve them unto the
Kingdom appointed for them.

Mark you therefore, how the Apostle, when he asserteth that the Lord Jesus
took our Flesh, urges the reason why he took our Flesh. THAT he might destroy
the Devil and Death, THAT he might deliver them. It behoved him to be made like
unto his Brethren, THAT he might be merciful and faithful, THAT he might make
Reconciliation for the Sins of the People. The Reason therefore why he took our
Flesh is declared, to wit, That he might be our Savior. And hence you find it
so often recorded; He has abolished in his Flesh the Enmity; He has slain the
Enmity by his Flesh; and you who were sometimes Aliens and Enemies in your
Minds by wicked works: yet, now has he reconciled, in the Body of his Flesh,
through death, to present you holy and unblameable in his Sight, Ephesians. 2. 15,
16. Col. 1. 21, 22.

How he took Flesh.
I Come now to the Second Question, to wit, How he took our Flesh. This must be
inquired into, for his taking Flesh was not after the common way, never any
took man's Flesh upon him as he, since the Foundation of the World.

1. He took not our flesh like Adam, who was formed out of the Ground. Who was
made of the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2. 7. Chap. 3. 19.

2. He took not our flesh as we do by Carnal Generation. Joseph knew not his
Wife, neither did Mary know any Man, till she had brought forth her First-horn
Son, Luke 1. 34. Mat. 1. 25.

3. He took flesh then, by the immediate working and over-shadowing of the Holy
Ghost: And hence it is said expressly; She was found with Child of the Holy
Ghost. Now the Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When As his Mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph, ( before they came together) she was found with Child
of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 18. And hence again, When Joseph doubted of her
Honesty (for he perceived she was with Child and knew he had not touched her)
the Angel of God, himself comes down to resolve his doubt, and said, Joseph
thou Son of David, Fear not, to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, for that which is
conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 20.

But again, Though the Holy Ghost was that by which the Child Jesus was formed
in the Womb, so as to be without Carnal Generation; yet was he not formed in
her without, but by her Conception. Behold, thou shall conceive in thy Womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his Name Jesus, Luke 1. 31. Wherefore, he
took flesh not only IN, but OF the Virgin. Hence he is called HER Son, the SEED
of the Woman. And hence it is also that he is called the Seed OF Abraham, the
Seed OF David; THEIR Seed according to the Flesh, Luke 2. 7. Genesis 13. 15. Chap.
12. Chap. 22. Gal. 3. 16. Chap. 4. 4. Romans 1. 3. Luke 1. 32. Romans 9. 5.

And this the Work he undertook, required.

1. It required that he should take our Flesh.

2. It required that he should take our Flesh without sin, which could not be,
had he taken it by reason of a Carnal Generation; for so, all Children are
conceived in, and polluted with sin, Psalm. 51. And the least pollution, either
of flesh or spirit, had utterly disabled him for the Work, which to do, he came
down from Heaven. Therefore, Such an High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens,
Heb. 7. 26.

This Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God was thus completed: I say,
That he might be in all points like as we are, yet without sin; for sin in the
Fesh disableth, and makes incapable to do the Commandment. Therefore was he
thus made, thus made of a Woman: And this the Angel assigns as the Reason of
this his Marvelous Incarnation: The Holy Ghost, says he, shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that Holy
thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, Luke 2. 35.

The Overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and the Power of the Highest; the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, brought this Wonderful thing to pass; for Jesus is a
Wonderful One, in his Conception and Birth. This Mystery is that, next to the
Mystery of three Persons in one God. It is a great Mystery. Great is the
Mystery of Godliness; God was manifested in the Flesh.

The Conclusion is, That Jesus Christ took our Flesh, that he might be our
Savior; and that he might be our Savior indeed, he THUS took our Flesh.

That it was necessary that he should take our Flesh, if he will be our Savior.
I Come now to the Third Thing, namely, That it was necessary that he should
take our Flesh if he will be our Savior.

And that first, from the Nature of the Work; his Work was to save, to save
man, sinking man: man that was going down to the Pit, Job 34. 24. Now he that
will save him that is sinking, must take hold on him. And since he was not to
save a Man, but Men; therefore it was necessary that he should take hold, not
of one Person, but of the Common Nature, clothing himself with part of the same.

He took not hold of Angels, but took on him the Seed of Abraham. For THAT
Flesh was the same with the whole Lump of the Children, to whom the Promise was
made; and comprehended in it the Body of them that shall be saved, even as in
Adam was comprehended the whole World at first, Romans 5.

Hence we are said to be chosen in him, to be gathered, being in him, to be
dead by him, to be risen with him and to be set with him, or in him in Heavenly
Places already, I phes. 1. 4, 10. Romans 7. 4. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Chap. 2. 12, 13.

This then was the Wisdom of the great God, that the Eternal Son of his Love
should take hold of, and so secure the sinking Souls of perishing Sinners by
assuming their Flesh.

Secondly, The Manner of his doing the Work of a Savior, did call for his
taking of our Flesh.

He must do the Work by dying: Ought not Christ to have suffered? Christ must
needs have suffered, Luke 24. 26. Acts 17. 3. or else no glory follows. The
Prophets testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that
should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 11. Yea, they did it by the Spirit, even by the Spirit
of Christ himself. This Spirit then did bid them tell the World, yea, testify
that Christ must suffer, or no man be blessed with Glory. For the threatening of
death, and the Curse of the Law lay in the Way between Heaven-Gates and the
Souls of the Children, for their Sins; wherefore he that will save them, must
answer Divine Justice, or God must lie in saving them without inflicting the
Punishment threatened. Christ then must needs have suffered, the Manner of the
Work, laid a necessity upon him to take our Flesh upon him; he must die, he
must die for us, he must die for our Sins. And this was effectually foretold by
all the Bloody Sacrifices that were offered under the Law; The Blood of Bulls,
the Blood of Lambs, the Blood of Rams, the Blood of Calves, and the Blood of
Goats and Birds. These Bloody Sacrifices, what did they signify, what were
they figures of, but of the bloody Sacrifice of the Body of Jesus Christ; their
Blood being a Shadow of his Blood, and their Flesh being a Shadow of his Flesh?

Therefore when God declared that he took no pleasure in them, because they
could not make the Worshippers perfect as pertaining to the Conscience; then
comes Jesus Christ to offer his Sinless Body and Soul for the Sin of the
People: For it is not possible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take
away sin: wherefore, when he comes into the World, he says, Sacrifices and
Offerings thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me; in
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure. Then said I,
to, I come, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me to do thy good Will.
Since Burnt-Offerings cannot do thy Will, my Body shall; since the Blood of
Bulls and Goats cannot do thy Will, my Blood shall.

Then follows, By the Will of God we are Sanctified through the offering up of
the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 8, 9, 10.

Thirdly, The End of the Work required, That Christ, if he will be our Savior,
should take upon him our Flesh.

The End of our Salvation is, That we might enjoy God, and that he by us might
be glorified for ever and ever.

1. That we might enjoy God. I will dwell in them, and they shall be my People,
and I will be their God. This Indwelling of God, and consequently our Enjoyment
of him, begins first in its Eminency, by his Possessing our Flesh in the Person
of Jesus Christ. Hence his Name is called Emmanuel, God with us; and the Word
was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us. The Flesh of Christ, is the Tabernacle
which the Lord pitched, according to that saying: The Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God, Revel. 21. 3. Here God begins to
discover his Glory, and to be desirable to the Sons of Men.

God could not communicate himself to us, nor take us into the Enjoyment of
himself, but with respect to that Flesh which his Son took of the Virgin,
because sin stood betwixt. Now this Flesh, only, was the Holy Lump; in this
Flesh God could dwell, and forasmuch as this Flesh is the same with ours, and
was taken up with intent that what was done, in, and by that, should be
communicated to all the Children; therefore through that, does God communicate
of himself unto his People. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself. And* I am the Way, says Christ, no man comes to the Father but by
me, 2 Cor. 5. Joh. 14. 6.

That Passage to the Hebrews is greatly to our purpose: We have boldness,
Brethren, to enter into the Holiest, (the place where God is) by the Blood of
Jesus, by a new and living Way which he has Consecrated for us through the
Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Wherefore by the Flesh and
Blood of Christ, we enter into the Holiest; through the Vail, says he, that is
to say, his Flesh.

2. As the End of our Salvation, is, That we might enjoy God: so also it is
that he by us might be Glorified for ever. That God in all things might be
Glorified through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Here indeed will the Mystery of his Grace, Wisdom, Justice, Power, Holiness,
and Glory, inhabit Eternal praise, while we that are counted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, shall admire at the Mystery, and see our selves, without our
selves, even by the Flesh and Blood of Christ (through Faith therein)
effectually, and Eternally saved. O! This will be the burden of our Eternal
Joy; God loved us, and gave his Son for us, Christ loved us, and gave his Flesh
for our Life, and his Blood for our Eternal Redemption and Salvation.

That Christ was made under the Law.
BUt Secondly, Christ was made under the Law. When the fullness of the time was
come* God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.

Of right, being found in flesh, he must needs be under the Law, for that there
is not any Creature, above or without Law to God, (but this is not to the point
in hand) Christ was not therefore under the Law because he was found in flesh,
but he took flesh, and designedly put himself, or was made under the Law;
wherefore it is added, he was made under the Law to Redeem, to redeem them that
were under the Law. Wherefore here is a design, an Heavenly contrivance, and
device on foot. Christ is made, that is, by design, subjected under the Law,
for the sake, and upon the account of others: To redeem them that were under
the Law.

Made under the Law; that is, put himself into the Room of Sinners, into the
Condition of Sinners; made himself subject to the same pains and penalties we
were obnoxious to. We were under the Law, and it had dominion over us, bound us
upon pain of Eternal Damnation to do completely all things written in the Law.
This Condition Christ put himself into, that he might redeem: for assuredly we
had else perished.

The Law had dominion over us, and since we had sinned, of right it pronounced
the Curse, and made all men subject to the Wrath of God. Christ therefore did
not only come into our Flesh, but also into our Condition, into the Valley and
Shadow of Death where we were, and where we are as we are Sinners. He that is
under the Law, is under the Edge of the Axe. When David was to go visit his
Brethren, and to save them from the Hand of Goliath, he was to look how his
Brethren fared, and to take their Pledge, 1. Sam. 17. 18. This is true of Jesus
Christ, when he came to save us from the Hand of Death and the Law; he looked
how his Brethren fared, took to heart their deplorable Condition, and put
himself into the same Plight, to wit, under the Law, that he might redeem them
that were under the Law.

I told you before, that he came sinless into the World, that he had a
miraculous Conception, and wonderful Birth: And here you see a Reason for it,
he was to be put, or made under the Law to redeem. He that will be made under
the Law to redeem, had need be sinless, and spotless himself; for the Law
finds fault with the least, and condemns man for the first beginning of Sin.

Without this then there could not have been Redemption, nor any the Sons of
God by Adoption; no Redemption, because the Sentence of Death had already past
upon all; no Sons by Adoption, because that is the Effect of Redemption. God
sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law to redeem them that were
under the Law, That we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Christ then by being
made under the Law, has recovered his from under the Law, and obtained for
them the Privilege of the Adoption of Sons.

For as I told you before, Christ stood a Common Person, presenting in himself
the whole Lump of the promised Seed, or the Children of the Promise; wherefore
he comes under the Law for them, takes upon him to do what the Law required of
them, takes upon him to do it for them.

He began therefore at the first Tittle of the Law, and going in man's Flesh,
for man, through the Law, He becomes the End of the Law for righteousness, for
every one that believes. The END of the Law, what is the End of the Law, but
perfect and sinless Obedience? that is the End of the Law both with respect to
its Nature, and the Cause of its being imposed. God gave the Law, that complete
Righteousness should by that be found upon men, but because sin was got into
man's Flesh, therefore this Righteousness, by us, could not be completed: Now
comes Christ the Lord into the World, clothes himself with the Children's
Flesh, addresseth himself to the Work of their Redemption, is made under the
Law; and going through every part of the Law without Sin, he becomes the End
of the Law for Justifying Righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10.
4. For he obeyed not the Law for himself, he needed no obedience thereto: 'Twas
we that needed obedience, 'twas we that wanted to answer the Law, we wanted it
but could not obtain it, because then the Law was weak through the Flesh;
therefore God sent his own Son, and he did our duty for us, even to become the
End of the Law to every one that believes: In this therefore Christ labored
for us, he was made under the Law to redeem. Therefore, as I said before, It
behoved him to be sinless, because the Law binds over to answer for sin at the
Bar of the Judgment of God. Therefore did his Godhead assume our humane Flesh,
in a clean and spotless way that he might come under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law.

For consisting of two Natures, and the Personality lieing in the Godhead,
which gave value and worth to all things done for us by the Manhood, the
Obedience takes denomination from thence, to be the Obedience of God. The Sons
Righteousness, the Sons Blood; the Righteousness of God, the Blood of God, Heb.
5. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 7, 8. Acts 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16.

Thus Jesus Christ came into the World under the Law to redeem; not simply as
God, but God-Man, both natures making one Christ. The Godhead therefore did
influence and give value to the human Flesh of Christ in all its Obedience to
the Law; else there would have been wanting that Perfection of Righteousness
which only could answer the Demands and Expectation of the Justice of God, to
wit, Perfect Righteousness by Flesh.

But the Second Person in the Godhead, the Son, the Word, coming under the Law
for men in their Flesh, and subjecting himself by that Flesh to every tittle,
and demand of the Law; all, and every whit of what was acted, and done by Jesus
Christ God-man for us, it was, and is the Righteousness of God: and since it
was not done for himself, but for us (as he says in the Text, to redeem.) The
Righteousness by which we are set free from the Law, is none other but the
Righteousness that alone resideth in the Person of the Son of God.

And that it is absolutely necessary thus it should be, is evident, both with
respect to God, and also with respect to Man.

1. With respect to God. The Righteousness is demanded by God: therefore he
that comes to redeem, must present before God a Righteousness absolutely
perfect; this can be done by none but God.

2. With respect to Man. Man was to present this Righteousness to God,
therefore must the Undertaker be man. Man for Man, and God for God, God-Man
between God and Men. This Days-man can lay his Hand upon us both, and bring God
and Man together in peace, Job. 9. 33.

Quest. But some may say, What need of the Righteousness of one that is
naturally God? had Adam who was but a mean Man stood in his Innocence, and done
his duty, he had saved himself and all his Posterity.
Ans. Had Adam stood he had so long secured himself (from the Wages of Sin) and
Posterity so long as they were in him. But had Adam sinned, yea, although he
had not defiled his Nature with filth, he could never after that have redeemed
himself from the Curse of the Law; because he was not equal with God: for the
Curse of the Law is the Curse of God, but no man can deliver himself from the
Curse of God, having first transgressed. This is evident because Angels, for
sin, lie bound in Chains, and can never deliver themselves.

He therefore that redeemeth man from under the Law, must, not only do all the
good that the Law requires, but bear all the Penalty that is due by the Law
for sin.

Should an Angel assume human Flesh, and in that Flesh do the Law, this
Righteousness would not redeem a Sinner, it would be but the Righteousness of
an Angel, and so, far short of such a Righteousness as can secure a Sinner from
the Wrath of God. But thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul, with
all thy Heart, with all thy Mind, with all thy Strength. If there was no more
required of us, now to redeem our selves, it would be utterly impossible for us
to do it, because in the best there is sin, which will intermix it self with
every duty of Man. This being so, all the Heart, all the Soul, all the
Strength, and all the Mind, to the exact requirement of the Justice of the Law,
can never be found in a Natural Man.

Besides, For this Work there is required a perfect Memory, always to keep in
mind the whole Duty of Man, the whole of every tittle of all the Law, lest sin
come in by forgetfulness.

2. A perfect Knowledge and Judgment, lest sin come in by ignorance.

3. An everlasting Unweariedness in all, lest sin and continual Temptations
tire the Soul, and cause it to fail before the whole be done.

For the Accomplishing this last, he must have,

1. A Perfect Willingness, without the least thought to the contrary. 2. Such
an hatred of sin, as is not to be found, but in the Heart of God. 3. A full
delight in every Duty, and that in the midst of all temptations. 4. A
continuing in all things to the well-pleasing of the Justice of God.
I say, should the penalty of the Law be taken off, should God forgive the
Penalty and Punishment due to sins that are past, and only demand good works
now, according to the Tenor of the Law, no man could be saved: there would not
be found that Heart, that Soul, that Mind and that Strength any-where in the
World.

This therefore must cease for ever unless the Son of God will put his Shoulder
to the Work; but blessed be God he has done it: When the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that are under the Law.

Christ took upon him our Sins.
BUt Thirdly, Christ our Savior takes upon him our Sins. This is another step
to the Work of our Redemption. He has made him to be sin for us. Strange
Doctrine! a Fool would think it blasphemy, but Truth has said it. Truth, I
say, has said, not that he was made to be sin, but that GOD made him to be
sin. He bath made him to be sin for us, 1 Cor. 5. 21.

This therefore shows us how effectually Christ Jesus undertook the Work of
our Redemption. He was made to be sin for us. Sin is the great block and bar to
our happiness; sin is the Procurer of all miseries to men both here and for
ever. Take away sin, and nothing can hurt us; for death Temporal, death
Spiritual, and death Eternal is the Wages of sin, Romans 6. 23.

Sin then, and man for Sin, is the Object of the Wrath of God. If the Object of
the Wrath of God, then is his Case most dreadful; for who can bear, who can
grapple with the Wrath of God! Men cannot, Angels cannot, the whole World
cannot. All therefore must sink under sin, but he who is made to be sin for us;
he only can bear sins, he only can bear them away; and therefore were they laid
upon him. The Lord laid upon him the Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.

Mark therefore, and you shall find, that the Reason why God made him to be sin
for us, was, That we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. He took our
Flesh, he was made under the Law, and was made to be sin for us; that the Devil
might be destroyed, that the Captives might be redeemed, and made the
Righteousness of God in him.

And forasmuch as he says, that GOD has made him to be sin, it declares that
the Design of God, and the Mystery of his Will and Grace was in it. He has
made him to be sin. God has done it, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him: there was no other way, the Wisdom of Heaven could find no other
way, we could not by other means stand just before the Justice of God.

Now what remains, but that we who are reconciled to God by Faith in his Blood,
are quit, discharged, and set free from the Law of Sin and

Death. Yea, what encouragement to trust in him, when we read That God made him
to be sin for us.

Quest. But how was Jesus Christ made of God to be sin for us?
Ans. Even so as if himself had committed all our Sins; that is, they were as
really charged upon him, as if himself had been the Actor and Committer of them
all. He has made him to be sin; not only as a Sinner, but as Sin it self. He
was as the Sin of the World, that Day he stood before God in our steed. Some
indeed will not have Jesus Christ our Lord to be made sin for us, their Wicked
Reasons think this to be wrong Judgment in the Lord: it seems, supposing, that
because they cannot imagine how it should be; therefore God, if he does it,
must do it at his Peril, and must be charged with doing wrong Judgment, and so,
things that become not his Heavenly Majesty: But against this Duncish
Sophistry, we set Paul and Isaiah, the one telling us still, The Lord laid on
him the Iniquities of us all; and the other, That God made him to be sin for us.

But these Men, as I suppose, think it enough for Christ to die under that
Notion only, not knowing nor feeling the Burden of Sin, and the Wrath of God
due thereto. These make him as senceless in his Dicing and as much without
reason, as a silly Sheep or Goat who also died for Sin, but so as in name, in
show, and shadow only. They felt not the proper Weight, Guilt, and Judgment of
God for Sin.

But thou, Sinner, who art so in thine own Eyes, and, who feel guilt in
thine own Conscience; Know then, that Jesus Christ the Son of the Living God in
flesh, was made to be sin for thee, or stood sensibly guilty of all thy Sins
before God, and bare them in his own Body upon the Cross.

God charged our Sins upon Christ, and that in their guilt and burden; what
remains, but that the Charge was real or feigned: if real, then he has
either perished under them, or carried them away from before God: if they were
charged but feignedly, then did he but feignedly die for them, then shall we
have but feigned benefit by his Death, and but a feigned Salvation at last; not
to say how this Cursed Doctrine charge God and Christ with Hypocrisy, the one
in saying He made Christ to be sin, the other in saying He bare our sin; when
indeed, and in truth, our guilt and burden never was really upon him.

Quest. But might not Christ die for our Sins, but he needs must bear their
Guilt or Burden?
Ans. He that can sever sin, and guilt, sin and the Burden, each from other,
laying sin and no guilt, sin and no burden on the Person that dies for Sin,
must do it only in his own imaginary Head. No Scripture, nor Reason, nor Sense,
says, understands, or feels sin when charged, without its guilt and burden.

And here we must distinguish between sin charged, and sin forgiven. Sin
forgiven, may be seen without guilt or burden, though I think not without shame
in this World: But sin charged, and that by the Justice of God, for so it was
upon Christ; This cannot be, but guilt and the burden, as inseparable
companions, must unavoidably lie on that Person. Poor Sinner, be advised to
take heed of such deluded Preachers, who with their Tongues smoother than Oil,
would rob thee of that Excellent Doctrine, God has made him to be sin for us:
for such, as I said, do not only present thee with a feigned deliverance and
forgiveness, with a feigned Heaven and Happiness, but charge God and the Lord
Jesus as mere Impostors, who while they tell us that Christ was made of God to
be sin for us, affirm, that it was not so REALLY, suggesting this Sophistical
Reason, no wrong Judgment comes from the Lord. I say again, this Wicked
Doctrine is the next way to turn the Gospel in thy thoughts, to no more than a
Cunningly-devised Fable, 2 Pet. 1. and to make Jesus Christ in his dying for
our Sins, as brutish as the Paschal-Lamb in Moses's Law.

Wherefore, distressed Sinner, when thou find it recorded in the Word of
Truth, that Christ died for our Sins, and that God has made him to be sin for
us: Then do thou consider of sin as it is a Transgression against the Law of
God, and that, as such, it procures the Judgment of God, torments and afflicts
the Mind with guilt, and binds over the Soul to answer it: sever not sin and
guilt asunder, left thou be an Hypocrite like these wicked Men, and rob Christ
of his true Sufferings. Besides, to see sin upon Christ but not its guilt, to
see sin upon Christ, but not the Legal Punishment; what is this but to
conclude, that either there is no guilt and punishment in sin, or that Christ
bare our sin, but we the Punishment? for the Punishment must be born, because
the Sentence is gone out from the Mouth of God against sin.

Do thou therefore, as I have said, consider of sin as a Transgression of the
Law, 1 John 3. and a Provoker of the Justice of God, which done, turn thine Eye
to the Cross, and behold those Sins, in the Guilt and Punishment of them,
sticking in the Flesh of Christ. God condemned sin in the Flesh of Christ. He
bare our Sins IN his own Body on the Tree, Romans 8. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

I would only give thee this Caution, not sin in the Nature of sin; Sin was not
so in the Flesh of Christ, but sin in the Natural Punishment of it, to wit,
Guilt, and the Chastising Hand of Justice. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities: The Chastisements of our
Peace were upon him, and by his Stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.

Look then upon Christ crucified to be as the sin of the World, as if He only
had broken the Law; which done, behold him perfectly innocent in himself, and
so conclude, that for the transgressions of God's People he was stricken: That
when the Lord made him to be sin, He made him to be sin FOR US.

He was made a Curse for us,
FOurthly, As he, was made Flesh under the Law, and also Sin; so he was made a
Curse for us. Christ has redeemed us from the Cross of the Law, being made a
Curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree.
This Sentence is taken out of Moses being passed there upon them that for Sin
are worthy of death. And if a Man have committed a Sin worthy of death, and
thou hang him on a Tree, his Body shall not remain all night upon the Tree, but
thou shall in anywise bury him that Day, for he that is hanged is accursed of
God. By this Sentence Paul concludes that Jesus Christ was Justly hanged,
because sin worthy of Death was upon him. Sin, not of his own but ours. Since
then he took our Sins, he must be cursed of God; for sin is sin wherever it
lies, and justice is justice wherever it finds it: wherefore since Jesus
Christ will bear our Sin, he must be numbered with the Transgressors, and
counted worthy to die the Death.

He that commits sin is worthy of death: This, though Christ did not
personally do, his Members, his Body, which is his Church, did: and since he
would undertake for them with God, and stand in their Sins before the Eyes of
his Justice; He must die the Death by the Law.

Sin and the Curse cannot be severed. Sin must be followed with the Curse of
God: Sin therefore being removed from us to the Back of Christ, thither goes
also the Curse; for if sin be found upon him, he is the Person worthy to die,
worthy by our Sins. Wherefore Paul here sets forth Christ clothed with our
Sins; and so taking from us the Guilt and Punishment. What punishment, but the
Wrath and Displeasure of God. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law, being made a Curse for us.

In this word [Curse] are two things comprised.

1. The Reality of Sin, for there can be no Curse where there is no Sin; either
of the Persons own, or made to be his by his own Consent or the Imputation of
Divine Justice. And since Sins are made to be Christ's by Imputation, they are
his, though not naturally, yet really, and consequently the Wages due: He has
made him to be sin; he was made a Curse for us.

2. This word Curse comprizeth therefore the Punishment of Sin, that Punishment
properly due to sin from the Hand of God's Justice, which punishment stands
in three things.

1. In charging sin upon the Body and Soul of the Person concerned: and hence
we read that both the Body and Soul of Christ, were made an Offering for Sin,
Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 10. 10.

2. The Punishment stands in Gods inflicting of the Just merits of sin upon
him that stands charged therewith, and that is Death in its own nature and
strength; to wit, Death with the Sting thereof: The Sting of Death is sin. This
Death did Christ die, because he died for our Sins.

3. The Sorrows and Pains of this Death therefore must be under-gone by Jesus
Christ. Now there are diverse Sorrows in Death.

1. Such Sorrows as Brutes are subject to. 2. Such Sorrows as Persons are
subjects to, that stand in sin before God. 3. Such Sorrows as those undergo who
are swallowed up of the Curse and Wrath of God for ever.
Now so much of all kind of Sorrow as the Imputation of our Sin, could justly
bring from the Hand of Divine Justice, so much of it he had.

1. He had Death.

2. He had the Sting of Death, which is Sin.

3. He was forsaken of God, but could not by any means have those Sorrows which
they have that are everlastingly swallowed up of them. It was not possible that
he should be holden of it, Act. 2. 24.

For where Sin is charged and born, there must of necessity follow the Wrath
and Curse of God: Now where the Wrath and Curse of God is, there must of
necessity follow the Effects, the Natural Effects.

I say, the Natural Effects: to wit, the Sense, the Sorrowful Sense of the
Displeasure of an Infinite Majesty, and his Chastisements for the Sin that has
provoked him.

There are Effects natural, and Effects accidental; those Accidental, are such
as flow from our weakness, whilst we wrestle with the Judgment of God; to wit,
hellish fear, despair, rage, blasphemy, and the like: These were not incident
to Jesus Christ, he being in his own Person every way perfect. Neither did he
always endure the Natural Effects; his Merits relieved, and delivered him. God
loosed the Pains of death, because it was not possible he should be holden of
it, Acts 2. 24.

Christ then was made a Curse for us, for he did bear our sin; the Punishment
therefore, from the Revenging Hand of God must needs fall upon him.

Wherefore, by these four things, we see how Christ became our Savior, he took
hold of our Nature, was born under the Law, was made to be sin, and the
Accursed of God for us. And observe it; all this, as I said before, was the
Handiwork of God. God made him Flesh, made him under the Law, God made him to
be Sin, and also a Curse for us. The Lord bruised him, the Lord put him to
grief, the Lord made his Soul an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53. Not for that he
hated him, considering him in his own harmless, innocent, and blessed Person;
for he was daily hid Delight; but by an act of grace to usward, were our
Iniquities laid upon him, and he in our stead, bruised and chastised for them.
God loved us, and made him a Curse for us. He was made a Curse for us, That the
Blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Faith in Jesus Christ,
Gal. 3. 13, 14, 15.

Further Demonstration of this Truth.
BEfore I pass this Truth, I will present thee (Courteous Reader) with two or
three Demonstrations for its further confirmation.

First, That Christ did bear our Sin and Curse, is clear because he died, and
that without a Mediator.

1. He died, Death is the Wages of Sin, Romans 6. 23. Now if death be the Wages
of sin, and that be true, that Christ did die and not sin, either the Course of
Justice is perverted, or else he died for our Sins; there was no cause of death
in him, yet he died Act. 13. 28. He did no Evil, Guile was not found in his
Mouth, yet he received the Wages of Sin. Sin therefore, though not of his own,
was found upon him, and laid to his Charge, because he died. Christ died for
our Sins, Christ gave himself for our Sins, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 1. 4. 1
Pet. 2. 22.

He then that will conclude that Christ did not bear our Sin, charge God
foolishly, for delivering him up to death: for laying on him the Wages, when in
no sense he deserved the same. Yea he overthrows the whole Gospel, for that
hangs on THIS hinge; Christ died for our Sins.

Object. But all that die, do not bear the Curse of God for Sin.
Ans. But all that die without a Mediator do: Angels died the Cursed Death,
because Christ took not hold of them; and they for whom Christ never prays,
they die the Cursed Death, for they perish everlastingly in the unutterable
Torments of Hell. Christ too died, that Death which is the Proper Wages of Sin,
for he had none to stand for him. I looked, says he, and there was none to
help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own Arm
brought Salvation unto me. And he saw that there was no man: and he wondered
that there was no Intercessor, therefore his Arm brought Salvation unto him,
and his Righteousness sustained him, Isa. 63. 5. Isa. 59. 16.

Christ then died, or endured the Wages of Sin, and that without an
Intercessor, without one between God and he: He grappled immediately with the
Eternal Justice of God, who inflicted on him Death, the Wages of Sin: there was
no man to hold off the Hand of God; Justice had his full blow at him, and made
him a Curse for Sin. He died for sin without a Mediator, he died the Cursed
Death.

Secondly, A Second thing that Demonstrateth that Christ died the Cursed Death
for Sin: It is the Frame of Spirit that he was in at the time that he was to be
taken.

Never was poor mortal so beset with the apprehensions of approaching death as
was this Lord Jesus Christ; Amazement beyond measu^e, Sorrow that exceeded
seized upon his Soul. My Soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful even unto
Death. And he began, says Mark, to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, Mat.
26. 38. Mar. 14. 33.

Add to this, That Jesus Christ was better able to grapple with death, even
better able to do it alone, than the whole World joined altogether.

1. He was anointed with the Spirit without Measure, Joh. 3. 34. 2. He had all
Grace perfect in him, John 1. 16. 3. Never none so soaked in the Bosom of his
Fathers Love as himself, Prove. 8. 23, 30. 4. Never none so harmless, and
without sin as he, and consequently never man had so good a Conscience as he,
Heb. 7. 26. 5. Never none prepared such a stock of good Works to bear him
company at the Hour of Death as he. 6. Never none had greater assurance of
being with the Father Eternally in the Heavens than he. And yet behold, when HE
comes to die, how weak is he, how amazed at death, how heavy, how exceeding
sorrowful; and I say, no cause assigned but the Approach of Death.
Alas! How often is it seen, that we Poor Sinners can laugh at destruction when
it comes: yea, and rejoice exceedingly when we find the Grave, Job. 3. 22.
looking upon death as a part of our Portion; yea, as that which will be a means
of our present relief and help, 1 Cor. 3. 22.

This Jesus Christ couldnot do, considered as dying for our Sin, but the nearer
death, the more heavy, and oppressed with the thoughts of the Revenging Hand of
God. Wherefore he falls into an Agony, and Sweats; not after the common rate,
as we do when death is severing Body and Soul. His Sweat was as it were great
drops (Clodders) of Blood, falling down to the Ground, Luke 22. 44.

What, I say, should be the Reason, but that death assaulted him with his
Sting. If Jesus Christ had been to die for his Virtues only, doubtless he would
have born it lightly, and so he did as he died, bearing witness to the Truth,
He endured the Cross, and despised the Shame, Heb. 12. 1, 2, How have the
Martyrs despised death, and as it were, not been careful of that, having peace
with God by Jesus Christ, scorning the most Cruel Torments that Hell and Men
could devise and invent; but Jesus Christ could not do so, as he was a
Sacrifice for sin, he died for sin, he was made a Curse for us. O my Brethren,
Christ died many deaths at once, he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with
the Rich in his Deaths. Look how many thousands shall be saved, so many deaths
did Jesus die; yet it was but once he died. He died thy death, and my death,
and so many deaths as all our Sins deserved, who shall be saved from the Wrath
to come.

Now to feign that these Sorrows, and this Bloody Agony was not real, but in
show only; What greater Condemnation can be passed upon Jesus Christ, who loved
to do all things in the most feigned Simplicity? It was therefore because of
sin; the Sin that was put into the Death he died, and the Curse of God that was
due to Sin; That, That made death so bitter to Jesus Christ; it is Christ that
died. The Apostle speaks as if never any died but Christ, nor indeed did there,
so wonderful a Death as he, Romans 8. Death considered simply, as it is a
deprivation of natural life could not have these Effects in a Person,
personally more Righteous than an Angel. Yea, even Carnal Wicked Men not
awakened in their Conscience how securely can they die. It must therefore also
be concluded, that the Sorrows, and Agony of Jesus Christ came from a higher
cause, even from the Guilt of sin, and from the Curse of God that was now
approaching for that Sin.

It cannot be attributed to the Fear of Men, their Terror could not make him
afraid; that was contrary to his Doctrine, and did not become the Dignity of
his Person; it was sin, sin, sin, and the Curse due to sin.

Thirdly, It is evident that Christ did bear and die the Cursed Death for sin;
from the Carriage and Dispensation of God toward him.

First, from the Carriage of God. God now becomes as an Enemy to him.

1. He forsakes him. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yea, the Sense
of the Loss of God's comfortable Presence abode with him even till he gave up
the Ghost.

2. He deals with him as with one that has sinned, he chastises him, he
bruiseth him, he strikes and smites him, Isa. 53. and was pleased, that is,
his Justice was satisfied, in so doing. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he
has put him to grief.

These things could not he, had he only considered him in his own Personal
standing, ( where was the Righteous forsaken.) Without the Consideration of
Sin, he does not willingly afflict, nor grieve the Children of Men; that is,
not out of pleasure, or without sufficient cause.

Jesus Christ then, since he is under this withdrawing, chastising, bruising,
and afflicting Displeasure of God, he is all that time under sin, under our
sins, and therefore thus accursed of God, his God.

Secondly, Not only the Carriage of God, but his Dispensations, his visible
Dispensations, plainly declare that he stood before God in our Sins, Vengeance
suffered him not to live. Wherefore God delivered him up. He spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, Romans 8. 32.

1. He delivered him into the Hands of Men, Mar: 9. 31. 2. He was delivered
into the Hands of Sinners, Luke 24. 7. 3. He was delivered unto Death, Romans 4.
25. 4. Yea, so delivered up, as that they both had him to put him to death, and
God left him for that purpose in their Hands: yea, was so far off from
delivering him, that he gave way to all things that had a tendency to take his
Life from the Earth.
Now may men do what they will with him, he was delivered to their Will.

1. Judas may sell him. 2. Peter may deny him. 3. All his Disciples forsake
him. 4. The Enemy apprehends him, binds him, they have him away like a Thief to
Caiaphas the High Priest, in whose House he is mocked, spit upon, his Beard is
twitched from his Cheeks; now they buffet him and scornfully bow the Knee
before him: Yea, his Visage is so marred more than any man's, and his Form more
than the Sons of Men, Isa. 52. 13, 14, 15.
Now he is sent to the Governor, defaced with Blows and Blood; who delivers
him into the Hand of his Soldiers; they Whip him, Crown him with Thorns, and
stick the Points of the Thorns fast in his Temples, by a Blow with a Staff in
their Hand: Now is he made a Spectacle to the People, and then sent away to
Herod, who with his Men of War set him at naught; no God appearing for his Help.

In fine, they at last condemn him to Death, even to the Death of the Cross,
where they hang him up by Wounds made through his Hands and his Feet, between
the Earth and the Heavens, where he hanged for the space of Six Hours, to wit,
from Nine in the Morning, till Three in the Afternoon. No God yet appears for
his help, while he hangs there; some rail at him, others wagg their Heads,
others tauntingly say, He saved others, himself he cannot save; some divide his
Raiment, casting lots for his Garments before his Face, others mockingly bid
him come down from the Cross, and when he desires succor, they give him
Vinegar to drink. No God yet appears for his help.

Now the Earth quakes, the Rocks are rent, the Sun becomes black, and Jesus
still cries out that he was forsaken of God; and presently boweth his Head and
dies: read Mat. 26. Chap. 27. Mar. 14. Chap. 15. and Luke 22. Chap. 23. John
18. Chap. 19.

And for all this there is no cause assigned from God, but Sin. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities, and the chastisement
of our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.

The Sum then is, That Jesus Christ the Lord by taking part of our Flesh,
became a Public Person, not doing, nor dying in a private Capacity, but in the
room and stead of Sinners, whose Sin deserved Death and the Curse of God: all
which Jesus Christ bare in his own Body upon the Tree. I conclude then, that my
Sin is already crucified, and accursed in the Death and Curse Christ under-went.

I come now to some Objections.
Objection First. CHrist never was a Sinner, God never supposed him to be a
Sinner, neither did our Sins become really his, God never reputed him so to
have been; therefore hate or punish him as a Sinner he could not; for no false
judgment can belong to the Lord.
1. Ans. That Christ was not a Sinner Personally, by acts, or doings of his
own, is granted, and in this sense it is true, that God did never suppose him to
be a Sinner, nor punished him as such a Sinner, nor did he really (if by really
you understand naturally) become our Sin, nor did God ever repute him so.

2. But that Christ stood before God in our Sins, and that God did not only
suppose him so to stand, but set him in them, put them upon him, and count them
as his own, is so true, that he cannot at present be a Christian that denies
it. The Lord has laid upon him the Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 1 Pet. 2. 22.

3. So then, though God did not punish him for sin of his own committing, yet
he punished him for sin of our committing. The Just suffered for the unjust, 1
Pet. 3. 18.

4. Therefore it is true, That though Christ did never really become sin of his
own, he did really become our Sin, did really become our Curse for sin: If this
be denied, it follows that he became our Sin but feignedly, that he was made
our Curse, or a Curse for us, but in appearance, show, or in dissimulation; but
no such action or work can proceed of the Lord. He did then really lay our Sin,
and his Curse upon him for our Sin.

2. Object. But if Christ indeed has suffered for our Sins, and endured for
them that Curse, that of justice is due thereto: then has he also endured for
us the proper torments of Hell, for they are the Wages of our Sins.
Ans. Many things might be said in answer to this Objection. But briefly;

1. What God charge upon the Soul for sin, is one thing, and what follows
upon that Charge, is another. 2. A difference in the Person suffering, may make
a difference in the Consequences that follow upon the Charge.
Let us then consider of both these things.

1. The Charge is Sin, God charged him with our Sins. 2. the Person then stands
guilty before the Judgment of God.
The Consequences are:

1. The Person charged sustains, or suffers the Wrath of God. 2. This Wrath
of God is expressed, and inflicted, on Body and Soul.
The Consequences are:

1. God forsakes the Person charged, and being left, if he cannot stand, he
falls under the Power of guilt and horror of the same.

If the Person utterly fall under this Charge, as not being able to wrestle
with, and overcome this Wrath of God, then despair, horror of Hell, rage,
blasphemy, darkness, and damnable anguish immediately swallow him up, and he
lies for ever and ever in the Pains of Hell, a Monument of Eternal Vengeance.

Now that Christ under-went the Wrath of God it is evident, because he bare our
Curse; That God forsook him, he did with strong crying and tears acknowledge;
and therefore that he was under the Soul-afflicting sense of the loss of God's
Favor, and under the sense of his Displeasure must needs flow from the Premises.

But now, because Christ Jesus the Lord, was a Person infinitely differing from
all others that fall under the Wrath of God: therefore those things that flow
from damned Sinners, could not flow from him.

1. Despair could not rise in his Heart, for his Flesh did rest in hope; and
said even when he suffered, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, Acts 2. 27.

2. The Everlastingness of the Punishment therefore, nor the Terrors that
accompany such, could not fasten upon him; for he knew at last that God would
Justify him, or approve of his Works that they were Meritorious.

And mark, Everlasting Punishment is not the proper Wages of sin, but under a
supposition that the Person suffering be not able to pay the Debt. Thou shall
not depart thence till thou have paid the very last Mite.

The difference then of the Persons suffering may make a difference, though not
in the Nature of the Punishment; yet in the Duration, and Consequences of it.

1. Christ under the Sentence, was as to his own Personal Acts only, altogether
innocent; the Damned, only altogether Sinners. 2. Christ had in him, even then
the utmost Perfection of all graces and virtues; but the Damned, the Perfection
of Sin and Vileness. 3. Christ's Humanity had still Union with his Godhead;
the Damned, Union only with Sin. 4. Now an Innocent Person, perfect in all
graces, as really God, as Man, can better wrestle with the Curse for sin, than
either sinful Men or Angels.
1. While they despair, Christ hopes. 2. While they blaspheme, Christ submits.
3. While they rage, Christ justifies God. 4. While they sink under the burden
of Sin and Wrath, Christ recovereth by virtue of his Worthiness. Thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy one to see corruption.
He was Gods Holy one, and his Holiness prevailed.
So that it follows not, That because Christ did undergo the Curse due to our
Sins, he therefore must have those accidental Consequences which are found to
accompany damned Souls.

3. Object. But the Scripture says, That the Wages of Sin is everlasting
punishment. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.
Ans. This Objection is partly answered already, in the Answer to that
foregoing. But further;

1. Consider, The Wages of Sin is Death, and punishment under the Wrath of God.
Till those that die the Death for Sin, have paid the utmost Farthing, Mat. 5.
25. Luke 12. 58, 59.

2. So then the everlastingness of the Punishment, lies here; If the Person
suffering be not able to make amends to justice for the Sins for which he
suffers; else justice neither would, nor could, because it is just, keep such
still under punishment.

3. The Reason then why fallen Angels, and damned Souls have an everlastingness
of Punishment allotted them, is because, by what they suffer: they cannot
satisfy the Justice of God.

4. The Conclusion then is, though the Rebukes of God for Sin by death and
punishment after, be the Rebukes of Eternal Vengeance; yet the Eternity of that
Punishment, is for want of merit: could the Damned merit their own Deliverance,
Justice would let them go.

5. It is one thing therefore to suffer for sin, by the stroke of Eternal
Justice, and another thing to abide for ever a Sufferer there: Christ did the
First, the Damned do the Second.

6. His Rising therefore from the Dead the third Day does nothing invalid his
Sufferings, but rather shows the Power of his Merit. And here I would ask a
Question, Had Christ Jesus been more the Object of Faith, if weakness and
endless infirmity had kept him under the Curse, than by rising again from the
Dead, want of merit causing the one, sufficience thereof causing the other?

7. If men will not believe that Christ has removed the Curse, because he is
risen again; they would much more strongly have doubted it, had he been still
in the Grave. But O amazing darkness! to make that an Argument, that his
Sufferings wanted merit, which to God himself is sufficient proof that he has
purged our Sins for ever. For this Man after he had offered up one sacrifice
for Sins for ever, sat down on the Right Hand of God, Heb. 10. 12.

4. Object. But the Scripture says, Christ is our Example and that in his very
death, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
Ans. Christ in his Sufferings, and Death, is both Sacrifice and Example.

1. A Sacrifice. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us. And again, He gave
himself for us, an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor.
And thus he made Reconciliation for Iniquity, and brought in Everlasting
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Dan. 9. 2.

2dly. He was also in his Sufferings Exemplary, and that in several particulars.

1. In his meek Deportment, while he was apprehended, Isa. 53. 7. 2. In doing
them good that sought his Life, Luke 22. 50, 51. 3. In his Praying for his
Enemies, when they were in their Outrage, Luke 23. 34. 4. When he was reviled,
he reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges Righteously, 1. Pet. 2. 23.
In these respects, I say, he was Exemplary, and brought honor to his
Profession by his good Behavior: And O how beautiful would Christianity be in
the Eyes of Men, if the Disciples of our Lord would more imitate him therein!

But what? Because Christ is our Pattern, is he not our Passover? or, because
we should in these things follow his Steps, died he not for our Sins? Thus to
conclude, would not only argue thee very erroneous, but such a Conclusion would
overthrow the Gospel; it being none other but a great flight of Satan, to shut
out the whole by a Part, and to make us Blasphemers, while we plead for
Holiness.

Look then upon the Death of Christ under a double Consideration.

1. As he suffered from the Hand of God. 2. As he suffered from the Hand of
Men.
Now as he suffered by God's Hand, so he suffered for sin; but as he suffered
from Men, so he suffered for righteousness sake.

Observe then, That as he suffered for sin, so no MAN took away his Life; but
as he suffered for righteousness, so THEY slew him by wicked hands: What is it
then? Christ must needs have suffered, and the Wisdom of God had so ordained.
That those things which God before had showed by the Mouth of all his Prophets,
that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled, Acts 3. 18.

Thus therefore we ought to distinguish of the Causes, and Ends of the Death of
Christ.

Again, As Christ suffered for sin, so he would neither be taken at man's
pleasure, nor die at man's time.

1. Not at man's pleasure, and hence it was that they so often sought his Life
in vain, for his Hour was not yet come; to wit, the Hour in which he was to be
made a Sacrifice for our Sin, John 13. Chap. 17. 1, 2. Chap. 18. 1, 2.

2. Not at their Time; but contrary to all expectation, when the due time was
come, he bowed his Head and gave up the Ghost, John 19. 30.

And for this last work he had power given him of God, that is, power to die
when he would. I have power, said he, to lay down my Life, and I have power to
take it again; This Power never man had before. This made the Centurion wonder,
and made Pontius Pilat marvel: And indeed well they might, for it was as great
a Miracle as any he wrought in his Life. It demonstrated him to be the Son of
God, Mar. 15. 38, 39. The Centurion knowing that according to nature he might
have lived longer, concluded therefore that his dying at that instant was not,
but miraculously. And when he saw that he so cried out, and gave up the Ghost,
he said, Truly this Man was the Son of God.

And the Reason why he had power to die, was, That he might offer his Offering
willingly, and at the Season.

1. Willingly. If his Offering be a Burnt-Sacrifice of the Lord, let him offer
a Male without blemish, he shall offer it of his own voluntary Will, at the
Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation before the Lord, Levit. 1. 3.

2. He must offer it at the Season. Thou shall keep this Ordinance (the
Passover) in his Season, Exodus 13. 10.

Now both these Offerings having immediate respect to the Offering of the Body
of Christ for sin (for he came in the room of all burnt-Sacrifices,) the
Passover also was a Type of him, Heb. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
Therefore, he being now the Priest as well as Sacrifice, must have Power and
Will to offer his Sacrifice with acceptance; and this the Scripture testifies
he did where it says, In due time Christ died for the Ungodly, Romans 5. 8, 9.
In due time, that is at the time appointed, at the acceptable time.

Thou must therefore, unless thou art willing to be deceived, look upon the
Sufferings of Christ, under a double Consideration, and distinguish between his
Sufferings as our Example, and his Suffering for our Sins. And know, that as he
suffered as our Example, so he suffered only for righteousness sake from the
Hands of wicked Men; but as he suffered for our Sins, so he suffered (as being
by God reputed wicked) the Punishment that was due to sin even the dreadful
Curse of God: Not that Christ died two deaths one after another, but he died at
the same time upon a double account; for his Righteousness sake from Men; for
our sins, from the Hand of God. And, as I said before, had he only suffered for
righteousness sake, death had not so amazed him, nor had he been so exceeding
heavy in the Thoughts of it; that had never put him into an Agony, nor made him
Sweat, as it were, great drops of Blood. Besides, When men suffer only for
righteousness sake, God does not use to hide his Face from them, to forsake
them, and make them accursed; But Christ has delivered us from the Curse of
the Law, being made a Curse for us.

Object. But if indeed Christ has paid the full price for us by his Death, in
suffering the Punishment that we should have done: wherefore is the Scripture
so silent, as not to declare, that by his Death he has made satisfaction?
Ans. No Man may teach God Knowledge, he knows best how to deliver his Mind in
such words and terms as best agree with his Eternal Wisdom, and the Consciences
of these that are truly desirous of Salvation, being over-burdened with the
guilt of Sin. Perhaps the Word Satisfaction will hardly be found in the Bible;
and where is it said in so many words, God is dissatisfied with our Sins? Yet
it is sufficiently manifest, that there is nothing that God hates but sin, and
Sinners for the Sake of sin. What meant he by turning Adam out of Paradise, by
drowning the Old World, by burning up Sodom with Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven? What meant he by drowning of Pharaoh, by causing the Ground to swallow
up Corah and his Company, and by his destroying Israel in the Wilderness, if
not to show that he was dissatisfied with Sin? That God is also satisfied, yea,
more than satisfied by Christ's Sufferings for our Sins, is apparent: For
granting that he died for them, as these Scriptures declare, Isa. 53. 1 Cor,
15. 1, 2, 3, 4. Gal. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Chap. 3. 18. 1 John 2. 2. Chap. 3. 16. Chap. 4. 14. Revel. 1. 5. Chap. 5. 9.
Isa. 49. 4, 5, 6.

1. It is apparent, because it is said; That God smelled in that Offering of
the Body of Christ for our Sins, a Sweet Smelling Savor. He gave himself for us
an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.

2. It is apparent, because it is said expressly, That God for Christ's Sake
does now forgive. Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's Sake bath forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 32.

3. It is apparent that God is satisfied with Christ's Blood for our Sins,
because he has declared, that he can justify those that believe in, or rely
upon that Blood for Life, in a way of Justice and Righteousness. Being
justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ;
whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins, that are past through the
forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he
might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 24,
25, 26.

Now, I say, to object against such plain Testimonies, what is it, but

1. To deny that Christ died for Sin; or to conclude, 2. That having so done,
he is still in the Grave: Or, 3. That there is no such thing as Sin: Or, 4. No
such thing as Revenging Justice in God against it: Or, 5. That we must die our
selves for our Sins: Or, 6. That sin may be pardoned without a satisfaction:
Or, 7. That every man may merit his own Salvation.
But without shedding of Blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22.

To avoid therefore these cursed Absurdities, it must be granted that Jesus
Christ by his Death did make satisfaction for sin.

But the word Satisfaction may not be used by the Holy Ghost, perhaps, for that
it is too short and scanty a Word to express the Blessedness that comes to
Sinners by the Blood of Christ.

1. To make satisfaction amounts to no more than completely to answer a legal
Demand for harms and injuries done. Now this when done to the full, leaves the
Offender there where he was before he committed the Injury. Now if Christ had
done no more than this, he had only paid our debt, but had not obtained eternal
redemption for us.

2. For a full Satisfaction given by this Man for harms done by another, may
neither obtain the Love of the Person offended, nor the smallest Gift which the
Person offending has not deserved. Suppose I owe to this Man ten thousand
Talents, and another should pay him every Farthing, there remains over and
above, by that complete Satisfaction, not one single Halfpenny for me. Christ
has therefore done more than to make satisfaction for sin by his Blood. He
has also made us Kings and Priests to God and his Father, and we shall reign
with him for ever and ever, Revel. 1. 5, 6. Chap. 22. 5.

But take a few more Scriptures for the Proof of the Doctrine before asserted.

First, We have redemption through his Blood, Col. 1. 14.

1. Redemption from Sin, Ephesians. 1. 7. 2. Redemption from Death, Heb. 2. 14, 15.
Hos. 13. 14. 3. Redemption from Satan, Heb. 2. 15. 4. Redemption from the
World, Gal. 1. 4. 5. Redemption to God, Revel. 5. 9. 6. Eternal Redemption.
Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood, he entered in
once into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.

Secondly, We are said also to be washed in his Blood.

1. Our Persons are washed; He loved US, and washed US from our Sins in his own
Blood, Rev. 1. 5. 2. His Blood washes also our Performances, Our Robes are
washed, and made white in the Blood of the Lamb, Revel: 7. 14.
Thirdly, We are said to be purged by his Blood.

1. Purged from Sin before God. When he had by himself purged our Sins, he sat
down on the Right Hand of God, Heb. 1. 3.

2. Purged from evil Consciences. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; purge your
Conscience from dead works, to serve the Living God? Heb. 9. 14.

Fourthly, We are said to be made nigh to God by his Blood. But now in Christ
Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 13.

Fifthly, Peace is said to be made by his Blood.

1. Peace with God, Col. 1. 20. 2. Peace of Conscience, Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21,
22.
3. Peace one with another, Ephesians. 2. 14.

Sixthly, We are said to be justified by his Blood. Much more being now
justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him, Romans 5. 9.

Justified, that, is acquitted:

1. Acquitted before God, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. 2. Acquitted before Angels, Mat.
28. 5. 3. Acquitted by the Law, Romans 3. 21, 22, 23. 4. Acquitted in the Court
of Conscience, Heb. 9. 14.
Seventhly, We are said to be saved by his Blood, Romans 5. 8, 9.

Eighthly, We are said to be reconciled by his Blood, Col. 1. 2^, 21, 22.

Ninthly, We are said to be sanctified by his Blood, Heb. 13. 12.

Tenthly, We are said to be admitted into the Holiest by his Blood, Heb. 10. 19.

Eleventhly, We are said to have Eternal Redemption by his Blood, Heb. 9. 12.

Yea Lastly, This Blood which was once spilt upon the Cross, will be the burden
of our Song in Heaven it self for ever and ever, Revel. 5. 9.

Now if we be redeemed, washed, purged, made nigh to God, have peace with God,
if we stand just before God, are saved, reconciled, sanctified, admitted into
the Holiest; if we have eternal Redemption by his Blood, and if his Blood will
be the burden of our Song for ever: then has Christ paid the full price for us
by his Death; then has he done more than made satisfaction for our Sins.

Several Demonstrations more, proving the former Doctrine.
BUt before I conclude this Answer, I will give you nine or ten more undeniable
Demonstrations, to satisfy you, if God will bless them to you, in the Truth of
this great Doctrine, to wit, That Jesus Christ by what he has done has paid
the full Price to God for the Souls of Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption
for them.

The first Demonstration.
ANd First, I begin with his Resurrection: THAT God that delivered him up unto
death, and that made him a Curse for Sin; THAT God raised him up from the dead.
But God raised him from the Dead, Act. 3. 15. Chap. 13. 30. Now considering,
that at his Death he was charged with our Sins, and accursed to death for our
Sins: That Justice that delivered him up for them, must have amends made to
him, before he acquit him from them; for there can be no change in Justice. Had
he found him in (...) Sins in the Grave, as he found him in them upon the Tree,
(for he had them in his Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24.) he had left him there
as he left him upon the Tree: yea, he had as surely rotted in the Grave, as
ever he died on the Tree. But when he visited Christ in the Grave, he found him
a Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and Spotless Christ, and therefore he raised him
up from the Dead. He raised him up from the dead, having loosed the Pains of
Death; because it was not possible that he should be helden of it, Act. 2. 24.

Quest. But why not possible now to be helden of death?
Ans. Because, the Cause was removed, Sin was the Cause, he died for our Sins,
he gave himself for our Sins, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 1. 4. These Sins brought
him to death: But when God that had made him a Curse for us, looked upon him
into the Grave, he found him there without sin, and therefore loosed the Pains
of Death; for Justice says, This is not possible, because not lawful, that he
who lies sinless before God, should be swallowed up of death; therefore he
raised him up.

Quest. But what did he do with our Sins? for he had them upon his Back.
Ans. It Is said he TOOK them away: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the World; It Is said he PUT them away. Now once in the End of the World
has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, Joh. 1. 29. Heb.
9. 26. That is, by the Merit of his undertaking he brought into the World, and
set before the Face of God such a Righteousness, that out-weigheth, and goes
far beyond that Sin; and so did hide sin from the Sight of God: Hence, he that
is justified, is said, to have his Sins HID, and covered. Blessed is the Man
whose Transgressions are forgiven, and whose Sin is covered, Romans 4. 7. covered
with the Righteousness of Christ. I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
Nakedness, thy Sins, Ezekiel. 16. 8. Christ Jesus therefore, having by the
Infiniteness of his Merit, taken away, put away, or hidden our Sins from the
Face of God; therefore he raised him up from the Dead.

You find in that 16th of Leviticus mention made of two Goats, one was to be
slain for a Sin-Offering, the other to be left alive: The Goat that was slain,
was a Type of Christ in his Death, the Goat that was not slain, was a Type of
Christ in his Merit. Now this living Goat, HE carried away the Sins of the
People into the Land of forgetfulness. And Aaron shall lay both his Hands upon
the head of the Live-Goat, and confess over him all the Iniquities of the
Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions, in all their Sins, putting
them upon the Head of the Goat, and shall send him away by the Hands of a fit
Man into the Wilderness, and the Goat shall bear upon him all their Iniquities
unto a Land not inhabited, Levit. 16. Thus did Jesus Christ bear away by the
Merit of his Death, the Sins and Iniquities of them that Believe; wherefore,
when God came to him in the Grave, he found him, Holy and Undefiled, and raised
him up from the Dead.

And observe it, As his Death was for our Sin, so his Rising again was for our
Discharge: for both in his Death and Resurrection he immediately respected our
Benefits; he died for us, he rose from the Dead for us. He was delivered for
our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification, Rom 4. 25. By his
Death he carried away our Sins, by his Rising, he brought to us Justifying
Righteousness.

There are five Circumstances also attending his Resurrection, that show us how
well-pleased God was with his Death.

1. It must be solemnized with the Company, Attendance and Testimony of Angels,
Mat. 28. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 24. 3, 4, 5, 6. John 20. 11, 12.

2dly. At, or just upon his Resurrection, the Graves, where many of the Saints,
for whom he died, lay asleep, did open, and they followed their Lord in full
Triumph over Death. The Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which
slept arose, and came out of their Graves after his Resurrection, and went into
the Holy City, and appeared unto many, Mat. 27. 52.

These Saints coming out of their Graves after him; what a Testimony is it,
that he, for them, had taken away Sin, and destroyed him that had the Power of
Death: yea, what a Testimony was it that he had made amends to God the Father,
who granted him at his Resurrection, to have presently out of the Grave, Of the
Price of his Blood, even the Body of many of the Saints which slept. He was
declared to be the Son of God with Power by the Spirit of Holiness, and the
Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1. 4. It says not, by his Resurrection,
though that be true; But by the Resurrection, meaning the Resurrection of the
Bodies of the Saints which slept, because they rose by virtue of his Blood; and
by that he was with power declared to be the Son of God. They I say, were part
of his Purchase, some of them for whom Christ died: Now for God to raise them,
and that upon, and by virtue of his Resurrection; what is it, but an open
Declaration from Heaven, that Christ by his Death has made amends for us, and
obtained Eternal Redemption for us?

3thly. When he was risen from the Dead, God, to confirm his Disciples in the
Faith of the Redemption that Christ had obtained by his Blood, brings him to
the Church, presents him to them alive, shows him openly, sometimes to two or
three, sometimes to eleven or twelve, and once to above five hundred Brethren
at once, Acts 1. 3. Chap. 10. 40. Luke 24. 13, 14, 15, 16. 31. John 20. 19.
Chap. 21. 1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

4thly. At his Resurrection, God gives him the Keys of Hell and of Death,
Revel. 1. 16, 17. Hell and Death are the Effects and Fruits of Sin. The Wicked
shall be turned into Hell, and the Wages of Sin is Death. But what then are
Sinners the better for the Death and Blood of Christ? O! They that dare venture
upon him are much the better, for they shall not perish unless the Savior will
damn them; for he has the Keys of Hell and of Death. Fear not, says he, I am
the First and the Last, I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold, I am
alive for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell and Death. These were given him
at his Resurrection; as if God had said, My Son thou have spilt thy Blood for
Sinners, I am pleased with it, I am delighted in thy Merits, and in the
Redemption which thou have wrought; in token hereof, I give thee the Keys of
Hell and of Death: I give thee all Power in Heaven and Earth, save who thou will, deliver who thou will, bring to Heaven who thou will.

5thly. At Christ's Resurrection, God bids him ask the Heathen of him, with a
Promise to give him the uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession. This
Sentence is in the second Psalm, and is expounded by Paul's Interpretation of
the Words before, to be spoken to Christ at his Resurrection Thou art my Son,
this Day have I begotten thee. I have begotten thee, that is, says Paul, from
the Dead.

He has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the Second Psalm. Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Act. 13. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Now
mark at his Raising him from the Dead, he bids him ask, ASK of me, and that the
Heathen: As if God had said, My Son, thy Blood has pacified, and appeased my
Justice; I can (...) in justice, for thy sake, forgive poor Mortals their Sin;
ASK them of me, ASK them, though they be Heathens, and I will give them to
thee, to the utmost Ends of the Earth. This is then the First Demonstration to
prove that Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
the Souls of Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them; namely, his
being Raised again from the Dead.

The Second Demonstration.
SEcondly. A Second thing that demonstrateth this Truth, is, That he Ascended,
and was received up into Heaven. So after the Lord had spoken to them, he was
received up into Heaven, Mar. 16. 19.

This Demonstration consists of two parts.

1. Of his Ascending. 2. Of his being Received.
First, For his Ascending. He is ascended on High, Ephesians. 4. 8.

This Act of Ascending answers to the High Priest under the Law, who, after
they had killed the Sacrifice, he was to bring the Blood into the most Holy
Place, to wit, the Inner Temple, the Way to which, was ascending or going up, 2 Chronicles. 9.

Now consider the Circumstances that attended his Ascending, when he went to
carry his Blood to present it before the Mercy-Seat: and you will find, they
all say amends is made to God for us.

1. At this, He is again attended, and accompanied with Angels, Act. 1. 10, 11.

2. He ascends with a shout, and with the sound of a Trumpet, with sing
Praises, sing Praises, sing Praises, Psalm. 47. 5, 6.

3. The Enemies of man's Salvation are now tied to his Chariot-wheels. When he
ascended on High, he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. that is, he led Death,
Devils, and Hell, and the Grave, and the Curse, captive, for these things were
our Captivity. And thus did Deborah prophecy of him, when she cried, Arise
Barak and lead thy Captivity captive, thou Son of Abinoam. This David also
foresaw when he said, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity
captive, Judges 5. 12. Psalm. 68. 18.

4. The Apostles must be the Beholders of his going up, and must see the Cloud
receive him out of their Sight, Act. 1. 11, 12.

The Consideration of these things strongly inforceth this Conclusion, That he
has spoiled what would have spoiled us, had he not by his Bloodshed taken them
away: And I say, for God to adorn him with all this Glory in his Ascension;
THUS to make him ride Conqueror up into the Clouds; THUS to go up with found of
Trumpet, with shout of Angels, and with Songs of Praises; and let me add, to be
accompanied also with those that rose from the Dead after his Resurrection, who
were the very Price of his Blood. This does greatly demonstrate, That Jesus
Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for the Souls of
Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them; he had not else rid thus in
Triumph to Heaven.

2. I come now to his being Received: He was received up into Heaven. The
High Priest under the Law, when he ascended into the Holiest, he was, there to
offer the Blood; which Holiest was the Type of Heaven, Exodus 19. 10, 11. Heb.
9. 24. But because the Sacrifices under the Law could not make them that did
the Service perfect as pertaining to the Conscience; therefore they were to
stand, not sit, to come out again, not tarry there. For it is not possible that
the Blood of Bulls and Goats, should take away sin; wherefore, when he comes
into the World, he says, Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, but a Body
have thou prepared me. In Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou have had
no pleasure. Then said he, lo, I come (in the Volume of thy Book it is written
of me) to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10. 4, 5, 6.

Christ therefore in his entering into Heaven, did it, as High Priest of the
Church of God: Therefore neither did he go in without Blood. Wherefore, when he
came to be an High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this Building, neither
by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, but by his own Blood, he entered in once into
the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12, 13, 14.

He entered in having obtained, or because he obtained Eternal Redemption for
us: but to pass that,

Consider ye now also those Glorious Circumstances that accompany his Approach
to the Gates of the Everlasting Habitation.

1. The Everlasting Gates are set, yea, bid stand open. Be ye open ye
Everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. This King of Glory, is
Jesus Christ, and the Words are a Prophecy of his Glorious Ascending into the
Heavens; when he went up as the High Priest of the Church, to carry the Price
of his Blood into the Holiest of all. Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, even lift
them up, ye Everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in, Psalm 24.
7, 9.

2dly. At his Entrance, he was received, and the Price accepted which he paid
for our Souls. Hence it is said, He entered in by his Blood; that is, by the
Merit of it. To Receive, is an Act of Complacency and Delight, and includes
Wellpleasedness in the Person Receiving, who is God the Father: And considering
that this Jesus, now received, is to be received upon our account, or as
undertaking the Salvation of Sinners: (for he entered into the Heavens for us)
it is apparent that he entered thither by virtue of his Infinite Righteousness,
which he accomplished for us upon the Earth.

3dly. At his Reception, he received Glory, and that also for our
Encouragement. God raised him up, and gave him Glory, that our Faith and Hope
might be in him, 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21.

He gave him Glory, as a Testimony, that his undertaking the Work of our
Redemption was accepted of him.

1. He gave Glory; first to his Person, in granting him to sit at his own Right
Hand, and this he had, I say, for, or upon the account of the Work he
accomplished for us in the World; When he had offered up one Sacrifice for
Sins, for ever, he sat down on the Right Hand of God, Heb. 10. 12, 13. and this
by God's appointment. Sit thou at my Right Hand. This Glory is the Highest; it
is above all Kings, Princes, and Potentates in this World; it is above all
Angels, Principalities, and Powers in Heaven. He is gone into Heaven, and is on
the Right Hand of God; Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made Subject
unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

2. He gave Glory to his Name, to his Name, JESUS; that Name being exalted
above every Name. He has given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name
of Jesus, every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and
things under the Earth, and that every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.

This Name is said (in another place) to be a Name above every Name that is
Named, not only in this World, but in that also which is to come, Ephesians. 1. 21.

But should [JESUS] have been such a Name, since he undertook for Sinners; had
this Undertaker failed in his Work, if his Work had not been accepted with God,
even the Work of our Redemption by his Blood? No verily, it would have stunk in
both the Nostrils of God and Man, it would have been the most abhorred Name:
but JESUS is the Name; JESUS, he was called, in order to his Work. His Name
shall be called JESUS, for he shall save; He was so named of the Angels, before
he was conceived in the Womb; and he goes by that Name now he is in Heaven: By
the Name Jesus, Jesus of Nazareth, because he once dwelt there. This Name, I
say, is the Highest Name, the Everlasting Name; the Name that he is to go by,
to be known by, to be worshipped by, and to be glorified by; yea the Name by
which also most Glory shall redound to God the Father. Now what is the
Signification of this Name, but SAVIOR? This Name he has therefore, for his
Works Sake; and because God delighted in his Undertaking, and was pleased with
the Price he had paid for us; therefore the Divine Majesty has given him it,
has made it High, and has commanded all Angels to bow unto it. Yea, it is the
Name in which he rests, and by which he has magnified all his Attributes.

1. This is the Name by which Sinners should go to God the Father.

2. This is the Name through which they obtain forgiveness of Sins, and ANY
thing. If you ask anything in my Name I will do it, John 14.

3. This is the Name through which our spiritual Services and Sacrifices are
accepted, and by which an Answer of Peace is returned into our Bosoms, 1 Pet.
2. But more of this anon.

3. At this Name Devils tremble, at THIS Name Angels bow the Head, at THIS Name
God's Heart opens, at THIS Name the Godly Man's Heart is comforted: THIS Name
none but Devils hate it, and none but those that must be damned despise it, No
man speaking by the Holy Ghost calls Jesus accursed, or accounts him still
dead, and his Blood ineffectual to save the World.

3dly. He has also given him the Glory of Office.

1. He is there a Priest for ever, intercepting betwixt the Divine Presence,
and all that hate us, by his Blood; Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, the Law, the
Grave, or the like, cannot be heard, if his Blood be presented to God, as the
Atonement for us: This is called the Blood of Sprinkling which speaks better
things than the Blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. By this Blood he entered into
Heaven, by this Blood he secureth from wrath, all that come unto God by him:
but should his Blood have had a Voice in Heaven to save withal, had it not
merited first, even in the Shedding of it, the Ransom, and Redemption of Souls.
It Is true, a Man whose Blood cannot save, may with Abels, cry out for Vengeance
and Wrath on the Head of him that shed it, but THIS Blood speaks for better
things, this Blood speaks for Souls, for Sinners, for Pardon. Having obtained
Eternal Redemption for us.

2. He is there a Forerunner for us. Whither the Forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus, Heb. 6. 20. This Office of Harbinger, is distinct from,
though it comes by virtue of, his Priestly Office: therefore they are both
mentioned in the Text, Whither the Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus,
made an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec. He is therefore
our Forerunner by virtue of his Priesthood, his Blood giving worth to all he
does.

In this Office of Harbinger, or Forerunner; he prepares for Believers their
dwelling-Places in the Heavens; their dwelling-Places, according to their
Place, State, Calling, Service, or Work, in his Body the Church. In my Fathers
House, says he, are many Mansions, if it were not so I would have told you, I
go to prepare a Place for you, Joh. 14.

This is that is mentioned in the 47th Psalm. He shall choose our Inheritance
for us, the Excellency of Jacob whom he loved. But should he have had Power to
choose our Inheritance for us, to prepare for us our dwelling-Places; should he
have Power to give even Heaven itself to a Company of Poor Men, had he not in
the first Place obtained by his Blood the Deliverance of our Soul from Death.

3. He is there a Prophet for us, by which Office of his, he has received to
communicate the whole Will of the Eternal God, so far as is fit for us to know
in this World, or in that which is to come. Hence he is called the Prophet of
the Church. The Lord shall raise you up a Prophet, and this is, of a truth,
that Prophet that should come into the World: But this Office he has also now
in Heaven, by virtue of the Blood he shed for us upon Earth. Hence the
New Testament is called, The New Testament in his Blood, and his Blood is said
to be The Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, or Testament: Yea such virtue does
his Blood give to the New Testament or Covenant of Grace, as that severed from
that it is nothing worth; for a Testament is of force after men are dead,
otherwise it is of no strength at all, while the Testator lives, Heb. 9. 16,
17. So that every Word of God, which he has by Christ given to us, for our
Everlasting Consolation, is dipped in blood, is founded in blood, and stands good
to Sinners purely (I mean with respect to merit) upon the account of Blood, or
because his Blood that was shed for us on the Cross, prevailed for us for the
Remission of our Sins. Let no man think to receive any benefit by Christ's
Prophetical Office; by any of the good Words of Grace, and forgiveness of Sins
that are sprinkled up and down in the New Testament; That looks not for that
good to come to him for the Sake of that Blood by which this Testament is
established: For neither was the First Testament dedicated without Blood; for
when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the People according to the Law; He
took the Blood of Calves, and of Goats with Water, and scarlet Wool, and Hissop
and sprinkled both the Book and all the People, saying, This is the Blood of
the Testament, which God has enjoined unto you, Heb. 9. 18, 19, 20.

The Prophetical Office of Christ stands of two parts: First in Promises of
Grace; Secondly, in Directions of Worship; but neither is this last, to wit,
the Doctrine of Worship, or our subjection to that Worship, of any value, any
further than as sprinkled also with his Blood: For as in the first Testament,
the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of the Ministry were sprinkled with Blood,
(and it was necessary that so it should be) so the Heavenly Things themselves,
must be also purified with Sacrifices, but yet with better Sacrifice than
these; for now, not Moses, but Christ, does sprinkle, not with Blood of Calves,
but with his own Blood; neither as entered into places made with Hands, but
from Heaven does Jesus sprinkle all that Doctrine of Worship, and subjection of
his Saints thereto, which is of his own instituting, and commanding, Heb. 9.
23, 24, 25, 26.

4. He has received there the Office of a King, by which he rules in the
Church, and over all things for her sake. The Government is laid upon his
Shoulders; the Lord God has given him the Throne of his Father David. Hence it
is that he says, All Power is given me in Heaven and Earth; but now this
Kingly Office, he has it by his Blood, because he humbled himself to death,
therefore God has highly exalted him, and given him the Highest Name. And
hence again he is called a LAMB upon the Throne. In the midst of the Throne and
of the four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb as it had been
slain, having seven horns; a Demonstration of Kingly Power. But mark, he was a
Lamb upon the Throne, he had his Horns as a Lamb. Now by LAMB, we are to
understand, not only his meek and sweet Disposition, but his Sacrifice; for he
was as a Lamb to be slain, and Sacrificed; and so his having a Throne and seven
Horns as a Lamb, gives us to understand, that he obtained this Dignity of
King, by his Blood. When he had by himself purged our Sins, he sat down on the
Right Hand of the Majesty in the Heavens. When he had offered up one Sacrifice
for Sins for ever, he sat down on the Right Hand of God, Revel. 5. Heb. 4.
Chap. 10.

Now put all these together, to wit, his Resurrection from the Dead, his
Ascension, and Exaltation to Office, and remember also that the Person thus
Exalted, is the same Jesus of Nazareth that sometime was made accursed of God
for Sin, and also that he obtained this Glory by virtue of the Blood that was
shed for us, and it must unavoidably follow, That Jesus Christ by what he has
done, has paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption
for them.

The Third Demonstration.
BUt to proceed; A Third Demonstration, That Jesus Christ by what he has done,
has paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for
them, is, because he has received for them the Holy Spirit of God.

Thus Jesus has God raised up, whereof, said Peter, we are all Witnesses.
Therefore being by the Right Hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth that which ye now see
and hear, Act. 2. 32, 33.

The receiving of the Holy Ghost at the Hand of the Father, who had bruised him
before for the Transgressions of his People. The receiving of it, I say, upon
his Resurrection, and that to give them for whom (just before) he had spilt his
Blood to make an Atonement for their Souls; argues that the Divine Majesty
found rest and content in that Precious (...)od, and found it full price for
the Sinners for whom he shed it.

And if you consider the necessity of the giving of this good spirit to Men,
and the benefit that they receive by his coming upon them, you will see yet
more into the Truth now contended for.

First, Then of the Necessity of giving this good Spirit.

2. And then of the Benefit which we receive at his coming.

First, Of the Necessity of its being given.

1. Otherwise Jesus could never have been proved to be the Savior; for the
Promise was, that Messiah should have the Spirit given him; given him to
communicate. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, (says the Lord,) my
Spirit which is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth (meaning
the Redeemer, ver, 20.) shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth
of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds. Seed, from henceforth and for
ever, Isa. 59. 21.

Here is the Promise of the Spirit to be given to Christ, and by him to his
Seed for ever. And this was signified long before in the Anointing of Aaron and
his Sons. And thou shall anoint Aaron and his Sons and consecrate them, Exodus
30. 30.

This Spirit Jesus promised to send unto his, at his Exaltation on the Right
Hand of God; The Spirit, I say, in the plentiful Pourings of it out. True, the
Church in all Ages had something of it by virtue of the Suretyship of the Lord
Jesus; but this in comparison of what was to come into the Church after his
Resurrection, is not reckoned a Pouring forth, therefore Pourings forth thereof
are reserved to the time of the Ascension, and Exaltation of this Jesus. I will
pour out of my Spirit in THOSE Days.

Hence Jesus reserves it till his going away, and it is expressly said; The Holy
Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet Glorified. Accordingly did
the Apostles wait after his Resurrection for the pouring forth of the Holy
Ghost, and at the set time did receive it, by the giving of which, he declared
himself to be the son of God and Savior of the World, John 14. 26. Chap. 15.
26. Chap. 16. 7. Act. 1. 4. 5. Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 16, 17. Joh. 7. 39. Romans 1.
4.

2. Without the giving of the Holy Ghost, there had wanted a Testimony that his
Gospel was the Gospel of Messiah. Moses his Ministration was confirmed by Signs
and Wonders and mighty Deeds, both in Egypt, in the Wilderness, and at the
Red Sea; wherefore 'twas necessary that the Doctrine of Redemption by Blood,
which is the Doctrine of the Gospel of this Jesus, should be also confirmed
with signs following. Hence both himself, and Apostles did as frequently work
Miracles and do mighty Deeds, as his Ministers now do preach: which Signs and
Miracles, and Wonders, confirmed their Doctrine, though themselves, both Master
and Scholar was (in appearance the most considerable) mean: yea, they by the
means of the Holy Ghost, have so ratified, confirmed, and settled the Gospel in
the World, that no Philosopher, Tyrant, or Devil has been able hitherto, to
move it out of its place. He confirmed the Word with Signs following, Mar. 16.
20. Heb. 2. 4.

3. As the giving of the Holy Ghost was necessary thus; so was it necessary
also to strengthen them that were entrusted with his Gospel.

1. To preach it effectually. 2. To stand to it boldly. 3. And to justify it
to be the Doctrine of Messiah incontroulably.
1. To preach it effectually; in demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. 2
Cor. 6. 4, 5, 6. Joh. 16. 8, 9.

2. To stand to it boldly; Then Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, said: And
they saw the Boldness of Peter and John, Act. 8. 13.

3. To justify the Doctrine incontroulably. I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom
which all your Adversaries shall not be able to resist or gain say. And they
were not able to resist the Wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke, Luke 21. 15.
Act. 6. 10.

Now, I say, that God should give the Holy Ghost to Jesus, to confirm this
Gospel, Redemption from sin by his Blood; what is it, but that by his Blood he
has paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for
them?

But again, the Benefit which we receive at the Coming of the Holy Ghost, does
more demonstrate this Truth; has Christ purchased Sinners, and are they the
Price of his Blood? Yes. But how does that appear? Why, because by the Holy
Ghost which he has received to give us, we are fitted for the Inheritance
which by his Blood is prepared for us.

1. By the Spirit of God we are quickened, and raised from a state of Sin, but
that we could not be, were it not that an Atonement is made for us; first, by
the Blood of Christ our Savior. This is true; for they that are quickened by
the Holy Ghost, are quickened by it through the Word of the Gospel which
offers Justification to Sinners through Faith in his Blood: yea, we are said
to be quickened together with him, dead and risen with him: yet so as by the
Spirit of God.

2. We are not only quickened by the Holy Ghost, but possessed therewith; it is
given to dwell in our Hearts. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. which Spirit is also our
earnest for Heaven, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession; that is,
until our Body which is the purchased Possession, be redeemed also out of the
Grave, by the Power of the same mighty Spirit of God, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.

3. By this Holy Spirit we are made to believe, Romans 15. 13.

4. By this Holy Spirit, we are helped to pray and call God Father.

5. By this Holy Spirit we are helped to understand and apply the Promises.

6. By this Holy Spirit the Joy of Heaven, and the Love of God is shed abroad
in the Heart of the Saved.

7. By this Holy Spirit we are made to wait for the hope of Righteousness by
Faith, that is, to stand fast through our Lord Jesus in the day when he shall
judge the World.

And all this is the Fruit of Redemption by Blood; of Redemption by the Blood
of Christ.

This is yet further evident:

1. Because the Work of the Spirit is to lead us into the sayings of Christ;
which, as to our Redemption from death, are such as these: I lay down my Life,
that you may have Life. I give my Life a Ransom for many; And the Bread which I
will give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World, Joh. 6.

2. Because, IF the Spirit in the Wisdom of Heaven, is not counted a sufficient
Testimony on Earth, but as joined with the Blood of Christ. There are three
that bear witness on Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. These are the
Witness of God. The Spirit, because it quickneth; the Blood, because it has
merited; and the Watter, to wit, the Word, because by that, we are clean, as to
life and conversation, 1 John 5. 8. Ephesians. 5. 26. Romans 8. 16. Psalm. 119. 9.

3. Because, as by the Spirit, so we are sanctified by Faith in the Blood of
Jesus, Heb. 13. 12.

4. Because when most full of the Spirit, and when that does work most mightly
in us, we are then most in the belief, and admiring apprehensions of our
deliverance from death by the Blood of Jesus, Revel. 15. Chap. 5. 9.

5. The Holy Ghost breaheth, nowhere, so as in the Ministry of this Doctrine;
this Doctrine is sent WITH the Holy Ghost from Heaven; yea, as I have hinted,
one of the Great Works of the Holy Ghost under the Old Testament, was to
testify of the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet.
1. 11, 12.

Put all these things together and see, if Jesus Christ by what he has done,
has not paid full price to God for Sinners; if he has not obtained Eternal
Redemption for them.

The Fourth Demonstration.
THat Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them, is evident, if you consider
how the preaching thereof has been from that time to this, a mighty Conqueror
over all kind of Sinners. What Nation, what People, what kind of Sinners have
not been subdued by the preaching of a Crucified Christ. He upon the White
Horse with his Bow and his Crown has conquered, does conquer, and goes forth
yet conquering and to conquer, Revel. 6. 2. And I, says he, if I be lifted up
from the Earth, will draw all men unto me: but what was it to be lifted up from
the Earth? Why, it may be expounded by that saying; As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him might not perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 12. 32. Chap.
3. 14, 15.

He was then lifted up, when he was hanged upon a Tree between the Heavens and
the Earth as the Accursed of God for us. The Revelation of this, it conquers
all Nations, Tongues and People. And they sang a new Song, saying, thou art
worthy to take the Book and to open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and
People, and Nation, Revel. 5. 9. Hence the Apostle Paul chose, above all
Doctrines, to preach up a Crucified Christ, and resolved so to do: For I
determined, says he, not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and
him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2, 3.

1. The Doctrine of Forgiveness of Sin, conquered his very Murderers. They
could not withstand the Grace, them bloody ones, that would kill him whatever
it cost them, could stand no longer, but received his Doctrine, fell into his
Bosom, and obtained the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus. They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced and mourn for him, as one mourns for his only
Son, and they shall be in bitterness for him, as one is in bitterness for his
firstborn, Zech. 12. 10. Now was this Scripture eminently fulfilled, when the
Kindness of a Crucified Christ, broke to pieces the Hearts of them that had
before been his Betrayers and Murderers. Now was there a great mourning in
Jerusalem; now was there wailing and lamentation, mixed with joy and rejoicing.

2. Though Paul was mad, exceeding mad against Jesus Christ of Nazareth, yea,
though he was his avowed Enemy, seeking to put out his Name from under Heaven:
yet the Voice from Heaven [ I am Jesus, etc.] I am the Savior; how did it
conquer him, make him throw down his Arms, fall down at his Feet, and accept of
the forgiveness of Sins freely by grace, through Redemption by Faith in his
Blood.

3. They at Samaria, though before Philip preached to them, worshipped and
admired the Devil in Magus, yet when they believed Philip's preaching of Christ
unto them, and forgiveness of sins through Faith in his Name, great joy was
amongst them, and they were baptized both Men and Women, Act. 8. He preached,
says the Text, the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus
Christ; that is, all the Blessings of Life, through the Name of Jesus Christ;
for he is the Mediator, and without his Blood come no spiritual blessings to
men.

4. How was the sturdy Jailer overcome by a Promise of forgiveness of sins by
Faith in Jesus Christ. It stopped his Hand of self-murder, it eased him of the
gnawings of a guilty Conscience, and fears of Hellfire, and filled his Soul
with rejoicing in God, Act. 16. 30, 31, 32, 33.

5. How were those that used curious arts, that were next to, if not, Witches
indeed; I say, how were they prevailed upon, and overcome by the Word of God;
which is, the Gospel of good Tidings through Faith in the Blood of Christ? Act.
19. 17, 18.

6. How were the Ephesians, who sometimes were far from God, how, I say, were
they made nigh by the Blood of Christ! Ephesians. 2. 13.

7. The Colossians, though sometimes dead in their Sins, yet how were they
quickened by God, through the Forgiveness of all their Trespasses, and they had
that through his Blood, Col. 2. 13. Chap. 1. 14.

What shall I say, no man could as yet stand before, and not fall under the
Revelation of the Forgiveness of Sins through a Crucified Christ; as hanged, as
dying, as accursed for Sinners; he draws all men unto him, men of all sorts, of
all degrees.

Shall I add, how have men broken through the Pricks to Jesus, when he has
been discovered to them! neither Lions nor Fires, nor Sword, nor Famine, nor
Nakedness, nor Peril; neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor
any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

The Fifth Demonstration.
THat Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them is evident, by the Peace and
Holiness, that by that Doctrine possesses men's Souls; The Souls of Men
awakned, and that continue so. By awakened men I mean, such as through the
Revelation of their Sin and Misery, groan under the want of Jesus to save them,
and that continue sensible that they needs must perish if his benefits be not
bestowed upon them.

For otherwise the Gospel ministers neither Peace nor Holiness to any of the
Souls of the Sons of Men; that is to say, not Saving Peace and Holiness. The
Gospel of Grace and Salvation, is above all Doctrines, the most dangerous, if
in word only it be received by graceless men: if it be not attended with a
Revelation of Men's need of a Savior: if it be not accompanied in the Soul by
the Power of the Holy Ghost. For such Men as have only the notions of it, are
of all Men liable to the greatest Sins, because there wants in their notions,
the Power of Love, which alone can constrain them to love Jesus Christ. And
this is the Reason of these Scriptures. They turn the Grace of God into
wantonness; They turn the Grace of our God into lasciviousness, Jude 4.

For some when they hear of the Riches of Grace, through Christ, that hearing,
not being attended with the Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus; those Men
receive the notions of this good Doctrine, only to cloak their wickedness, and
to harden themselves in their Villainies.

Others when they hear, being leavened before with the Leaven of some other
Doctrine, some Doctrine of the Righteousness of the World, or Doctrine of
Devils; forthwith make head against, and speak evil of the blessed Doctrine;
and because some that profess it, are not cleansed from their filthiness of
flesh and spirit, and do not perfect Holiness in the Fear of God: therefore
others conclude that all that profess it are such, and that the Doctrine it
self, tends to encourage, or at least, to tolerate licentiousness, as they
imagined and affirmed of Paul, that he should say, Let us do evil that good may
come, Romans 3. 8, 9.

The ground of that wicked Conclusion of theirs, was, because he by the
Allowance of God affirmed, That as sin had reigned unto death, so grace reigned
unto life in a way of Righteousness by Jesus Christ our Lord. Nay then, says
the Adversary, we may be as unholy as we will, and that by the Doctrine you
preach: for, if where sin abounds, grace abounds more, the consequence of a
wicked life, is but the hightening, advancing and magnifying of Grace. But what
says the Apostle? my conclusions are true, That grace does reign above sin;
but to say, let us therefore sin, that Man's Damnation is just; because such an
one abuses, and makes the most devilish use of the Blessedest Doctrine that
ever was heard of in the World amongst Men. Besides, it is evident that such
know not the Power thereof; nor have felt or savored its blessedness; for where
this Gospel comes in truth, it naturally produces Peace and Holiness.

1. Peace. He is our Peace, he is the Prince of Peace, he gives peace in his
High Places.

This word Peace has in it a double respect.

1. It respects God: He has made peace by the Blood of his Cross; that is,
he has made peace for us with God, having appeased the rigor of his Law, and
satisfied justice for us. Hence it is said: The Peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus, Col. 1.
20. Phil. 4. 7. The Peace of God, that is, the Doctrine of Reconciliation by
Christ's being made to be sin for us, THAT shall keep the Heart, that is, from
despair or fainting under apprehensions of weakness and justice: But yet, this
Peace of God, cannot be apprehended nor be of any comfort to the Heart, but as
the Man looks for it through Christ Jesus. Therefore that clause is added,
through Christ Jesus: for he is Peacemaker, it is he that reconcileth us to God
in the Body of his Flesh through death; for by his doing and suffering he
presented God with Everlasting Righteousness, with Everlasting Righteousness
for Sinners: Upon this we have Peace with God. Hence Christ is called King of
Righteousness FIRST; first being by interpretation King of Righteousness, and
after that also King of Salem, which is King of Peace, Heb. 7. 1, 2. For he
could not make peace with God, 'twixt us and him, but by being first the Lord
of Righteousness, the Lord our Righteousness: but having first completed
Righteousness, he then came and preached Peace, and commanded his Ambassadors
to make Proclamation of it to the World, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. For 'twas want of
Righteousness, that caused want of Peace: now then righteousness being brought
in, it follows that he has made peace. For he is our Peace who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle-Wall of Partition between us. Having
abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments, contained in
Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new Man, so making Peace, and
that he might reconcile both unto God, in one Body by the Cross, having slain
the Enmity thereby; and came and preached Peace to you that were afar off, and
to them that were nigh; for through him we both have access, by one spirit unto
the Father, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

2dly. This word Peace respects our inward quietness of heart which we
obtain, by beholding this Reconciliation made by Christ, with God, for us.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
The God of Peace fill you with all joy and peace in believing. Romans 5. 1, 2.
Chap. 15. 13.

This Peace is expressed diversely:

1. Sometimes it is called QUIETNESS; for it calms the Soul from those
troublous Fears of damning, because of sin. And the work of Righteousness shall
be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever,
Isa. 32. 17.

2. Sometimes it is called BOLDNESS; for by the Blood of Christ a Man has
encouragement to approach unto God. Having, brethren, Boldness to enter into
the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, Heb. 10. 19, 20.

3. It is sometimes called CONFIDENCE; because by Jesus Christ we have not only
encouragement to come to God, but confidence; that if we ask any thing
according to his Will, he not only hears, but grants the Request which we
put up to him. In whom we have boldness and access, with confidence, by the
Faith of Jesus, Ephesians. 3. 12. 1 John 5. 14, 15.

4. Sometimes this Peace is expressed by REST, because a Man having found a
sufficient Fullness to answer all his Wants, he sits down, and looks no
further for satisfaction. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28.

5. It is also expressed by SINGING, because the Peace of God when it is
received into the Soul by Faith, puts the Conscience into a Heavenly and
Melodious Frame. And the Ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion
with Songs, and Everlasting Joy upon their Heads, they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isa. 35. 10.

6. Sometimes it is expressed, or discovered by an Heavenly glorying and
boasting in Jesus Christ, because this Peace causes the Soul to set its Face
upon its Enemies with Faith of a Victory over them for ever by its Lord Jesus.
Let him that glories glory in the Lord; and, My Soul shall make her boasts in
the Lord, the Humble shall hear thereof, and be glad, Jer. 9. 23, 24. Psalm 34.
2.

7. Sometimes it is expressed, or discovered by Joy, Joy unspeakable; because
the Soul having seen it self reconciled to God, has not only quietness, but
such apprehensions do now possess it of the unspeakable Benefits it receives
by Christ with respect to the World to come, that it is swallowed up with them.
Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing
ye rejoice, with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

8. Lastly: It is expressed, or discovered by the Triumph that arises
sometimes in the Hearts of the Believers; for they at times are able to see
Death, Sin, the Devil, and Hell, and all Adversity conquered by, and tied as
Captives at the Chariot-Wheels of Jesus Christ: Taken captive, I say, and
overthrown for ever. Thanks be to God who causes us always to triumph in
Christ. O clap your Hands, O ye People, sing unto God with the voice of
Triumph, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Psalm 47. 1.

Now that all this should be a cheat, is impossible, that is, it is impossible
that Believers should thus have Peace with God through the Blood of his Cross;
he having not paid full price to God for them; especially if you consider that
the Authors of this Peace, are all the three in the Godhead, and that upon a
double account.

1. In that they have given us a Gospel of Peace, Romans 10. 15. or a
New Testament which propounds Peace with God through the Redemption that is
in Christ. Now as this is called the Gospel of Peace; so 1. It is called, The
Gospel of God, 1 These. 2. 9. 2 These. 1. 8. 2. The Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.
19. 3. A Gospel indicted by the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 4. 8.

I say therefore, that Redemption and Salvation, being that throw Christ, and
the Truth thereof proclaimed by the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, in
the Word of the Truth of the Gospel, it must needs be that we who believe,
shall be saved, if we hold the confidence and the rejoicing firm unto the End.

2. As the three in the Godhead are the Authors of this Peace, by inditing for
us the Gospel of Peace, or the good Tidings of Salvation by Jesus Christ: So
they are the Authors of our Peace, by working with that word of the Gospel in
our Hearts. And hence 1. the Father is called the God of Peace; now the God of
Peace be with you all: And the very God of Peace sanctify you, Romans 15. 33. 1
These. 5. 23. And because he is the God of Peace, therefore he fills those
that believe in his Christ, with joy and peace through believing, Romans 15. 13.

2. Again, Christ is called the Prince of Peace; therefore the Prayer is, Grace
be with you and Peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These.
1. 2.

3. The Holy Ghost also is the Author of this Peace, this inward Peace; Even
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

And, I say, as I also have already said, the procuring or meritorious Cause of
this Peace, is the doings and sufferings of Christ. Therefore by his Doings and
Sufferings he paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal
Redemption for them: else God would never have indicted a Proclamation of Peace
for them, and the Tenor of that Proclamation to be the Worthiness of the Lord
Jesus: yea, he would never have wrought with that Word in the Heart of them
that believe, to create in them Peace, Peace.

Secondly, As peace with God is an Evidence, (the Blood of Christ being the
Cause thereof) that Christ has by it paid full price to God for Sinners; so
Holiness in their Hearts taking its beginning from this Doctrine, makes this
fist Demonstration of double strength.

1. That Holiness, true gospel Holiness, possesses our hearts by this
Doctrine, it is evident; because the ground of Holiness, which is the Spirit of
God in us, is ministered to us by this Doctrine. When the Apostle had insinuated
that the Galatians were bewitched because they had turned from the Doctrine of
Christ Crucified, he demands of them, Whether they received the Spirit by the
Works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. That is,
whether the Spirit took possession of their Souls by their Obedience to the ten
Commandments; or by their giving credit to the Doctrine of the forgiveness of
their Sins, by Faith in this Crucified Christ: strongly concluding not by the
Law, but by the hearing, or preaching of Faith; that is, of the Lord Jesus as
Crucified, who is the Object of Faith.

2. As this Doctrine conveyeth the ground, or Groundwork which is the Spirit;
so also it works in the Heart those three Graces, Faith, Hope, Love; all
which as naturally purify the Heart from wickedness, as Soap, or Niter,
cleanses the Cloth. He purified their Hearts by Faith, by Faith in Christ's
Blood. And everyone that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is
pure. And also Love, you shall see what that does, if you look into the Text,
Act. 15. 9. 1 John 3. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 13. Now I say, this Faith groundeth it self
in the Blood of Christ; Hope waits for the full enjoyments of the Purchase of
it, in another world: and love is begot, and works, by the Love that Christ
has expressed by his Death, and by the Kindness he presents us with in his
Heart-Blood, Romans 3. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 19. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

Besides, what arguments so prevailing, as such as are purely Gospel? To
instance a few:

1. What stronger, than a free forgiveness of Sins. A certain Man had two
Debtors, the one owed him five Hundred Pence, and the other Fifty, and when
they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both, tell me therefore which
of them will love him most? Luke 7. 41, 42, 47.

2. What stronger argument to holiness, than to see, that though forgiveness
comes free to us, yet it cost Christ Jesus Heart-Blood to obtain it for us.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the Propitiation for our Sins. And this Love of God in giving his Christ
and of Christ, in dying for us, there is no argument stronger to prevail with a
sensible and awakened Sinner to judge, he should live to him that died for him,
and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

3. What stronger argument to holiness than this; If any man sins, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1, 2.
Unsanctified and graceless wretches, know not how to use these Words of God;
the Hypocrites also fly in our faces, because we thus urge them; but a Heart
that is possessed with Gospel-ingenuity, or to speak more properly, that is
possessed with Gospel Grace, and with Divine Considerations, cries; if it be
thus, O let me never sin against God! for the Love of Christ constrains me, 2
Cor. 5. 14.

4. What greater argument to holiness, than to see the Holy Scriptures so
furnished with promises of Grace and Salvation by Christ, that a Man can hardly
cast his Eye into the Bible, but he espieth one, or another of them? who would
not live in such an House, or be servant to such a Prince, who, besides his
exceeding in good Conditions, has Gold and Silver as common in his Palace, as
stones are by the Highway side? Having therefore these Promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

5. What greater argument to holiness, than to have our Performances, though
weak and infirm, from us; yet accepted of God in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5,
6.

6. What greater argument to holiness, than to have our Soul, our Body, our
Life hid, and secured with Christ in God? Mortify therefore your Members that
are upon the Earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness which is idolatry, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

What greater argument to holiness, than to be made the Members of the Body, of
the Flesh, and of the Bones of Jesus Christ? Shall I take the Members of
Christ, and make them the Members of an harlot, God forbid, Ephesians. 5. 30. 1
Cor. 6. 15.

Now all these, and five times as many more, having their foundation in the
Love, Blood and Righteousness of Christ, and operating in the Soul by Faith,
are the great Argument unto that Holiness, to which is annexed eternal Life.
It Is worth our observing, that in Act. 26, at the 18. The Inheritance belongs
to them, that are sanctified by Faith in Jesus Christ: For all other pretenses
to holiness, they are but a stolen semblance of that which is true and
acceptable; though it is common for even that which is counterfeit to be called
by the deluded, the True; and to be reckoned to be in them that are utter
strangers to Faith, and the Holiness that comes by Faith. But whosoever
compoundeth any like it, or whosoever puts any of it upon a stranger; shall
even be cut off from his People, Exodus 30. 33. God knows which is holiness
that comes by Faith in forgiveness of Sins, and acceptance with God, through
Christ: and God knows which is only such feignedly; and accordingly will he
deal with Sinners in that great Day of God Almighty.

The Sixth Demonstration.
THat Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them, is evident; because Prayers
are accepted of God only upon the account and for the sake of the Name of Jesus
Christ: Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
Name, he will give it you, Joh. 16. 23. In my Name, in the Name of Jesus Christ
of Nazareth: in the Name of him that came into the World to save Sinners, by
dying for them a grievous bloody Death; in his Name that has by himself put
away sin, and brought unto God acceptable Righteousness for Sinners; in his
Name; why in his Name, if he be not accepted of God? why in his Name, if his
undertakings for us are not well-pleasing to God? But, by these Words, in my
Name, are insinuated that his Person, and performances, as our undertaker, is
accepted by the Father of Spirits. We may not go in our own names, because we
are Sinners; not in the Name of one another, because all are Sinners; but why
not in the Name of an Angel? Because they are not those that did undertake for
us, or had they, they could not have done our work for us. He puts no trust
in his Saints, yea the Heavens are not clean in his Sight, Job. 4. 18. Chap.
15. 15. It may further be objected:

Since Jesus Christ is God equal with the Father, and so has naturally the
same Power to give as the Father, why should the Father rather than the Son, be
the great Giver to the Sinners of the World? and why may we not go to Christ in
the Name of the Father, as well as to the Father in the Name of Christ? I say,
how can these things be salved, but by considering that sin and justice put a
NECESSITY upon it, that thus must our Salvation be obtained. Sin and Justice
could not reconcile, nor could a means be found out to bring the Sinner and an
Holy God together, but by the Intercepting of the Son, who must take upon him
to answer Justice, and that by taking our Sins from before the Face of God by
bloody Sacrifice, not by Blood of others, as the Highpriests under the Law.
For, as every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices, it is of
necessity that this Man have somewhat also to offer, Heb. 8. 3. which Offering
and Sacrifice of his being able to perfect for ever them that are sanctified
and set apart for Eternal Life: Therefore the name of the Person that offered
(even Jesus made of God an High Priest) is acceptable with God; yea therefore
is he made for ever, by his doing for us, the Appeaser of the Justice of God,
and the Reconciler of Sinners to him. Hence it is, that HIS Name is that which
it behooves us to mention when we come before God, for what God has determined
in his Counsels of Grace to bestow upon Sinners; because, for his Name sake he
forgiveth them. I write to you little Children, because your Sins are forgiven
you for his Name sake. To him give all the Prephets witness, that through his
Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of Sins, 1. Joh. 2.
14. Act. 10. 43.

They therefore that would obtain the forgiveness of Sins, must ask it of God
through the Name of Jesus; and he that shall sensibly and unteignedly do it, he
shall receive the forgiveness of them. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in
my Name, he will give it you. Hence it is evident that he has not only paid
full price to God for them, but also obtained Eternal Redemption for them.

And it is observable, the Lord Jesus would have his Disciples make a Proof of
this, and promises, that if they do, they shall experimentally find it so.
Hitherto, says he, ye have asked nothing in my NAME, ask and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full, Joh. 16. 24. As who should say, O my Disciples, you
have heard what I have promised to you, even that my Father shall do for you,
whatsoever ye shall ask him in my Name. Ask now therefore, and prove me, if I
shall not make my Words good: Ask, I say, what you need, and see if you do not
receive it to the Joying of your Hearts. At that day ye shall ask in my Name,
and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you. I do not bid you
ask in my Name, as if the Father was yet hard to be reconciled, or unwilling to
accept you to mercy: my Coming into the World was the Design of my Father, and
the Effect of his Love to Sinners; but there is sin in you, and justice in God;
therefore that you to him might be reconciled, I am made of my Father Mediator,
wherefore ask in my Name; for, there is none other name given under the Heavens
among Men whereby they must be saved, Act. 4. 12. Ask in my Name, love is let
out to you through me, it is let out to you by me in a way of Justice, which is
the only secure way for you. Ask in my Name, and my Father will love you. The
Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God, Joh. 16. 27. My Fathers Love is set first upon me, for my
Name is chief in his Heart, and all that love me are beloved of my Father, and
shall have what they need if ye ask in my Name.

But, I say, what cause would there be to ask in his Name more than in the Name
of some other? since justice was provoked by our Sin; if he had not undertook
to make up the difference that by Sin was made betwixt justice and us. For
though there be in this Jesus infinite worth, infinite righteousness, infinite
merit; yet if he make not with these, interest for us, we get no more benefit
thereby than if there were no Mediator: But this Worth and Merit, is in him for
us; for he undertook to reconcile us to God, it is therefore that his Name is
with God so prevailing for us poor Sinners: and therefore that we ought to go
to God in his Name. Hence therefore it is evident, that Jesus Christ has paid
full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them.

The Seventh Demonstration.
THat Jesus Christ, by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
Sinners, etc. is evident, because we are commanded also to give God thanks in
his Name. By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise continually,
that is, the Fruit of our Lips, giving thanks in his Name, Heb. 13. 15.

By him therefore; wherefore? because he also, that he might sanctify us with
his own Blood suffered without the Gate, ver. 12.

He sanctified us with his Blood, but why should the Father have thanks for
this? even because the Father gave him for us, that he might die to sanctify
us with his Blood. Giving thanks to the Father which has made us meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, who has delivered us from
the Power of Darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son,
in whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins,
Col. 1. 12, 13, 14. The Father is to be thanked, for the contrivance was also
his, but the Blood, the Righteousness, or that worthiness, for the Sake of
which we are accepted of God, is the Worthiness of his own dear Son; as it is
meet therefore that God should have thanks, so it is necessary that he have it
in his Name for whose sake we indeed are accepted of him.

Let us therefore by him offer Praise.

First, For the Gift of his Son, and for that we stand quit through him in his
Sight; and that in despite of all inward weakness, and that in despite of all
outward enemies.

When the Apostle had taken such a view of himself as to put himself into a
maze, with an outcry also, who shall deliver me? he quiets himself with this
sweet conclusion, I thank God through Jesus Christ, Romans 7. 24. He found more
in the Blood of Christ to save him, than he found in his own Corruptions to
damn him; but that could not be, had he not paid full price for him, had he not
obtained Eternal Redemption for him. And can an Holy and Just God require that
we give thanks to him in his Name, if it was not effectually done for us by him?

Further, when the Apostle looks upon Death, and the Grave, and strengthens
them by adding to them Sin and the Law, saying, The Sting of Death is sin, and
the Strength of Sin is the Law: he presently adds, but thanks be to God which
gives us the Victory through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. The Victory over Sin,
Death, and the Law, the Victory over these through our Lord Jesus Christ; but
God has given us the Victory: but it is through our Lord Jesus Christ, through
his fulfilling the Law, through his destroying Death, and through his bringing
in Everlasting Righteousness. Elisha said to the King of Israel, that had it
not been that he regarded the Person of Jehoshaphat, he would not look to him,
nor regard him, 2 Kin. 3. 14. nor would God at all have looked to, or regarded
thee, but that he respected the Person of Jesus Christ.

Let the Peace of God therefore rule in your Hearts, to the which also you are
called in one body, and be you thankful, Col. 3. 15. The Peace of God, of that
we have spoken before; but how should this rule in our Hearts? he by the next
words directs you; Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly; that is, the
Word that makes revelation of the Death and Blood of Christ, and of the Peace
that is made with God for you thereby.

Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 20. For all things: for all things come to us
through this Name Jesus; Redemption, Translation, the Kingdom, Salvation, with
all the good things wherewith we are blessed.

These are the Works of God, he gave his Son, and he brings us to him, and puts
us into his Kingdom; that is, his true Body, which Jeremiah calls, a putting
among the Children, and a giving us a Godly heritage of the Host of Nations,
Joh. 6. Jer. 3. 19.

4. Now thanks be to God, which causes us always to triumph in Christ, 2 Cor.
2. 13, 14.

See here our cause of triumph is through Christ Jesus, and God causes us
through him to triumph: First and chiefly, because Christ Jesus has done our
work for us, has pleased God for our Sins, has spoiled the powers of
Darkness. God gave Jesus Christ to undertake our Redemption; Christ did
undertake it, did engage our Enemies, and spoiled them. He spoiled
principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
upon the Cross, Col. 2. 14, 15. Therefore, it is evident that he paid full
price to God for Sinners with his Blood, because God commands us, to give
thanks to him in his Name; through his Name. And whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God, and the
Father, by him, Col. 3. 17.

Take this Conclusion from the whole, no thanks are accepted of God, that come
not to him in the Name of his Son; his Son must have the Glory of conveying our
thanks to God, because he was he that by his Blood conveyeth his Grace to us.

The Eight Demonstration.
IN the next place; That Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full
price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them, is evident;
Because we are exhorted to wait for, and to expect the full and glorious
Enjoyment of that Eternal Redemption, at the second Coming of the Lord from
Heaven: Let your loins be girded about, and your Lights burning, and you your
selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, that when he comes and
knocks, ye may open unto him immediately, Luke 12. 35, 36.

Jesus Christ has obtained by his Blood Eternal Redemption for us, and has
taken it up now in the Heavens* is (as I have showed) preparing for us there
Everlasting Mansions of rest; and then he will come again for us. This Coming
is intended in this Text, and this Coming we are exhorted to wait for: and that
I may more fully show the Truth of this Demonstration, observe these following
Texts.

1. It is said, he shall choose our Inheritance for us. He shall choose our
inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved, Selah. God is gone
up with a Shout, etc. Psalm. 47. 4, 5.

These latter words intend the Ascension of Jesus Christ: His Ascension, when
he had upon the Cross made reconciliation for iniquity; his Ascension into the
Heavens to prepare our Mansions of Glory for us. For, our Inheritance is in the
Heavens; our House, our Hope, our Mansion House, and our incorruptible and
undefiled Inheritance is in Heaven, 2 Cor. 1. 2. Col. 1. 5, 6. Joh. 14. 1, 2. 1
Pet, 1. 3, 4, 5.

This is called the Eternal Inheritance, of which we that are called, have
received the Promise already, Heb. 9. 14, 15.

This Inheritance, I say, he is gone to choose for us in the Heavens, because by
his Blood he obtained it for us, Heb. 9. 12. and this we are commanded to wait
for: but how ridiculous, yea, how great a cheat would this be, had he not by
his Blood obtained it for us.

2. We wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead even Jesus
Christ, which delivered us from the Wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. He delivered
us by his Blood, and obtained the Kingdom of Heaven for us, and has promised
that he would go and prepare our places, and come again and fetch us thither.
And if I go and prepare a Place for you, I will come again and receive you unto
myself, that where I am there ye may be also, Joh. 14. 3. This then is the
Cause that we wait for him, we look for the reward of the Inheritance at his
Coming, who have served the Lord Christ in this World.

3. For our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior, the
Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20. We look for him to come, yet as a Savior; a
Savior he was at his first Coming, and a Savior he will be at his second
Coming. At his first Coming, he bought and paid for us; at his Second Coming,
he will fetch us to himself. At his first Coming, he gave us promise of the
Kingdom; at his second Coming, he will give us possession of the Kingdom. At
his first Coming, he also showed us how we should be, by his own
Transfiguration; at his second Coming, he will change our vile Body that it may
be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, Phil. 3. 21.

4. Hence therefore it is, that his Coming is called, our blessed Hope. Looking
for the Blessed Hope, and glorious Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 13. A Blessed Hope indeed, if he has bought our Persons
with his Blood, and an Eternal Inheritance for us in the Heavens: A blessed
Hope indeed, if also at his Coming we be certainly carried thither. No marvel
then if Saints be bid to wait for it, and if Saints themselves long for it. But
what a disappointment would these waiting Believers have, should all their
expectations be rewarded with a Fable? and the result of their Blessed Hope can
amount to no more, if our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, either denies to
come, or coming, brings not with him the HOPE, the blessed HOPE that is laid
up for us in Heaven: Whereof we have certainly been informed by the Word of the
Truth of the Gospel, Col. 1. 5, 6.

5. For Christ was once offered to bear the Sin of many, and unto them that
look for him, shall he appear the second Time, without sin unto Salvation, Heb.
9. 28. Here we have it promised that he shall come, that he shall appear the
second time, but not with sin, as he did before, to wit, with, and in the Sin
of his People when he bare them in his own Body; but now without sin, for he
before did put them away by the Sacrifice of himself. Now then let the Saints
look for him, not to die for the purchasing of their persons by Blood, but to
bring to THEM, and to bring them also to that Salvation, that before, when he
died, he obtained of God for them by his Death.

These things are to be expected therefore, by them that believe in, and love
Jesus Christ, and that from faith and love serve him in this world; they are to
be expected by them, being obtained for them by Jesus Christ: And he shall give
the Crown, says Paul, not only to me, but to them that love his Appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8, 9.

Now forasmuch as this Inheritance in the Heavens is the Price, Purchase, and
Reward of his Blood; how evidently does it appear, that he has paid full price
to God for Sinners? Would God else have given him the Heaven to dispose of to
us that believe, and would he else have told us so! Yea, and what comfort could
we have to look for his Coming, and Kingdom, and Glory, as the Fruits of his
Death; if his Death had not for that purpose been sufficiently efficacious. O!
the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that shall follow, 1 Pet. 1. 11.

The Ninth Demonstration.
THat Jesus Christ by what he has done, has paid full price to God for
Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for Sinners is evident, Because of the
Threatenings wherewith God has threatened, and the Punishments wherewith he
punished those that shall refuse to be saved by Christ, or seek to make
insignificant the Doctrine of Righteousness by Faith in him.

This Demonstration consists of three parts.

1. It suggesteth that some refuse to be justified or saved by Christ, and also
seek to make insignificant the Doctrine of Righteousness by Faith in him.

2. That God does threaten these.

3. That God will punish these.

That some refuse to be saved by Christ is evident, from many Texts. He is the
Stone which the Builders have rejected: He is also disallowed of Men: The Jews
stumble at him, and to the Greeks he is foolishness; both saying this Man shall
not rule over us, or how can this man save us? Psalm. 118. 22. Mat. 24. 42. 1
Pet. 2. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 23. Luke 19. 14.

The Causes of men's refusing Christ are many.

1. Their Love to sin. 2. Their Ignorance of his Excellency. 3. Their Unbelief.
4. Their Deferring to come to him in the acceptable Time. 5. Their leaning to
their own Righteousness. 6. Their entertaining Damnable Doctrines. 7. Their
loving the praise of Men. 8. The meanness of his Ways, his People, etc. 9. The
just Judgment of God upon them. 10. The Kingdom is given to others.
Now these, as they all refuse him, so they seek more or less, some
practically, others in practice and judgment also, to make insignificant the
Doctrine of Righteousness by Faith in him.

1. One does it by preferring his Sins before him. 2. Another does it by
preferring his Righteousness before him. 3. Another does it by preferring his
Delusions before him. 4. Another does it by preferring the World before him.
Now these God threatens, these God punishes.

First, God threatens them. Whosoever shall not receive that Prophet, shall be
cut off from amongst his People, Acts 3. 23. The Prophet is Jesus Christ; the
Doctrine that he preached was that he would lay down his Life for us, that he
would give us his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink by Faith: and promised,
that if we did eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, we should have Eternal Life.
He therefore that sees not, or that is afraid to venture his Soul for
Salvation on the Flesh and Blood of Christ by Faith, he refuses this Prophet,
he hears not this Prophet; and him God has purposed to cut off. But would
God thus have threatened, if Christ by his Blood and the Merits of the same, had
not paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for
them.

Secondly. Sit thou on my Right Hand until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool,
Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 22. 44. Heb. 1. 13. The Honor of sitting at God's Right
Hand, was given him because he died, and offered his Body once for all. This
Man when he had offered up one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the
Right Hand of God, from henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his
Footstool, Heb. 10. 11, 12, 13. Expecting, since God accepted his Offering,
that those that refused him should be trodden under foot, that is, sunk by him
into, and under endless and unsupportable vengeance. But would God have given
the World such an account of his Sufferings, that by one Offering he did
perfect for ever them that are sanctified? yea, and would he have threatened to
make those foes his Foot stool, that shall refuse to venture themselves upon
his Offering (for they are indeed his Foes) had not his Eternal Majesty been
well pleased with the Price he paid to God for Sinners; had he not obtained
Eternal Redemption for them?

Thirdly. He shall come from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming-fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 7, 8.

Here he expressly tells us wherefore they shall be punished: Because they
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, where also is
notably intimated that he that obeys not the Gospel of Christ, knows not
God, neither in his Justice or Mercy. But what is the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but good tidings of good things; to wit, Forgiveness of Sins by Faith
in his Blood, an Inheritance in Heaven by Faith in his Blood, as the whole of
all the foregoing discourse has manifested? Now, I say, can it be imagined
that God would threaten to come upon the World with this
Flaming-Fiery-Vengeance to punish them for their Non-subjection to his Sons
Gospel, if there had not been by himself paid to God full price for the Souls
of Sinners; if he had not obtained Eternal Redemption by his Blood for Sinners?

Fourthly. And Enoch, the seventh from Adam also prophesied of these, saying,
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly
Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard Speeches which
ungodly Sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14. 15.

The LORD that is here said to come with ten thousands of his Saints, is Jesus
Christ himself: and they that come with him are called his Saints, because
given to him by the Father, for the Sake of the shedding of his Blood. Now in
that he is said to come to execute judgment upon all, and especially those that
speak hard Speches against him; it is evident that the Father tendereth his Name
which is, Jesus, a Savior, and his undertaking for our Redemption; and as
evident that the hard Speeches, intended by the Text, are such as vilify him,
as Savior, counting the Blood of the Covenant, unholy, and trampling him, that
is Prince of the Covenant under the Feet of their reproachful Language; this is
counted a putting of him to open shame, and a despising the riches of his
Goodness, Heb. 10. Chap. 6. Romans 2. Time would fail to give you a view of the
revilings, despiteful sayings, and of the Ungodly Speeches which these
abominable Children of Hell, let fall in their Pamplets, Doctrines, and
Discourses, against this Lord the King. But the threatening is, He shall execute
judgment upon them for all their ungodly Deeds, and for all their hard Speeches
that ungodly Sinners have spoken against him.

Fifthly. Take heed therefore lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the
Prophets: Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a Work in
your days, a Work which you shall in no wise believe, though a Man declare it
unto you, Act. 13. 40, 41.

This Work is the same we have been all this while treating of, to wit,
Redemption by the Blood of Christ for Sinners, or that Christ has paid full
price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal Redemption for them. This is
manifest from ver. 23 to ver. 29. of this Chapter.

Now, observe, there are, and will be Despisers of this Doctrine, and they are
threatened with the Wrath of God. Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish:
But would God so carefully have cautioned Sinners to take heed of despising
this Blessed Doctrine, and have backed his Caution with a threatming that they
shall perish, if they persist, had not himself received by the Blood of Christ
full price for the Souls of Sinners?

Secondly. As God threatens, so he punishes those that refuse his Son, or
that seek to vilify or make insignificant, the Doctrine of Righteousness by
Faith in him.

1. He punishes them with the abidings of his Wrath. He that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the Wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36.

The Wrath of God for men; for sin stands already condemned by the Law; and the
Judgment is, that they who refuse the Lord Jesus Christ, shall have this Wrath
of God for ever lie, and abide upon them: For they want a Sacrifice to pacific
wrath for the Sin they have committed, having resisted, and refused the
Sacrifice of the Body of Christ. Therefore it cannot be that they should get
from under their present condition who have refused to accept of the
undertaking of Christ for them.

Besides, God to show that he takes it ill at the Hands of Sinners, that they
should refuse the Sacrifice of Christ, has resolved that there shall be no
more Sacrifice for sin. If therefore we sin wilfully after we have received the
Knowledge of the Truth; there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 26.
God does neither appoint another, neither will he accept another who-ever
brings it. And here those sayings are of their own natural force; How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great Salvation! And again, See that ye refuse not him
that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth,
(Moses) How shall we escape if we turn away from him (Christ) that speaks
from Heaven! Heb. 2. 3. Chap. 12. 25.

This therefore is a mighty Demonstration that Christ by what he has done,
has paid full price to God for the Souls of Sinners, because God so severely
threatens, and also punishes them that refuse to be justified by his Blood:
he threatens as you have heard, and punishes by leaving such men in their
Sins, under his heavy and unsupportable Vengeance here.

Secondly. He that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16. 16. damned in
Hellfire. He that believes not, but what should he believe? Why!

1. That Jesus is the Savior. If, says he, ye believe not that I am he, ye
shall die in your Sins.

2. He that believes not that he has undertaken and completely perfected
Righteousness for us, shall die in his Sins, shall be damned and perish in
Hellfire: For such have no cloak for their Sin, but must stand naked to the
show of their Shame before the Judgment of God, that fearful Judgment.
Therefore, after he had said, there remains for such, no more sacrifice for
sin* he adds, But a certain fearful looking for of judgment; there is for them
left nothing but the Judgment of God, and his fiery Indignation which shall
devour the Adversaries. He that despised Moses's Law died without mercy under
two or three Witnesses; of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the
Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an Unholy thing, and done
despite to the Spirit of Grace? Heb. 10. 25, 26.

See here, if fury comes not up now into the Face of God: now is mention made
of his fearful Judgment and fiery Indignation. Now, I say, is mention made
thereof, when it is suggested that some have light thoughts of him, count his
Blood unholy, and trample his Sacrificed Body under the Feet of their
Reproaches: Now is he a Consuming fire, and will burn to the lowest Hell. For
we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense,
says the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his People, Heb. 10. 28, 29, 30.
These words are urged by the Holy Ghost, on purpose, to beget in the Hearts of
the Rebellious, reverend thoughts, and an high esteem of the Sacrifice which
our Lord Jesus offered once for all upon Mount Calvary unto God the Father for
our Sins; for that is the very argument of the whole Epistle.

It is said to this purpose in one of Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians,
That because men receive not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved;
For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a
ly and be damned, 2 These. 2.

The Truth mentioned in the Place, is Jesus Christ. I am the Truth, says he,
Joh. 14. 6. The Love of the Truth, is none else but the Love and Compassion of
Jesus Christ, in shedding his Blood for Man's Redemption. Greater love than this
has no man, that a Man lay down his Life for his Friends, Joh. 15. 13. This
then is the Love of the Truth (of Jesus) that he has laid down his Life for
us. Now that the rejectors of this Love, should by this their rejecting procure
such wrath of God against them, that rather than they shall miss of damnation,
himself will choose their Delusions for them, and also give them up to the
effectual Working of these Delusions: what does this manifest, but that God is
displeased with them that accept not of Jesus Christ for Righteousness, and
will certainly order that their end shall be everlasting Damnation; therefore
Jesus Christ has paid full price to God for Sinners, and obtained Eternal
Redemption for them.

The Use of the Doctrine.
I come now to make some use of, and to apply this Blessed Doctrine of the
Undertaking of Jesus Christ; and of his paying full Price to God for Sinners,
and of his obtaining Eternal Redemption for them.

The first Use.
BY this Doctrine, we come to understand many things which otherwise abide
obscure and utterly unknown, because this Doctrine is accompanied with the Holy
Ghost, that Revealer of secrets, and Searcher of the deep things of God, 1 Pet.
1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 17. 1 Cor. 2. The Holy Ghost comes down with this Doctrine, as
that in which it alone delights: therefore is it called The Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. He gives also the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Little
of God is known in the World where the Gospel is rejected: the Religious Jew,
and the Wise Gentile may see more of God in a Crucified Christ, than in Heaven
and Earth besides: For in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge:
not only in his Person, as God, but also in his Undertakings as Mediator. Hence
Paul tells us, That he determined not to know any thing among the Corinthians
but Jesus Christ and him Crucified, Col. 2. 2, 3. 1 Cor. 2. 2, 3. I say more of
God is revealed in this Doctrine to us, than we can see of him in Heaven and
Earth without it.

First, Here is more of his WISDOM seen, than in his making, and upholding all
the Creatures. His Wisdom, I say, in devising means to reconcile Sinners to an
Holy and Infinite Majesty, to be a Just God, and YET a Savior; to be just to
his Law, just to his Threatening, just to himself, and yet save Sinners, can
no-way be understood till thou understandest why Jesus Christ did hang on the
Tree; for here only is the Riddle unfolded, Christ died for our Sins, and
therefore can God in justice save us, Isa. 45. 21. And hence is Christ called
The Wisdom of God, not only because he is so essentially, but because by him is
the greatest Revelation of his Wisdom toward man. In Redemption therefore, by
the Blood of Christ, God is said to abound toward us in all wisdom, Ephesians. 1.
7, 8. Here we see the highest Contradictions reconciled, here Justice kisseth
the Sinner, here a Man stands just in the Sight of God, while confounded at his
own Pollutions; and here he that has done no good, has yet a sufficient
Righteousness; even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, The JUSTICE of God, is here more seen, than in punishing all the
Damned. He spared not his own Son, is a Sentence which more reveals the
Nature of the Justice of God, than if it had said he spared not all the World.
True, he cast Angels from Heaven, and drowned the Old World; he turned Sodom
and Gomorrah into Ashes, with many more of like nature, but what were all these
to the Cursing of his Son? yea, what were ten thousand such manifestations of
his Ireful Indignation against Sin, to that of striking, afflicting,
chastising, and making the darling of his Bosom the Object of his Wrath and
Judgment. Here it is seen he respects not persons, but, judges sin, and
condemns him on whom it is found; yea although on Jesus Christ his
well-Beloved, Romans 8. 32. Gal. 3. 13.

Thirdly, The Mystery of God's WILL, is here more seen, than in hanging the
Earth upon nothing; while he condemns Christ though Righteous, and justifies
us though Sinners: while he makes him to be sin for us, and us the
Righteousness of God in him, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 20.

Fourthly, The POWER of God, is here more seen, than in making of Heaven and
Earth; for, for one to bear, and get the Victory over Sin, when charged by the
Justice of an Infinite Majesty, in so doing, he shows the Height of the
Highest Power: For where sin by the Law is charged, and that by God immediately,
there an Infinite Majesty opposes, and that with the whole of his Justice,
Holiness, and Power: So then, he that is thus charged, and engaged for the Sin
of the World, must not only be equal with God, but show it, by overcoming that
Curse and Judgment that by Infinite Justice is charged upon him for Sin.

When Angels and Men had sinned, how did they fall and crumble before the Anger
of God! they had not power to withstand the terror, nor could there be worth
found in their Persons, or Doings, to appease displeased Justice. But behold
here stands the Son of God before him in the Sin of the World, his Father
finding him there, curses, and condemns him to death: but he by the Power of
his Godhead, and the Worthiness of his Person and Doings, vanquisheth sin,
satisfies God's Justice, and so becomes the Savior of the World. Here then is
Power seen: Sin is a Mighty thing, it crusheth all in pieces, save him whose
Spirit is Eternal, Heb. 9. 14. Set Christ, and his Sufferings aside, and you
neither see the Evil of Sin, nor the Displeasure of God against it; you see
them not in their utmost. Had thou a view of all the Legions that are now in
the pains of Hell, yea, could thou hear their shreeks, and groans together
at once, and feel the whole of all their burden: much of the evil of Sin, and
of the Justice of God against it, would be yet unknown by thee; for thou
would want power to feel, and bear the utmost! A Giant shows not his Power,
by killing of a little Child, nor yet is his might seen by the resistance that
such a little one makes, but then he shows his power when he deals with one
like himself: yea, and the Power also of the other is then made manifest in
saving himself from being swallowed up with his Wrath. Jesus Christ also made
manifest his Eternal Power and Godhead, more, by bearing and overcoming our
Sins; than in making, or upholding the whole World: Hence Christ Crucified, is
called the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.

Fifthly, The LOVE and MERCY of God, is more seen in, and by this Doctrine,
than any other way. Mercy and Love are seen in that God gives us Rain and
fruitful Seasons, and in that he fills our Hearts with food and gladness;
from that bounty he bestows upon us as men, as his Creatures. Oh! but herein
is Love made manifest in that Christ laid down his Life for us: And God
commended his Love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ died
for us; 1 John 3. 16. Chap. 4. 10 Romans 5. 8.

Never Love like this, nor did God ever give such discovery of his Love from
the beginning to this Day. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins.

Here is Love, that God sent his Son! his Darling! his Son that never offended!
his Son, that was always his delight! Herein is Love that be sent him to save
Sinners! to save them by bearing their Sins! by bearing their Curse! by dying
their Death! and by carrying their Sorrows! Here is Love in that while we were
yet Enemies, Christ died for us! yea, here is Love, in that while we were yet
without strength, Christ died for the Ungodly, Romans 5.

The second Use.
But Secondly, as this Doctrine gives us the best discovery of God; so also it
gives us the best discovery of our selves, and our own things.

First, It gives us the best discovery of our selves: Would thou know
Sinner, what thou art; look up to the Cross, and behold a Weeping, Bleeding,
Dying Jesus: nothing could do but that, nothing could save thee but his Blood;
Angels could not, Saints could not, God could not, because he could not ly,
because he could not deny himself. What a thing is Sin, that it should sink all
that bear its burden, yea it sunk the Son of God himself into death and the
Grave, and had also sunk him into Hellfire for ever, had he not been the Son
of God; had he not been able to take it on his Back, and bear it away. O! This
Lamb of God. Sinners were going to Hell, Christ was the Delight of his Father,
and had a whole Heaven to himself; but that did not content him, Heaven could
not hold him. He must come into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Ay,
and had he not come, thy Sins had sunk thee, thy Sins had provoked the Wrath of
God against thee; to thy perdition and destruction for ever. There is no Man,
but is a Sinner, there is no Sin but would damn an Angel, should God lay it to
his charge. Sinner, the Doctrine of Christ crucified cries, therefore, aloud
unto thee, that sin has made thy Condition dreadful: See your selves, your
Sin, and consequently, the Condition that your Souls are in, by the Death and
Blood of Christ; Christ's Death gives us the most clear discovery of the
dreadful Nature of our Sins. I say again, if sin be so dreadful a thing as to
break the Heart of the Son of God (for so he says it did) how shall a Poor,
Wretched, Impenitent, damned Sinner, wrestle with the Wrath of God. Awake
Sinners, you are lost, you are undone, you perish, you are damned, Hellfire is
your Portion for ever, if you abide in your Sins, and be found without a
Savior in the dreadful Day of Judgment.

Secondly, For your good Deeds cannot help you, the Blood of Christ tells you
so: For by this Doctrine, Christ died for our Sins, God damneth to death and
hell, the Righteousness of the World. Christ must die, or Man be damned: where
is now any room for the Righteousness of Men? room, I say, for Man's
Righteousness, as to his Acceptance and Justification. Bring then thy
Righteousness to the Cross of Jesus Christ, and in his Blood behold the Demands
of Justice; behold them, I say, in the Cries, and Tears, in the Blood and Death
of Jesus Christ. Look again, and behold the Person dying; such an one as never
sinned, nor offended at any time, yet he dies. Could an Holy Life, an Innocent,
Harmless Conversation have saved one from death, Jesus had not died. But he
must die, Sin was charged, therefore Christ must die.

Men therefore need to go no further to prove the Worth of their own
Righteousness, than to the Death of Christ: They need not be to seek in that
Matter till they stand before the Judgment Seat.

Quest. But how should I prove the Goodness of mine own Righteousness, by the
Death and Blood of Christ?
Ans. Thus: If Christ must die for Sin, then all thy Righteousness cannot save
thee. If Righteousness comes by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.
21. By this Text it is manifest, that either Christ died in vain, or thy
Righteousness is vain. If thy Righteousness can save thee, then Christ died in
vain. If nothing below, or besides the Death of Christ could save thee, then
thy Righteousness is in vain; one of the two must be cast away, either
Christ's, or thine. Christ Crucified to save the World, discovers two great
evils in Man's own Righteousness: I mean when brought for Justification and
Life.

1. It opposes the Righteousness of Christ. 2. It condemns God of
Foolishness.
1. It opposes the Righteousness of Christ; in that it seeks it self to
stand, where should the Righteousness of Christ; to wit, in God's affection for
the Justification of thy Person, and this is one of the highest affronts to
Christ, that poor man is capable to give him: Right worthily therefore, does
the Doctrine of the Gospel damn the Righteousness of Men, and promises the
Kingdom of God to Publicans and Harlots rather.

2. It condemns God of Foolishness: For if Works of Righteousness which we
can do, can justify from the Curse of the Law in the Sight of God, then is not
all the Treasures of Wisdom found in the Heart of God and Christ: For this
Dolt-headed Sinner, has now found out a Way of his own, unawares to God, to
secure his Soul from Wrath and Vengeance. I say, unawares to God; for he never
imagined that such a thing could be, for had he, he would never have purposed
before the World began, to send his Son to die for Sinners. Christ is the
Wisdom of God, as you have heard, and that as he is our Justifying
Righteousness. God was manifest in the Flesh to save us, is the great Mystery
of Godliness. But wherein lies the depth of this Wisdom of God in our
Salvation, if Man's Righthand can save him? Job 40. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Yea, wherefore has God also given it out, that there is none other Name given
to Men, under Heaven whereby we must be saved: I say again, why is it affirmed,
without shedding of Blood is no Remission, if Man's good Deeds can save him?

This Doctrine therefore of the Righteousness of Christ, being rightly
preached, and truly believed, arraigneth and condemns Man's Righteousness to
Hell: It casts it out, as Abraham cast out Ismael.

BLOOD! BLOOD, the sound of Blood, abaseth all the Glory of it. When Men have
said all, and showed us what they can, they have no Blood to present God's
Justice with; yet it is Blood that makes an Atonement for the Soul, and nothing
but Blood can wash us from our Sins, Levit. 17. 11. Revel. 1. 5. Heb. 9.

Justice calls for Blood, Sins call for Blood, the Righteous Law calls for
Blood; yea the Devil himself must be overcome by Blood: Sinner where is now thy
Righteousness? Bring it before a Consuming Fire; [for our God is a Consuming
Fire] Bring it before the Justice of the Law: yea try if ought but the Blood of
Christ can save thee from thy Sins, and Devils; try it, I say, by this
Doctrine; go not one step further before thou have tried it.

Thirdly, By this Doctrine we are made to see, the worth of Souls: it cannot be
but that the Soul is of Wonderful Price, when the Son of God will not stick to
spill his Blood for it. O Sinners, you that will venture your Souls for a
little pleasure, surely you know not the worth of your Souls. Now if you would
know what your Souls are worth, and the Price which God sets them at, read that
Price by the Blood of Christ. The Blood of Christ was spilt to save Souls. For
ye are bought with a Price, and that Price none other than the Blood of Christ;
wherefore glorify God in your Bodies and in your Spirits which are Gods, 1 Cor.
6. 20. Sinners, you have Souls, can you behold a Crucified Christ and not
Bleed, and not Mourn, and not fall in Love with him?

The third Use.
By this Doctrine Sinners, as Sinners, are encouraged to come to God for mercy,
for the Curse due to Sin is taken out of the way. I speak now to Sinners that
are awake, and see themselves Sinners.

There are two things in special when Men begin to be awakened, that kill their
thoughts of being saved.

1. A Sense of sin. 2. The Wages due thereto.
These kill the Heart, for who can bear up under the guilt of Sin? If our Sins
be upon us, and we pine away in them, how can we THEN live? Ezekiel. 33. 10. How
indeed! it is impossible. So neither can Man grapple with the Justice of God.
Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be strong? they cannot. A wounded
Spirit who can bear? Men cannot, Angels cannot: wherefore if now Christ be hid,
and the blessing of Faith in his Blood denied, woe be to them: such go after
Saul and Judas, one to the Sword, and the other to the Halter, Ezekiel. 22. 14.
Prove. 18. 14. and so miserably end their days; for come to God they dare not,
the thoughts of that Eternal Majesty strikes them through.

But now present such Poor dejected Sinners with a Crucified Christ, and
persuade them that the Sins under which they shake and tremble, was long ago
laid upon the Back of Christ, and the Noise, and Sense, and Fear of damning,
begins to cease, depart, and fly away: Dolours, and Terrors fade, and vanish,
and that Soul conceives hopes of Life. For thus the Soul argues, is this
indeed the Truth of God, that Christ was made to be Sin for me! was made the
Curse of God for me! Has he indeed born all my Sins, and spilt his Blood for
my Redemption? O blessed Tidings, O welcome Grace! Bless the Lord O my Soul,
and all that is within me bless his Holy Name. Now is peace come, now the Face
of Heaven is altered: Behold all things are become new. Now the Sinner can
abide Gods Presence, yea sees unutterable Glory and Beauty in him: For here he
sees Justice smite. While Jacob was afraid of Esau, how heavily did he drive,
even toward the Promised Land? but when killing thoughts were turned into
kissing, and the fears of the Swords Point turned into Brotherly Embraces, what
says he, I have seen thy Face, as though it had been the Face of God, and thou
wast pleased with me? Genesis 33. 10.

So, and far better is it, with a poor distressed Sinner at the Revelation of
the Grace of God through Jesus Christ. God was in Christ reconciling the World
unto himself not imputing their Trespasses to them: O! what work will such a
word make upon a wounded Conscience, especially when the next words follow. For
he has made him to be Sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

Now the Soul sees qualifications able to set him quit in the Sight of God:
Qualifications prepared already. Prepared I say already, and that by God
through Christ; even such as can perfectly answer the Law. What does the Law
require? If Obedience, here it is; if Bloody Sacrifice, here it is; if infinite
Righteousness, here it is. Now then the Law condemns him that Believes, before
God, no more; for all its Demands are answered, all its Curses are swallowed up
in the Death and Curse Christ underwent.

Object. But reason says, since Personal Sin brought the Death, surely
Personal Obedience must bring us Life and Glory.
Ans. True, Reason says so, and so does the Law it self, Romans 10. 5. but God,
we know, is above them both, and he in the Covenant of Grace, says otherwise:
to wit, That if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine Heart that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be
saved, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Let Reason then hold his tongue, yea let the Law with all his Wisdom subject
it self to him that made it; let it look for sin where God has laid it; let it
approve the Righteousness which God approves: yea though it be not that of the
Law, but that by Faith of Jesus Christ.

God has made him our Righteousness; God has made him our Sin; God has made
him our Curse; God has made him our Blessing. Methinks this word God has made
it so, should silence all the World.

The fourth use.
Fourthly, By this Doctrine sufficiency of argument is ministered to the
tempted, to withstand, thereby, the assaults of the Devil.

When the Souls begin to seek after the Lord Jesus, then Satan begins to
afflict and distress, as the Canaanites did the Gibeonites, for making Peace
with Jehoshuah, Jos. 10. 1, 6.

There are three things that do usually afflict the Soul that is earnestly
looking after Jesus Christ.

1. Dreadful accusations from Satan. 2. Grievous defiling and infectious
thoughts. 3. A strange readiness in our Nature to fall in with both.
By the first of these the Heart is made continually to tremble. Hence his
Temptations are compared to the roaring of a Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. For as the Lion
by roaring kills the Heart of his Prey, so does Satan, kill the Spirit of
these that hearken to him: For when he tempts, especially by way of
accusation, he does to us, as Rabshakeh did to the Jews: He speaks to us in our
own Language. He speaks our Sin at every word, our guilty Conscience knows it,
he speaks our Death at every word, our doubting Conscience feels it.

Secondly, Besides this, there does now arise even in the Heart such defiling,
and soul infectious thoughts, that puts the Tempted to their wits end: for
now it seems to the Soul that the very Floodgates of the Flesh are opened, and
that to sin there is no stop at all; now the Air seems to be covered with
darkness, and the Man is as if he was changed into the nature of a Devil: Now
if ignorance and unbelief prevail, he concludes that he is reprobate, made to
be taken and destroyed.

Thirdly, Now also he feels in him a readiness to fall in with every
temptation; a readiness, I say, continually present, Romans 7. 21. This throws
all down, now despair begins to swallow it up; now it can neither pray, nor
read, nor hear, nor meditate on God, but Fire and Smoke continually bursteth
forth of the Heart against him; now sin and great confusion puts forth it self
in all: yea, the more the Sinner desires to do a duty sincerely, the further
off it always finds it self: For by how much the Soul struggleth under these
distresses, by so much the more does Satan put forth himself to resist, still
infusing more poison, that if possible it might never struggle more (for
strugglings are also us poison to Satan.) The Fly in the Spider's Webb, is an
emblem of the Soul in such a condition; the Fly is entangled in the Webb, at
this the Spider shows himself; if the Fly stir again, down comes the Spider to
her, and claps a Foot upon her, if yet the Fly makes a noise, then with
poisoned Mouth the Spider lays hold upon her; if the Fly struggle still, then
he poisons her more and more; what shall the Fly do now? why she dies, if
somebody does not quickly release her. This is the case of the Tempted, they
are entangled in the Webb, (their Feet and Wings are entangled) now Satan shows
himself, if the Soul now struggleth, Satan labors to hold it down; if it now
shall make a noise, then be bites with blasphemous Mouth, (more poisonous than
the Gall of a Serpent.) If it struggle again, then he poisoneth more and more:
infomuch that it needs at last must die in the Net, if the Man, the Lord Jesus,
helps not out.

The afflicted Couscience understands my words.

Further, though the Fly in the Webb, is altogether incapable of looking for
relief, yet this awakened tempted Christian is not; what must he do therefore?
how should he contain hopes of life? If he looks to his Heart there is
Blasphemy; if he looks to his duties, there is Sin; if he strives to mourn and
lament, perhaps he cannot, unbelief and hardness hinder: shall this Man lie
down in despair? No: shall he trust to his duties? No: shall he stay from
Christ till his Heart is better? No: What then? Let him NOW look to Jesus
Christ Crucified, then shall he see his Sins answered for, then shall he see
Death a-dying, then shall he see Guilt born by another, and there shall he see
the Devil overcome. This sight destroys the Power of the first Temptation;
purifies the Heart and inclines the Mind to all good things.

And to encourage thee, tempted Creature, to this most Gospel-Duty: Consider,
that when Jesus Christ read his Commission upon the entering into his Ministry,
he proclaimed: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me
to preach the Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted,
to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the Blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable Year of the
Lord, Luke 4. 18, 19.

These things therefore should the Tempted believe, but believing is now
sweating-work; for Satan will hold as long as possible, and only steadfast Faith
can make him fly: But O! the Toil of a truly gracious Heart in this Combat, if
Faith be weak, he can scarce get higher than his Knees; Lord help, Lord save,
and then down again, till an Arm from Heaven takes him up; until Jesus Christ
be evidently set forth Crucified for him, and Cursed for his Sin: for then (and
not till then) the Temptation rightly cease, at leastwise for a Season. Now
the Soul can tend to look about it, and thus consider with it self: If Christ
has bora my Sin and Curse, then it is taken away from me, and seeing thus to
take away sin, was the Contrivance of the God of Heaven, I will bless his Name,
hope in his Mercy, and look upon Death and Hell with Comfort. Thine Heart shall
meditate terror, thou shall see the Land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 16,
17, 18.

The fifth use.
Fifthly, This Doctrine makes Christ precious to the Believers. Unto you
therefore which believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 5. This Head might be greatly
enlarged upon, and branched out into a Thousand particulars, and each one full
of weight and glory.

1. By considering what Sin is. 2. By considering what Hell is. 3. By
considering what Wrath is. 4. By considering what Eternity is. 5. By
considering what the loss of a Soul is. 6. What the loss of God is. 7. What the
loss of Heaven is. 8. And what it is to be in utter Darkness with Devils and
damned Souls for ever and ever.
And after all to conclude, from all these Miseries the Lord Jesus delivered me.

Further, This makes Christ precious, if I consider in the next place:

1. How he did deliver me, 'twas with his Life, his Blood; it cost him Tears,
Groans, Agony, Separation from God; to do it he endured his Fathers Wrath, bare
his Fathers Curse, and died thousands of deaths at once.

2. He did this, while I was his Enemy, without my desires, without my
knowledge, without my deserts, he did it unawares to me.

3. He did it freely, cheerfully, yea he longed to die for me; yea, Heaven
would not hold him for the Love he had to my Salvation, which also he has
effectually accomplished for me at Jerusalem. Honorable Jesus! precious Jesus!
loving Jesus! Jonathan's Kindness captivated David, and made him precious in
his Eyes for ever. I am distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan (said he) very
pleasant have thou been to me; thy Love to me was wonderful, passing the Love
of Women, 2 Samuel 1. 26. Why, what had Jonathan done? O! He had delivered David
from the Wrath of Saul. But how much more should he be precious to me, who has
saved me from Death and Hell! who has delivered me from the Wrath of God! The
Love of Christ constrains us. Nothing will so edge the Spirit of a Christian
as, Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood: This makes the
Heavens themselves ring with joy and shouting. Mark the Words, Thou wast slain,
and have redeemed us to God with thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation, and and have made us unto our God, Kings, and Priests,
and we shall reign on the Earth. What follows now? And I beheld, and heard the
Voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders,
and the Number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands, saying with a loud Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Blessing; and every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are therein heard I, saying, Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to the LAMB for
ever and and ever, Revel. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Thus also is the Song, that New-Song, that is said to be sung by the Hundred
forty and four thousand which stand with the LAMB upon Mount Sion, with his
Fathers Name written in their Foreheads. These are also called Harpers,
Harping with their Harps. And they sang as it were a new Song before the
Throne, and before the four Beasts, and the Elders; and none could learn that
Song but the Hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the
Earth, Revel. 14. 1, 2, 3.

But why could they not learn that Song? Because they were not redeemed; none
can sing of this Song but the Redeemed: they can give Glory to the Lamb, the
Lamb that was slain, and that redeemed them to God by his Blood. It Is Faith in
his Blood on Earth, that will make us sing this Song in Heaven. These
Shoutings, and Heavenly Songs must needs come from Love put into a Flame by the
Sufferings of Christ.

The last Use.
If all these things be true, what follows but a Demonstration of the Accursed
Condition of those among the Religious in these Nations whose notions put them
far off from Jesus, and from venturing their Souls upon his Bloody Death. I
have observed such a Spirit as this in the World, that cares not for knowing
of Jesus; the Possessed therewith do think, that it is not material to
Salvation to venture upon a Crucified Christ* neither do they trouble their
Heads or Hearts with inquiring whether* Christ Jesus be risen, and ascended
into Heaven, or whether they see him again or no, but rather are for
concluding, that there will be no such thing: These Men speak not by the Holy
Ghost, for in the Sum, they call Jesus* Accursed; but I doubt not to say that
many of them are Anathematised of God, and shall stand so, till the Coming of
the Lord Jesus, to whom be Glory for ever and ever:

Amen.
THE END.
Books writ by Mr. Bunyan, and printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and
Castle near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil.
1. SIghs from Hell, or the Groans of a Damned Soul; discovering the Lamentable
Estate of the Damned. 2. Resurrection from the Dead, and Eternal Judgment
asserted; and with what Bodies the Dead arise. 3. A Discourse of Prayer, and
what it is to pray with the Spirit and with Understanding. 4. The Holy City, or
the New-Jerusalem; or the Glorious State of Believers after this Life,
asserted. 5. Christian Behavior; teaching Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children,
Masters, Servants, to walk so as to please God. 6. Grace abounding to the chief
of Sinners; discovering the woeful Estate of the Impenitent, and the Greatness
of Gods Mercy. 7. A Map, showing the Order and Causes of Salvation and
Damnation, etc. 8. Serious Meditations on the four last things, viz. Death,
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell. 9. A Defense of the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith in Jesus Christ. 10. A Confession of the Author's Faith, and a Reason of
his Practice in Matters of Worship.

