A DEFENSE OF THE Doctrine of Justification, BY FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST* SHOWING,
True Gospel-Holiness flows from Thence.

OR, Mr. FOWLER'S Pretended Design of CHRISTIANITY, Proved to be nothing more
then to trample under Foot the Blood of the Son of God; and the Idolizing of
Man's own Righteousness.

AS ALSO, How while he pretends to be a Minister of the Church of England, he
overthrows the wholesome Doctrine contained in the 10 th. 11 th. and 13 th. of
the Thirty Nine Articles of the same, and that he falls in with the Quaker,
and Romanist, against them.

By JOHN BVNYAN.

Disalowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, 1 Pet. 2. 4. Printed
for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle, without Temple Bar. 1673.

A Premonition to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THat thou may not be tired with longing to know what Errors, and Doctrines
Destructive to Christianity, Mr. Fow^er, in his Feigned, design of
Christianity, has presented the World withal; and that thou may even in the
Entry, see that which more fully is shown in the House: Namely, of the
Contradiction that is in his Book, to the wholesome Doctrine of the Church of
England, while he stands a Minister of the same. I have thought convenient,
instead of an Epistle, to present thee with those Doctrines contained in his;
and that are refuted by the Book that thou have in thy hand. The which also, I
hope, will be a sufficient Apology for this my undertaking.

His Doctrines are these.
1. That the First Principles of Morrals, those First Written in Men's hearts,
are the Essentials, the Indispensible, and Fundamental Points ^r Doctrines of
the Gospel, Page 8, 281, 282. 2. That these First Principles, are to be
followed, Principally, as they are made known to us, by the Dictates of Humane
Nature; and that this obedience, is the first, and best sort of obedience, we
Christians can perform, Page 8, 9, 10. 3. That there is such a thing as a
foundness of Soul, and the purity of Humane Nature in the World, Page 6. 4.
That the Law, in the first Principles of it, is far beyond, and more obliging
on the hearts of Christians, then is, That of coming to God by Christ, Page 7,
8, 9, 10. 5. That the Precept of coming to God by Christ, etc. is in its own
Nature, a thing indifferent, and absolutely considered neither good nor evil,
Page 7, 8, 9. 6. That Christ's great Errand, in coming into the World, was to
put us again in Possession of the Holiness we had lost, P. 12. 7. That John the
Baptist, the Angel that was sent to Zecharias, and Mary, Preached this
Doctrine; and so also did Malachy the Prophet, Page 13. 8. That Christ by
saving us from Sin, is meant, not first, his saving us from the punishment, but
from the Filth, and from the punishment, as a Consequence of that, Page 14, 15.
9. That Christ's Work, when he was come, was to establish ONLY an inward Real
Righteousness, Page 16. 10. That Christ's fulfilling the Law FOR US, was by
giving more perfect, and lighter instances of Morral Duties, then were before
expressly given, Page 17. 11. That Christ's Doctrine, Life, Actions, Miracles,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and coming again to Judgment, is all Preached
to establish us in this Righteousness, Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 12. That it
is not possible a Wicked man should have God's Pardon, Page 119. 13. That it is
impossible Christ's Righteousness should be imputed to an Unrighteous Man, Page
120. 14. And that if it were, he boldly affirms, it would signify as little to
his happiness, while he continues so, as would a Gorgious and Splendid
Garment, to one that is almost starved, Page 120. 15. For God to Justify a
Wicked man, etc. would far more disparage his Justice and Holiness, then
advance his Grace and Kindness, Page 130. 16. He says, Men are not Capable of
God's pardoning Grace, till they have truly repented them of all their Sins,
Page, 130. 17. The Devils, says he, have a large measure of these Attributes of
God; as his Power, Knowledge, etc. Page 124. 18 That Christ did himself
perform, as our example, what ever he required of us to do; Yea, That he trod,
himself EVERY step of our Way to Heaven, Page 148. 19. The Salvation of Christ,
First, Consists in curing our Wounds, (our Filth.) And Secondarily, In freeing
us from the Smart, Page 216. 20. That pardon does not so much Consist in
Remission, as in healing; to wit, our filth, Page 216. 21. Faith Justifies, AS
it includes true Holiness in the Nature of it; it Justifies AS it does SO,
Page 221. 22. That Faith which Intitles a Sinner to so high a Privilege as
that of Justification, must needs be such as complyeth with ALL the purposes of
Christ's coming into the World, etc. And it is no less necessary that it should
Justify AS it does THIS, Page 222. 23. He wonders that any Wordly man should
be so difficultly persuaded, to embrace THIS account of Justifying Faith, Page
222. 24. There can be no pretense for a man, to think that Faith should be the
condition or instrument of Justification, as it complyeth with, only the
Precept of relying on Christ's Merits for the obtaining of it, Page 223. 25. It
is, says he, As clear as the Sun at Noonday, that obedience to the other
Precepts must go before obedience to this, Page 223. 26. He shall be his
Apollo, that can give him a sufficient reason, why Justifying Faith should
consist in Recombancy and Relyance on Christ's merits for the pardon of Sin,
Page 224. 27. He will take the boldness to tell those who are dispeased with
this account of Justifying Faith, that in his opinion it is impossible they
should ONCE think of another, Page 225. 28. The Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Consists in dealing with sincerely Righteous Persons, as if
they were perfectly so, etc. Page 225. 29. The rand intent of the Gospel; is,
to make us pertakers of inward real Righteousness; and it is but Secondary,
that we should be accepted as before, Page 226. 30. It is not possible (he
says) that any other notion of this Doctrine should have truth in it, Page
226. 31. Whatsoever is commanded by the customs of the place we live in, or
commanded by Superiors, or made by ANY circumstance convenient to be done, our
Christian liberty consists in that we have leave to do them, Page 242. 32.
For our resuffering to comply with these, can hardly proceed from any thing,
then a proud affection of singularity, or at best from Supersticious
Scrupulosity, Page 242. 33. Those Ministers hinder the design of Christianity,
that Preach up free Grace, and Christian Privileges OTHER WAYS then as Motives
to obedience, and that scarce ever insist upon any other Duties then those of
believing, laying hold of Christ's Righteousness, applying the Promises, etc.
Page 262. 34. But to make the Christian Duties to consist either wholly or
MOSTLY in THESE, etc. is the way effectually to harden Hypocrites, Page 262.
35. Those Ministers do nothing less then Promote the design of Christianity,
that are never in their Element but when they are talking of the
irrespectiveness of God's Decrees, the absolute promises, the utter Disability,
and perfect Impotency of Natural men, to do any thing toward their own
Conversion, Page 262. 36. He is the only Child of Abraham, who in the purity of
his heart obeys those substantial Laws, that are by God imposed upon him,
Page 283. 37. There is NO Duty more affectionately commanded in the Gospel,
then that of Almsgiving, Page 284. 38. It is impossible we should not have the
design of Christianity accomplished in us, etc. if we make our Saviors most
excellent life the Pattern of our lives, Page 296. 39. To do well is better
then believing, Page 299. 40. To be imitators of Christ's Righteousness even of
the Righteousness we should rely on, is counted by Mr. Fowler, more noble, then
to rely thereon, or trust thereto, Page 300.

Reader,
I Have given thee here but a taste of these things; and by my Book but a brief
reply to the Errors that he by his has devulged to the World: Al, though many
more are by me reflected then the 40 thou art here presented with.

God give thee eyes to see, and an heart to shun and escape all these things
that may yet come to pass, for hurt, and to stand before the Son of Man.

Thus hoping that this short taste may make Mr. Fowler ashamed, and thee
receive satisfaction, touching the truth and state of this Man's Spirit and
Principles; I rest,

From Prison, the 27. of the 12 Month, 1671. Thine to serve thee in the Gospel
of Christ. J. Banyan.

A DEFENSE Of the Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION By Faith in Jesus Christ; Proving,
That Gospel-Holiness flows from thence, etc.
SIR,
HAving heard of your Book, Entitled, The Design of Christianity; and in that
was contained such Principles, as gave just ofence to Christian ears, I was
desirous of a view thereof, that from my sight of things I might be the better
able to judge. But I could not obtain it till the 13 th of this 11 th Month,
which was too soon for you Sir, a pretended Minister of the Word, so vilely to
expose to public view, the rottenness of your heart in Principles
Diametrically opposite to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ. And had it
not been for this consideration, that it is not too late to oppose open
Blasphemy, (such as endangereth the Souls of thousands) I had cast by this
answer, as a thing out of season.

Two things are the Design of your Book.
1. To assert, and justify a thing which you call inward, real righteousness,
and Holiness. 2 To prove, That the whole, the grand, the only, and ultimate
design of the Gospel of Christ, is to begin, and perfect this righteousness.
Into the truth, or untruth, of both these, as briefly as I may, I shall at
this time inquire.

First, Therefore, a little to examine the nature of your Holiness and
Righteousness^ as your self has described the same.

(...) It (...) (say you) so sound a complexion of Soul, at ma^^tains in life
and vigor, whatsoever is essential to it, and suffers not any thing
unnatural to mix with that which is (...): By the force and power whereof, a
man is enabled to behave himself as a Creature endued with a principle of
reason; keeps his supreme faculty in its throne, brings into due subjection
(...) his inferior ones; his sensual imagination, his passions and (...)

You add farther,

It is the purity of the humane nature, engaging those in whom it resides, to
demean themselves suitably in that state in which God has placed them; and not
to act disbecomingly in any co^^^ion, circumstance or relation. You say
moreover.

It is a Divine, or God-like nature, causing a^ hearts (...) of of, and an
affectionate compliance with the eternal laws of rig^teousness; and a behavior
agreeable to the essential, and (...) differ^nces of good and evil. page 6.

Farther, You call it a principle or habit of Soul, originally dictates of
humane nature. page 8.

A disposition and temper of the inward man, as powerfully inclin^ it to
regard, and attend to; aff^ctionately to embrace and adhere too; to be actuated
by, and under the government of, all those practical principles, that are made
known ^ither by revelation, nature or the use of reason. page 11. Which in
conclusion you call that holiness which already we have lost. page 12.

Thus Sir is your holiness, by you described, which holiness you aver is that,
which is the great and only design of Christ to promote both by his life and
glorious Gospel.

To take therefore your description in pieces, if happily there may be found
ought, but naught therein.

It is (say you) an healthful complexion of Soul, the purity of the humane
Nature, etc.

Answ. These are but words; there is no such thing as the purity of our Nature,
Romans 7. 24.
abstract and distinct from the sinful pollution that dwells in us. It Is
true, a man may talk of, and by Argument distinguish between Nature and sin;
but that there is such a Principle in man (since Adams fall) a Principle by
which he may act, or that Christ's whole Gospel-design is, the helping forward
such a Principle, is altogether without Scripture or reason. Isa 1. 6. Tit. 1.
15. Ephesians. 4. 1^. Isa. 59. 6, 7, ^, 9, 10.
There is no man by Nature, that that has any soundness in him, ^o, neither in
Soul or Body; his understanding is darkened, his Mind and Conscience is
defiled, his Wills perverted and obstinate: There is no judgment in his goings.
Where now is the sound and healthful complexion of Soul? Let the best come to
the best, when we have mustered up all the excellencies of the Soul of man, as
man, shall naught we find there, but the lame, the blind, the defiled, the
obstinate and missed faculties thereof. And never think to evade me by saying,
the Graces of the Spirit of God are pure: for with them you have nothing to do;
your Doctrine is of the sound Complexion of Soul, the purity of the humane
Nature, a habi^ of Soul, and the holiness we lost in Adam, things a great way
off from the Spirit of Grace, or the gracious workings of the Spirit. You talk
indeed of a Divine or Godlike Nature, but this is still the same with your pure
humane Nature, or with your sound Complexion, or habit of Soul; and so must
either respect man, as he was Created in the Image or likeness of God, or else
you have palpable contradiction in this your description. But it must be
concluded, that the Divine Nature you talk of, is that, and no other then the
dictates of the humane Nature, or your feigned purity thereof; because you make
it by your words the self same; it is the purity of the humane Nature, it is a
Divine or Godlike Nature.

2. But you proceed to tell us of a Degree; it is so found and healthful a
complexion or temperature of the faculties, qualities or virtues of Soul, as
maintains in life and vigor, whatsoever is essential to it, and suffers not
any thing unnatural to mix with that which is so.

Answer. If, as was said before, there is no soundness of Soul in man, as man,
and no such thing as a purity of our Nature, abstract from that which is sin*
then where shall we find so healthful a complexion, or temperature of Soul, as
to maintain in life and vigor whatsoever is essential to it, and that
suffers not any thing unnatural to mix with that which is so?

But let us take Paul's definition of a man; Romans 3.
There is none righteous, no not one, there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they are^
together become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Their
threat is an open Sepulch^e, with their Tongues they have used deceit, the
poison of Asps is under their lips, whose Mouth is full of Cursing and
Bitterness; their feet are swift to shed Blood, destruction and misery are in
their ways, and the way of Peace they have not known, there is no fear of God
before their Eyes. I the rather give you this of Paul, then any of my own;
because it is the soundest complexion of Soul, that the Holy Ghost himself
could draw. Here is now no purity of the humane Nature, nor such sound
complexion of Soul as can keep it self from mixing with that which is contrary
to itself. And note, that this is the state of all men, and that as they stand
on themselves before God; Wherefore together, even altogether, all the men in
the World, take them in their most pure naturals, or with all the purity of
humanity, which they can make, and together, they still will be unprofitable,
and so must come short of doing good, that every mouth might be stopped, and
all the World become guilty before God, ver. 19.

3. But proceeding, you say, that this complexion is so forcible as to keep his
supreme faculty (I suppose you mean the Conscience) in its Throne, and that
brings into due subjection all his inferior ones as namely his sensual
imagination, brutish passions and affections.

Answ. These words suppose that it is within the power of a man's own Soul,
always to keep sin out of it self, and so guilt out of the Conscience; albeit
the Scripture says, that both the mind and it are defiled with the filth of
sin, in all whoever do not believe the Gospel, Tit. (...). 15.
with which belief this description me^leth not.

2. They suppose that this Conscience is perfectly clear and light, when the
Scriptures say they have the understanding darkened; yea and farther, in
despite of these your sayings of the sound complexion of Soul, of the purity of
humane Nature, and of this supreme faculty, the Scriptures teach, Ephesians. 4. 18,
19.
that man in his best estate is altogether vanity, These. 5.
that they are darkness and night, Psalm. 39. 5.
etc.

Yea, say you, this sound complexion brings into due subjection all his
inferior ones.

Answ. Here seems to be a contradiction to the former part of this description,
yea, to the Nature of the Soul it self; for you say; before it suffers not
any thing unnatural to mix it self therewith, when yet here you seem to suggest
that part, I say, even part of it self is disobedient and rebellious; It brings
into subjection all his inferior ones.

It brings into due subjection.

Answ. Due subjection is such as is everlasting, universal, perfect in Nature,
kind and manner, such as the most righteous, perfect, comprehensive Law, or
Commandment cannot object against, or find fault therewith. Here Is a Soul!
here is a pure humane Nature! here are pure dictates of a brutish beastly man,
that neither knows himself nor one title of the Word of God. But there is a
Generation that are pure in their own Eyes, Pro. 30: 12:
yet are not washed from their fil^hiness.

It is the purity of the humane Nature, engaging those in whom it resides, etc.

Answ. That is, verily in none at all; for there is no such thing in any, man
in this world, as a purity of humane Nature: we are all an unclean thing, Isa.
64: 6* Job 15. 14*
and who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Again, what is man
that he should be clean? or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be holy?
These are therefore expressions without the Testimony of the Word, arising from
your own fantasy.

It is a Divine or Godlike Nature.

Answ. Thus you seem also to fetch from the similitude or likeness of God that
was in us at out first Creation, before we sinned; but that similitude being at
best but Created, and since most unspeakably defiled, defaced and polluted with
sin; there is now, no not in the best of men, as men, any smiles, likeness and
similitude of God to be found, no such petty Divine or Godlike Nature to be
found, as you magine.

But having thus stated your holiness in its Nature and essence, you come in
the next place to tell us, under what considerations it moves a person to act,
also by what Rules and Laws it squareth its acts and doings.

First by or under what considerations it acts, and these you scatter here and
there in this your description of holiness, under these heads.

First, To act as becomes a Creature endued with a principle of reason, eyeing
the state or place in which God has set him; approving of, affecting and
complying with the Eternal Laws of righteousness, Page 6. which eternal Laws in
Page 8. you call the Divine moral Laws, those that were first written in the
hearts of men, and originally the dictates of humane Nature, etc.

Secondly, To do these, from truly generous Motives and Principles, Page 7.
such as these.

1. Because it is most highly becoming all reasonable Creatures (you might also
have added, and those unreasonable) to obey God in every thing (within their
Spheres) and as much unbecoming them to disobey him, Page 8.

2. Because it is a base thing to do unjustly, Page 11.

Now a little to touch upon all these, and then to proceed to what is behind.

First, To act and do the things of the moral Law, but as Creatures endued with
a Principle of Reason, is but to do things in our Sphere as Men, as the Beast,
the Hog or Horse does things in his, as a Beast which is at best, if it could
be attained, to act but as pure naturals, which state of man is of at infinite
distance from that, in which it is by God expected, the man must act, that does
ought that is pleasing in his fight. For

First, The qualification and consideration by you propounded, is that which is
in all men, in men simply as men, they being reasonable Creatures, and
somewhat, though qut somewhat capable of acting as such.

Secondly, This qualification is not only in, but of men; reason is of the Man
himself, even that which is as essential to him, as is that of his being
Created or made.

Thirdly, The Law also, which you call Divine, Moral and Eternal is that which
is naturally seated in the Heart, and as you your self express it, is
originally the Dictates of humane Nature, or that which Mankind does naturally
assent to, Page 11.

Now I say, that a man cannot by these Principles, and these qualifications,
please the God of Heaven, is apparent.

1. Because none of these are Faith, but without Faith it is impossible to
please him. Heb. 11. 6.

2. Because none of these is the Holy Ghost, but there is nothing accepted of
God, under a New Testament consideration, but those which are the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.

3. The Man and Principles you have stated, may be such as are utterly Ignorant
of Jesus Christ, and of all his New Testament things as such: But the Natural
man receives not the things of the Spirit of God (the things of his New
Testament) for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because
they are Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 24.

4. Your qualifications and considerations, know nothing at all of the adoption
of Sons, and of our acting and doing our Duty, as such. You only content your
self to rest within the confines of the humane Nature, acts of reason, as men
or Creatures only, or in their supposed pure, natural Principles.

And Sir, a little by way of digression; I will tell you also of our truly
Christian righteousness, both as to its original or first Principle, and also
how, or under what capacity it puts the Person that is acted by it.

First, The Principle which is laid within us, it is not the purity of the
humane Nature, 1 Cor. 6. 1^.
but of the Holy Ghost it self, which we have of God received, by believing in
the Son of God, a principle as far above yours of Humanity, as is the Heavens
above the Earth; yours being but like those of the first Adam, but ours truly
those of the second. As is the Earthly, 1 Cor. 15*
such are those that are Earthly; and as is the Heavenly, such are those that
are Heavenly.

Now whosoever has not this Principle, although he be a Creature, and also
have the Dictates of the humane Nature, yea, and also follows them, yet he is
not Christ's: If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, Rev. 8, 9.
he is none of his. Thus therefore is the Christian Principle, another from,
and far above your Heathenish Pagan one. By (...) is Spirit is the Christian
qualified with Principles, not N^^ural, but Spiritual, such as Faith, Hope,
Joy, Peace, etc. all which are the fruits of the Revelation of the forgiveness
of sins, freely by Grace, though the Redemption that it in Jesus Christ In this
Spirit and Faith we walk, Gal: 5. ^5:
by this Spirit we are led, even into the Joy and Peace of the New Testament of
our Lord; Rom: 8. 14:
wherefore our Holy Actions are the fruits of Righteousness, that is by Jesus
Christ, not by our humane Nature, or the purity of it in us; yea, they are the
fruits of the Spirit of God, the qualifications that attend the new Covenant,
and those that by the work of regeneration are brought within the bounds and
Privileges thereof. Wherefore

Secondly, The capacity that we are in, who act and do from the Heavenly
Principle; it is that of Sons, the Sons of God by adoption, as the Apostle
said; Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, Gal. 4* Rom: 8:
crying, Abba Father. And again, As many as are led by the Spirit of God they
are the Sons of God. This is a far other then is your humane description of
acting as a Creature, endued with a Principle of Reason; for here is a man acts
as a Son, endued with the Holy Spirit of God, who has before the World, was
predestined him to this Estate, by Jesus Christ to himself, As a Son
therefore, Ephesians. 1. 4, 4* ^.
the Christian acts and does, because he is endued with that high and heavenly
Principle, mentioned before, by which Principle this man has received a new
Heart, a new Spirit, a new understanding, a good Conscience, so made by Faith
in the blood of the Lord Jesus: Heb. 10.
Thus being made again anew, and another man; 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 16.
he acts from a new, and another Principle then yours; a Principle as far
beyond, and above you, as is a Man above a Bruit, and as is Grace above Nature.

Thirdly, As the Christian acts and does from a better Principle, and under a
better capacity or consideration then that you have described; so (to allude to
your own notion) the first Principles by which they receive this Spirit and
Adoption, are not those Principles of Morals, or those originally dictates of
humane Nature; but it is through the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3. by
which we understand, that the Son of God became a Man, dyed for our sins, has
saved us from the curse of God, and accounted us to be the righteousness of God
in him; this being heard with the Gospel, and a New Testament- hearing, the
Holy Ghost forthwith possesses us, by the glorious working whereof we are
helped through the Son, to call the God of Heaven, our Father.

Now thus being made free from sin, by the only Faith of Jesus Christ, we have
our fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. Rom: 6. 22


And here come in those reasonable conclusions, which you would make the very
radicals of Christianity, they being only remote, and after conclusions, drawn
from the forementioned Mercy of God, viz. from predestination, Calling,
Adoption, and Justification by Christ's Blood, Romans 6. 22, 2*
while we in our selves, are sinners. I say these are the things which Paul
endeavored to provoke the Romans, Philippians and Colossians to an Holy
Conversation by.

1. To the Romans, I beseech you therefore, says he, by the Mercies of God;
(What Mercies? Why those of Election, Redemption, Calling, Justification, and
Adoption mentioned in the foregoing Chapters) that you present your Bodies a
living Sacrifice, Holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service,
Rev. 12. 1.

2. To the Philippians, If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, Phil. 2. 1.

3. To the Colossians, If you be risen with Christ, seek those things that are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God; set your affections on
things above, not on things of the Earth; for you are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in Glory. Now mark; mortify therefore, therefore!
wherefore? why, because they were risen with Christ; because they should appear
at the end of this World with Christ himself in Glory; therefore mortify the
deeds of the Body, or our Members that are upon the Earth, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.

These Sir are the Motives by which we Christians act; because we are forgiven,
because we are Sons, and if Sons, then Heirs, and so we act; but to speak to
this more anon.

Perhaps you will say I deal not fairly with you, because you treat, as of
moral, so of Gospel or New Testament Laws.

But to that I will answer at present, that in this description of your Holy
Principle, which is the Foundation of your Book, whether the Laws be Natural or
Spiritual, moral or of Grace, the Principle by which you do them, is no other
then the Principle of Nature, the dictates of the humane Nature; and so such as
can by no means reach the Doctrines of the Gospel any farther then to make a
Judgment of them, by that wisdom which is enmity with God, as will farther be
seen in my progress through your Book.

Indeed you make mention of Divine Laws, and that under two Heads.

1. Such as are of an indispensible and Eternal Obligation, as those purely
moral.

2. Such which you call positive precepts, in themselves of an indifferent
Nature, and absolutely considered are neither good nor evil. Of those of this
kind that we have under the Gospel, you say you know but three, viz, That of
coming to God by Christ, and the Institutions of Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Page 7 and Page 9.

So then, although you talk of Gospel positive Laws, and particularly that of
coming to God by Christ; yet those which you call first Principles of Morals,
are of higher concern with you, and more indispensible by far then this, this
being a thing of an indifferent Nature, and in it self absolutely considered,
is neither good nor evil; but the other is the life of the matter. But a little
to gather you up.

The Morals, say you, are indispensible, and good in themselves; but that of
coming to God by Christ, a thing indifferent, and in it self neither good nor
evil. Wherefore though in this your description, you talk of confirming to all
those good and practical Principles, that are made known either by Revelation,
Nature, or the use of Reason, yet in this your obedience you reckon coming to
God by Christ, but an act of a very indifferent Nature, a thing if done not
good in it self, neither evil in it self, should a man leave it undone; and so
consequently a man may have in him the ground and essentials of Christianity
without; it may be saved, and go to Heaven without it: for this I say,
whatsoever is of an indifferent Nature in it self, is not essential to the
Christian Religion; but may or may not be done without the hazard of Eternal
Salvation; but say you, this of coming to God by Christ, is one of the positive
precepts, Page 9. which are in themselves things indifferent, and neither good
nor evil: therefore not of the substance of Christianity.

But Sir, where learned you this new Doctrine, as to reckon coming to God by
Christ, a thing of so indifferent a Nature, a thing not good in it self, but
with respect to certain Circumstances, Page 7. Had you said this of Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord; I could with some allowance have born your words, but
to count coming to God by Christ a thing iudifferent in it self, is a blasphemy
that may not be born by Christians; it being too high a contempt of the Blood,
and too great a disgrace to the Person of the Lord, the King of Glory, of which
more hereafter, but to return.

The intent of this your description is to set before us these two things.

1. What are the essentials of the Rule of that Holiness, which by the Gospel
we are immediately obliged to, if we would be justified in the sight of God.

2. What are the principles by which we act, when we do these works aright.

For the first you tell us, they are the first Principles of Morals, such as
are self evident, and therefore not capable of being properly demonstrated; as
being no less knowable, and easily assented to, then any proposition that may
be brought for the proof of them, Page 8. Such as are self-evident or evident
of themselves; to what? To us as men that know the Principles of Reason, and
that are as easily assented to as any proposition; such as may be as easily
known, as we know there is a day or night, Winter and Summer, or any other
thing that may be brought for the proof of them. This Law therefore is none
other, then that mentioned in Romans 2. 14, 15. which is the Law of our Nature,
or that which was implanted in us in the day of our Creation, and therefore is
said to be our selves, even Nature it self, 1 Cor. 11. 14.

Secondly, the Principle, say you, by which we act, and in the strength of
which we do this Law, it is the Principle of Reason, or a reasonable compliance
with this Law written in our Hearts, and originally dictates of humane Nature,
etc. which certain Principle, say you, is this, To count it most highly
becoming all reasonable Creatures, to obey God in every thing and as much
disbecoming them, in any thing to disobey him, Page 8.

The sum is; this your Holiness both in root and act is no other then what is
common to all the men on Earth; I mean so common as that for the first, is in
their Nature, as the second is also part of themselves, they being Creatures
whose prime or principal distinction from other, consists in that they are
reasonable, and such as have reason as a thing essential to them; wherefore the
excellency that you have discoursed of, is none other then the excellency and
goodness that is of this World, such as in the first Principles of it is common
to Heathens, Pagans, Turks, Infidels: and that as evidently dictates to those
that have not heard the Gospel (I mean as to the Nature the good and evil) as
it does in them that sit under the sound thereof; and is the self same which
our late ungodly Heriticks the Quakers have made such a stir to promote and
exal^, only in the description thereof you seem more ingenious then they: for
whereas they erroniously call it Christ, the light of Christ, Faith, Grace,
Hope, the Spirit, the Word that is nigh, etc. you give it the names due
thereto, viz. A complexion or complication and combination of all the virtue of
the Soul, the humane Nature, the dictates of it, the Principles of reason, such
as are selfevident, than which there is nothing Mankind does naturally assent
to, Page 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. only here as I have said, you glorify your errors
also, with Names any Titles that are not to be found, but in your own deluded
Brains: As that the virtues of the Souls can keep themselves incommixed, that
there is yet in us the purity of the humane Nature, of such a disposition, that
can both by light and power give a man to see, and powerfully incline him to,
and bring him under the government of all those good and practical principles,
that are made known either by Revelation, Nature, or the use of Reason.

But I say, these principles thus stated by you, being the principles, and the
goodness of this World, and such as have not faith, but the law, not the holy
Ghost, but humane nature in them; they cannot be those which you affirm, was or
is the design, the great, the only, and ultimate design of Christ, or his
Gospel to promote, and propagate in the World; neither with respect to our
justification before God from the curse; neither with respect to the workings
of his Spirit, and the faith of Jesus in our hearts, the true Gospel or
evangelical Holiness.

First, It is not the righteousness that justifies us before God from the
curse; because it is that which is properly our own; and acted and managed by
principles of our own, arising originally in the roots of it, from our own.
There is the righteousness of Men, and the righteousness of God: that which is
the righteousness of Men, is that which we do work from matter and principles
of our own; but that which is the righteousness of God, is that which is
wrought from matter and principles purely Divine, and of the Nature of God.
Again, that which is our own righteousness, is that which is wrought in and by
our own persons as Men; but that which is the righteousness of God, is that
which is wrought in and by the second person in the Trinity, as God and Man in
one person; and that resideth only in that person of the Son. I speak now of
the righteousness by which we stand just before God, from the curse of the Law.
Now this righteousness of ours, our own righteousness, the Apostle always
opposes to the righteousness of God, saying, They going about to establish
their OWN righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God. Romans 19. 3.
Farther, This righteousness of our own, Paul counts loss and dogs-meat, Phil.
37, 8.
in comparison of that other, far more glorious righteousness, which he calls
as it is in truth, the righteousness of God, which as I said but now, resideth
in the person of the Son. Therefore says Paul, I cast away my own
righteousness, and do count it loss, and but dung, that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith. The righteousness therefore, that is our own, that arises from matter
and principles of our own, (such as that which you have described) justifies
us not before God from the curse.

Secondly, The righteousness that you have described, justifies us not, as
before, because it is the righteousness which is of the moral law, that is, it
is wrought by us, as walking in the law. Now it mattereth not, whether you
respect the law in its first principles, or as it is revealed in the table of
the ten Commandments, they are in nature but one, and the same, and their
substance and matter is written in our Hearts, as we are Men. Now this
righteousness, the Apostle casts away, as was showed before; not having mine
own righteousness, (says he) which is of the law; why? Because the
righteousness that ^aveth us from the wrath of God, is the righteousness of
God; and so a righteousness that is without the law. But now the righteousness
of God without the law is manifest, Romans 3. 21, 22, 23.
being witnessed by the law and the prophets, even the righteousness of God,
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.
Romans 3. The righteousness of God without the law; the righteousness of Christ
who is naturally God; wherefore such a righteousness, as was accomplished by
him, that was Lord, and the very God of the law; whose nature was infinite, and
not that which the law could command or condemn; neither was the command of the
law, the great and principal argument with him, no, not in its first and
highest principles, to do or continue to do it; but even that which the law
commanded of us, that he did, not by the law, but by that spirit of life, that
eternal Spirit, and Godhead, which was essential to his very being: He did
naturally and infinitely that which the law required of us, from higher, and
more mighty principles then the law could require of him: for I should reckon
it a piece of prodigious blasphemy, to say, that the Law could command his God,
the Creature, his Lord and Creator: but this Lord God, Jesus Christ, even he
has accomplished righteousness, even righteousness that is without, that is
above, higher, and better then that of the Law: and that is the righteousness
that is given to, and put upon all them that believe. Wherefore the Lord Jesus
Christ, in his most blessed life, was neither prompted to actions of holiness,
nor managed in them, by the purity of humane nature, or those you call first
principles of morals, or as he was simply a reasonable Creature; but being the
natural Son of God, truly, and essentially, eternal as the Father; by the
eternal Spirit, his Godhead, was his manhood governed, and acted, and
spirited to do and suffer. Heb. 9. 14.
He through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God; which
offering respects not only his act of dying, but also that by which he was
capacitated to dye without spot in his sight; which was the infinite Dignity,
and Sinlessness of his person; and the perfect justice of his Actions. Now this
person, thus acting, is approved of, or justified by the Law to be good: for if
the righteousness of the Law be good, which Law is but a creature, the
righteousness of the Lord, the God of this Law, must needs be much more good;
wherefore here is the Law, and its perfection swallowed up, even as the light
of a Candle, or Star is swallowed up by the light of the Sun. Thus then is the
believer made, not the righteousness of the Law, but the righteousness of God
in Christ; 2 Cor. 5. 21.
because Christ Jesus who is the righteousness of the Christian, did walk in
this world, in, and under the Law; not by legal and humane principles, which
are the excellencies of men, but in, and by those that are divine, even such as
were, and are of his own nature, and the essence of his eternal Godhead. This
is the righteousness without the Law, accomplished by a person, and principles,
far otherwise, then is he, or those you make description of; and therefore
yours cannot be that, by which we stand just before the justice of God without
the Law; Now if it be a righteousness without the Law, then it is a
righteousness without Men, a righteousness that cannot be found in the World;
For take away the Law, the rule, and you take away, not only the
righteousness, but that by which men, as men, work righteousness in the World:
Mine own righteousness which is of the Law. The righteousness then by which a
man must stand just in the sight of God from the curse, is not to be found in
men, nor in the Law, but in him, and him only, who is greater, and also,
without the Law; For albeit, for our sakes he became under the Law. even to the
curse and displeasure of God; yet the principles by which he walked in the
World to Godward, they were neither humane, nor legal, but heavenly, and done
in the Spirit of the Son: Wherefore it is not the righteousness you have
described, by which we stand just before God.

Thirdly, The righteousness you have described, cannot be that which justifies
us before God, because of its imperfections, and that both with respect to the
principle, and the power with which it is managed: For though you have talked
of a sound complexion of Soul, the purity of the humane nature, and that with
this addition of power, as to be able to keep it self incommixt with that which
is not of it self; yet we Christians know, and that by the words of God, that
there is in man, as man, now no soundness at all, but from the crown of the
head, to the sole of the foot, Botches, and Boyls, Isa. 1. 6.
Putrifactions, and Sores. We are ALL an unclean thing; and our righteousness,
as filthy vlcerous rags. Isa. 64. 6.
If there had been a Law given that could have given life, verily, Gal. 3. 21.
righteousness should have been by the Law. Could a man perform the Law to the
liking of the justice of the eternal majesty, then would the Law give life to
that man; but because of the perfection of an infinite justice, and the
weakness and unprofitableness of the Law through our flesh, Romans 8. 3,
therefore, though you speak yet farther of the excellency of your sound
complexion, and of the purity of the humane nature, you must fly from your
self, to another righteousness for life, or at the last stick in the jaws of
Death and everlasting Desperation. For by the works of the Law shall no flesh
be justified. Gal. 2. 16.

It is therefore no better then error, thus to ascribe to poor man, that has
drunk iniquity like water, a soundness of soul, a purity of humane nature.
Wherefore Jude says of you, and of all such naturalists, That even in the
things that you know naturally, as the bruit, in them you corrupt your selves.
Jude 10. even in the very principles, the first or original dictates of your
nature, or humanity. There is none that understands or is good, therefore
there is none that does good, no not one: that is, none as continuing in a
natural state; none by the power or principles of nature; for he means here,
in your own sense, as men by natural principles have to do with the justice of
the Law.

Fourthly, The righteousness which you have described, cannot be that which
justifies us before God, because it is that which is not of faith. The Law is
not of faith, but the man that does them shall live in them. Gal. 3. The
Apostle also in the 10 th. Chapter of the Romans tells us, that the
righteousness that is completed by doing the Law is one, and another, besides
the righteousness of faith. For faith in the justification of a sinner from the
curse and wrath of God, respects only the mercy of God, and forgiveness of
sins for the sake of Christ. God for Christ's sake has forgiven him, that is
enabled to believe, that is, trust to, and venture the eternal concern of his
soul upon the righteousness that is no where to be found, but in the person of
the Son of God. For there is justice more then answerable to all the demands of
the Law, and the requirements of the eternal justice of God, and he is our
justice; He is made unto us of God, righteousness, or justice; that is the
righteousness or justice that is in him; is by God accounted the man's that
shall accept thereof by faith, that he might be made the justice or
righteousness of God in him. For the righteousness that saves a sinner from
damnation, must be equal to that in the eternal Deity: but where can that be
found but in him that is naturally God, as is indeed the Son of the Father; in
him therefore, and not in the Law, there is a righteousness fit for faith to
apply to. Besides, the Law is not, neither can be the object of faith to men;
for that which is the object of faith (I speak now as to justifying
righteousness) it must be a righteousness already completed, and as I said, a
righteousness to be received, and accepted, being now perfected and offered,
and given to us by the kindness and mercy of God: but a man may believe long
enough in the Law, before that performs for him a perfect righteousness. The
Law can work nothing unless it be wrath. Romans 4. No thou must work BY, and not
believe IN the Law. Besides, all that comes out of the mouth of the Law is,
Gal. 3. 13.
Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing which is written in the
book of the Law to do them; which no man is capable of doing, so as to escape
the curse by doing, that has once, or first transgressed the same. Wherefore
it is a vain thing, yea an horrible wickedness in you, thus to abuse the Law,
and the weakne^s of man, by suggesting that the only, the ultimate, or grand
design of Christ Jesus was, or is, the promoting of a righteousness by the Law,
that is performed by humane principles in us.

I could double, yea ten times double the number of these arguments against
you, but I will pass from this to the second thing. The righteousness you have
described, is not the true Gospel inward holiness.

I told you before, that the principles which you have described, are not
evangelical principles; and now I will add, that as they are not such in
themselves, so neither do they fetch in, or obtain by our adhering to them,
those things which alone can make, or work in the Soul, those truly Gospel
inward acts of holiness.

There are three things which are essential to the inward Gospel holiness; of
which as your description is utterly destitute, so, neither can they by that be
obtained, or come into the heart.

1. The holy Ghost. 2. Faith in Christ. 3. A new Heart, and a new Spirit.
Without these three, there is no such things as Gospel holiness in Man, as
before I have also hinted at. But now as there is none of these three found in
your description of inward Holiness; so neither can you, or other, by all your
inclinations, either to those you call first principles of natural reason, or
the dictates of humane nature, obtain or fetch into the Soul, the least dram of
that which is essential, to that which is indeed according to the Gospel
description of inward Gospel holiness: as will further be manifest in this that
follows.

1. The holy Ghost is not obtained by your description, that consisting only in
principles of Nature, and in putting forth it self in acts of Civility and
Morality. When the Apostle would convince the bewitched Galathians, that your
Doctrine which was also the Doctrine of the false Apostles, was that, which
instead of helping forward, did hinder, and pervert the Gospel of Christ; he
applies himself to them in this manner. This only would I learn of you; Gal.
3. 2, 3.
Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith?
By the works of the Law, that is, by putting of your principles into practice,
Nay, may I not add, by putting of your principles into practice, by a more
bright, and clear rule, then in the beginning of your description is inserted
by you; for the Law as written and engraven in stones, with the addition of all
the Mosaical precepts, Romans 3: 1, 2, 3.
was a more ample, and full discovery of the mind of God, then can be obtained
by your virtues of Soul, your purity of humane nature, or the first principles
of morals, as they are written in the heart of man; and originally dictates of
humane nature. Yet by these, by following these, by laboring to live up to the
light of these, their own experience told them, that they neither could, nor
did obtain the enjoyment of the holy Ghost; but that rather their now declining
the word of Faith, by which indeed they receive it at first (whatever pretenses
of holiness, and godliness were the arguments to prevail with them so to do)
was in truth none other but the very witchcraft, and enchantments of the Devil.

Farther, The Apostle sets this your Spirit and Principles; and that which
indeed is the Spirit of God, in aline Diametrically opposite one against
another; yea the receiving of the one, opposes the receiving of the other. Now
we have received, says he, NOT the Spirit of the World (that is, your Spirit,
and principles of humanity) to walk by it, or live in it; but the Spirit which
is of God, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God. 1 Cor.
2. 12. But what is the Spirit of the World? He tells us in the verse before, it
is the Spirit of a man; which Solomon calls, the Candle of the Lord; that which
searches all the inward parts of the Belly. Prove. 20. 27. by humane
principles, good motions to moral duties, workings of reason, dictates of
nature to obey God as Creator. These things flow from the Spirit of a man,
which is the Spirit of all the World. They that preach, or speak by this
Spirit; they preach or speak of the World, of the virtues of the World; 1 John
4. 5.
and the World, the whole World hears them, or know in themselves what they
say.

Now when this Spirit is received, embraced and followed, as the Spirit that is
of God, then it must be branded with the mark of the Spirit of error, and of
Antichrist; because the act in so doing, is most wicked; yea, and Christ
himself is made head against, by it.

But I say, the holy Ghost is not obtained by these principles, nor by the
pursuit of them.

2. Faith is not obtained by the pursuit of your principle; but by hearing of
another doctrine, He that presses men to look to, and live by the purity of
humane nature, principles of natural reason, or by the Law, as written in the
heart, or Bible; he sets the word of Faith out of the World; for these
doctrines are as opposite, as the Spirits I spoke of before; For Moses
describes the righteousness that is of the Law, that the man that does these
things shall live by them. Now he that receives this Law, to do, and live by;
he has set up, and is in pursuit of a doctrine of another nature, then that
which is called the righteousness of faith; that being such, as for
justification, and deliverance from the curse, makes no mention at all of
hearing the Law, or of doing good works; but of hearing of the mercy of God, as
extended to sinners; and of its coming to us through the death, and
resurrection of Christ Jesus. The righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on
this wise; say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven (that is to
bring Christ down from above) or who shall descend into the deep, (that is to
bring up Christ again from the dead) but what says it? The word is nig^h thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is the word of faith which we preach;
That if thou shall confess with thy m^uth the Lord Jesus; and shall believe in
thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Romans
10. 5* 9. This then is the doctrine of faith; or the righteousness with which
faith has to do. Now as old covenant^ works, are begotten in men by the
doctrine of works; so faith is begotten by the doctrine of faith. Therefore
after he had said, faith comes by hearing; ^e insinuates it to be the hearing
the preaching of the Gospel of peace (peace by the blood of the cross) and the
glad tidings of good things, ( ver. 14, 15, 16, 17.) of good things promised
for the sake of the Lord Jesus; not for the sake of good deeds done of us, by
humane principles, or the dictates of our nature.

Faith, Then the second essential, comes into the heart, not by the preaching,
or the practice of your principles; but by another, a higher, and far more
heavenly doctrine. And hence the Apostle completely puts the difference betwixt
the worker of good works in the Spirit of the Law; and the believer that takes
hold of grace by Christ, that he may be saved thereby. The one he calls Them
that are of the works of the Law: the other, Gal. 3.
They which are of Faith. This being done, he tells us, that as they differ in
the principles, to wit, of Faith; and Works, so they shall differ in
conclusion: For the Law is not of faith; the promise is only made to faith,
therefore they only that are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

3. The third essential is, a new Heart, and a new Spirit or mind, and this
also comes not by your principle, that being but the old covenant that gendreth
to bondage, and that holds its Ismaels under the curse for ever: there comes no
new heart by the Law, nor new Spirit. It is by the new Covenant, even the
Gospel, that all things are made now. Jer. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8. 2. 2 Cor.
5. 17, 18, 19.

The Apostle after a large discourse of the two ministrations, and their
excellencies. (2 Cor. 3.) tell us that the heart is nothing changed, so long as
it abides in the works of the Law; but remains blind, and ignorant;
Nevertheless, says he, when it shall turn (from the Law) to the Lord, the vail
shall be taken away. But what is it to turn (from the Law) to the Lord? Why
even to leave, and forsake your Spirit, and principles, and works from those
principles; and fly to the grace, and merits; the glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Now when the heart is turned to Christ, then the vail of Moses is taken
off; wherefore then the soul with OPEN face, beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, is changed from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.
2 C^r. 3. 14, 18.

Obj^ct. But it seems a paradox to many, That a man should live to the Law,
that is devote himself to the works of the ten Commandments, the most perfect
rule of life; and yet not be counted one changed, or new.

Answ. Though it seems an untruth, yet it is most true; That by the works of
the Law, no heart is made new, no man made new. A man from principle of nature,
and reason, (which principles are of himself, and as old) may give up himself
to the goodness of the Law: Yet these principles are so far off from being new,
that they are as old as Adam in Paradise; and come into the world with all the
children of men. To which principles the Law, or the first principles of
morals, so equally suit, that as you have said, page 8. they are selfevident;
then which there is nothing ma^-kind does more naturally assent unto, page 11.
Now Nature is no new principle, but an old; even our own, and of our selves.
The Law is no new principle, but old, and one with our selves (as also you well
have called it) first written in men's hearts, and originally dictates of humane
nature. Let a man then be as devout, as is possible for the Law, and the
holiness of the Law. Yet if the principles from which he acts; be but the habit
of Soul, the purity (as he feigns) of his own nature; principles of natural
reason, or the dictates of humane nature; all this is nothing else but the old
Gentleman in his Holy-day-cloaths; the old Heart, the old Spirit; the Spirit of
the man, not the Spirit of Christ is here.

And hence the Apostle, when he would show us a man alive, or made a new man
indeed; as he talks of the holy Ghost and faith, so he tells us such^ are
dead to the Law, to the Law, as a Law of works; to the Law as to principles of
nature, Wherefore my brethen you are also become dead to the Law (the moral
Law, and the ceremonial Law) by the body of Christ, that you should be married
to another (another then the Law) even to him, who is raised from the dead,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God. Romans 7. 4.

Ye are become dead to the Law: dead to the Law! Why? That you should be
married to another: Married to another! Why? That you should bring forth fruit
unto God. But does not a man bring forth fruit unto God, that walks orderly
according to the ten Commandments? NO, if he do it before faith in the Spirit
of a man, by the dictates of humane nature, respecting the Law, as that, by the
obeying of which, he must obtain acceptance with God. This is bringing forth
fruit unto himself; for all that he does, he does it as a man, as a Creature,
from principles natural, and of himself, his own and for none other then
himself; and therefore he serves in an old Spirit, the oldness of the letter,
and for himself. But now, (that is, ye^ being dead to the Law, and married to
Christ) that (the Law) being dead; by which (while in our selves) we were held;
Now we are delivered from that law, both as to its curse and impositions; as it
stands a Law of works in the heart of the world; we serve in newness of the
Spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter, v. 6. A man must first then, be
dead to your principles, both of nature, and the Law; if he will serve in a new
Spirit, if he would bring forth fruit unto God. Wherefore your description of
the principle of holiness in man, and also the principles by which this
holiness is put forth by him into righteous acts; they are such as are
altogether void of the true essentials of inward Gospel-holiness, and
righteousness.

But there is one, thing more in this description, or rather effect thereof,
which I shall also inquire into: And that is saying, As it was the errand of
Christ to effect our deliverance out of that sinful state we had brought our
selves into: so to put us again into possession of that holiness which we HAD
LOST. page 12. The proof of this position is now your next business: that is,
if I understand your learning, the remaining part of your book, which
consists of well nigh 300 pages, is spent for proof thereof; which I doubt
not but effectually to confute with less then 300 lines. Only first by the
way, I would have my reader to take notice that in this last Clause. [ to put
us again into possession of that holiness which we had lost] is the sum of all
this large description of his holiness in the foregoing pages: that is, the
holiness and righteousness that Mr. Fowler has been describing; and adds, that
Christ's whole business when he came into the world was, as to effect our
deliverance from sin; so to put us again in possession of that holiness which
we had lost. The holiness therefore that here he contendeth for, is that, and
only that which was in Adam before the fall, which he lost by transgression;
and we by transgressing in him. A little therefore to inquire into this, if
perhaps his reader and mine, may come to a right understanding of things.

First then, Adam before the fall, even in his best and most sinless state, was
but a pure natural man, consisting of body and soul; these (to use your own
terms) were his pure essentials: In this man's heart, page 11:
God also did write the Law; that is, (as you term them) the first principles
of morals. This then was the state of Adam, he was a pure natural man; page 8:
made by God sinless; all the faculties of his Soul, and members of his body
were clean. Eccle. 7:
God made man upright. But he made him not then a Spiritual man; The first Adam
was made a living Soul, howbeit that was not first which was Spiritual: 1 Cor.
15:
but that which was natural, and afterward that which is Spiritual. The first
man is of the earth, earthy. 1 Cor. 15* A living Soul he was; yet but a natural
man, even in his first and best estate: but earthly, when compared to Christ;
or with them that believe in Christ. So then, the holiness of Adam in his last
estate, even that which he LOST, and we in him, it was none other, then that
which was natural, even the sinless-state of a natural man. This holiness then
was not of the nature of that, which has for its root the holy Ghost; for of
that we read not at all in him, he only was endued with a living Soul; his
holiness then could not be Gospel, nor that which is a branch of the second
covenant: his acts of righteousness, were not by the operations of the Spirit
of Grace, but the dictates of the Law in his own natural heart. But the Apostle
when he treats of the Christian inherent holiness; first excluding that in
Adam, as earthly; he tells us, it is such as is in Christ: As is the earthly,
such are they, that are earthly; and as is the heavenly such are they that are
heavenly. Let then those that are the Sons of Adam, in the state of nature as
he, though not so pure, and spotless as he, be reckoned to bear his image and
similitude: but let them that are the children of Christ, though not so pure as
he, bear the image and similitude of Christ; Romans 8. 29.
for they are conformable to the image of the Son of God. The holiness
therefore that was in Adam, being but that which was natural, earthly, and not
of the holy Ghost, cannot be that which Christ came into the world to give us
possession of.

Secondly, Adam in his best, and most sinless state, was but a type of figure:
Rom: 5. 14:
The figure of him that was to come. A type in what? A type or figure
doubtless, in his sinless and holy estate; a type and figure of the holiness of
Christ: But if Christ should come from heaven, to put us in possession of this
sinless holiness that was in Adam, or that we lost in him: To what more would
his work amount, then to put us into the possession of a natural, figurative,
shadowish, righteousness or holiness. But this he never intended; therefore it
is not the possessing of his people with that holiness, that was the great
errand Christ came into the world upon.

Thirdly, The holiness and righteousness that was in (and that we lost by) Adam
before the fall; was such as stood in, and was to be managed by his natural
perfect compliance with a covenant of works. For, Do not this sin and die, were
the terms that was from God to Adam. But Christ at his coming brings in
another, a better a blessed Covenant of Grace; and likewise possesses his
Children, with the Holiness, and Privileges of that Covenant; Not with Adams
heart nor Adams mind; but a new Heart, a new Spirit, a new Principle to act by;
and walk in a new Covenant. Therefore the Holiness that was in Adam before, or
that we lost in him by the Fall, could not be the Holiness that Christ at his
Coming made it his great or only business to put us in possession of.

Fourthly, The Holiness that was in Adam before, and that we lost in him by the
Fall, was such as might stand with perfect ignorance of the Mediation of Jesus
Christ: For Christ was not made known to Adam as a Savior, before that Adam
was a Sinner; neither needed he at all to know him to be his Mediator, before
he knew he had offended. Genesis 3.
But Christ did not come-into the World to establish us in, or give us
possession of such Holiness as might stand with perfect Ignorance of his
Mediatorship. No; The Holiness that we Believers have, and the righteous acts
that we fulfil^, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22.
they come to us, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
and are done by us, through the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, and of his being
the Messiah promised.

Fifthly, The Holiness that was in Adam, was neither given him through the
Promise, neither encouraged by the Promise. Adam had no promise to possess him
with a Principle of holiness; it came to him by Creation: neither had he any
promise to strengthen or encourage him in Holiness. All he ^id was Instructions
concerning his Duty, and Death threatened if he did it not: Genesis 2. 15, 16, 17.
But Christ came not, to give us possession of an holiness or Righteousness,
that came to us by our Creation, without a Promise; and that has no promise to
encourage us to continue therein; but of an Holiness that comes to us by the
best of Promises, and that we are encouraged to by the best of Promises.
Therefore it was not his great Errand when he came from Heaven to Earth, to put
us in possession of that Promiseless holiness that Adam had before, and that
was lost in him by the Fall.

Lastly, In a word; The Holiness that Adam had before, and that we lost in him
by the Fall; it was a natural shadowish old Covenant, promiseless holiness;
such as stood and might he walked in, while he stood perfectly ignorant of the
Mediator Christ. Wherefore it is rather the Design of your Apollo the Devil,
whom in Page 101. you bring forth to applaud your Righteousness; I say; it is
rather his Design then Christ, to put men upon an endeavor after a possession
of that: For that which is truly Evangelical, is the Spiritual, Substantial,
New Covenant, promised holiness; that which comes to us by, and stands in
the Spirit, Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God, not that which we lost in
Adam. Wherefore the Song which there you learnt of the Devil, is true, in the
sense he made it, and in the sense for which you bring it; which is, to beget
in men, the highest esteem of their own humane nature; and to set up this
natural, shadowish, promiseless, ignorant holiness, in opposition to that which
is truly Christ's.

To dwell in Heaven does not more please him, then
Within the Souls of Pious mortal Men.
This is the Song; but you find it not in Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, but
among the Heathens who were his Disciples; and who were wont to enquire at his
mouth, and learn of him.

Thus have I Ra^^d the foundation of your Book, even by overthrowing the
Holiness, and Righteousness, which by you is set up, as that which is the only
true Gospel, and Evangelical. Wherefore it remains, that the rest of your
Book, viz. whatever therein is brought, and urged for the proof of this your
Description of Holiness, etc. it is but the abuse of Christ, of Scripture, and
Reason; it is but a wresting and corrupting of the Word of God, both to your
own destruction, and them that believe you.

But to pass this, and to come to some other passages in your Book; And first
to that in Page 5 th. where you say, The Holiness, which is the Design of the
Religion of Christ Jesus, is not such as is subjected in any thing without us;
or is made ours by a mere external, or outward application, etc.

1. These words secretly smite at the Justification that comes by the
imputation of that most glorious Righteousness that alone resideth in the
Person of the Lord Jesus; Answ.
and that is made ours by an act of eternal Grace, we resting upon it by the
Faith of Jesus.

2. But if the Holiness of which you speak, be not subjected to any thing
without us, then it is not of all that fullness which it pleased the Father
should dwell in Christ: For the Holiness and Righteousness, even the inward
Holiness that is in Saints, it is none other then that which dwells in the
Person of the Son of God in Heaven: Neither does any man partake of, or enjoy
the least measure thereof, but as he is united by Faith to this Son of God, 1 John 2* 8.
The thing is as true in him, in us; in him as the Head, and without measure;
and is originally seated in him, Joh. 1. 16.
not in us. Of his fullness have we all (Saints) received, and grace for grace.
Wherefore the holiness that has its original from us; from the purity of the
humane nature (which is the thing you aim at) and that originally, as you term
it, is the dictates thereof, is the Religion of the Socinians, Quakers, etc.
and not the Religion of Jesus Christ.

And now I will come to your indifferent things, viz. those which you call,
positive Precepts; things, say you, of an indifferent nature; and absolutely
considered, are neither good nor evil; but are capable of becoming so; only by
reason of certain Circumstances: Of these positive indifferent Precepts, you
say, you know but three in the Gospel; but three that are purely so viz. That
of coming to God by Christ, the Institutions of Baptism, and the Lords Supper.
This we have in Page 7. and 9.

1. These words, as I hinted before, Answ.
are highly derogatory to the Lord the King of Glory, and trample as much upon
the Blood of the Son of God, as words can likely do.

For first, If coming to God by Christ, be in it self but an Indifferent thing,
then, as I also hinted before, it is not of the substance of Christianity; but
a man may be truly a Christian without it; may be saved, and go to heaven
without it; This is in truth the Consequence of your words: for things purely
of an indifferent nature, do not in themselves either make or mar the
Righteousness that justifies us from the Curse before God. Wherefore by your
Argument, if a man remain ignorant of that positive Precept, of coming to God
by Christ; he remains ignorant but of an Indifferent thing, a thing that in
its self is neither good nor evil, and therefore not essentially material to
his Faith or justifying Righteousness.

2. An indifferent thing in it self is next to nothing, neither good nor evil,
then but a thing betwixt them both.

Then is the Blood of the Lord Jesus, in it self, of no value at all; nor Faith
in him, of it self, any more then a things of ^ought; their virtue and goodness
only depends upon^ certain Circumstances that make them so? For the
indifferency of the thing lies not simply in coming to God, but in coming to
him by Christ: Coming otherwise to God, even in this man's eyes, being the All
in All; but in this coming, in coming to him by Christ, there lies the
indifferency. I marvel what injury the Lord Jesus has done this man, that he
should have such indifferent thought of coming to God by him?

But has he no better thoughts of his own good deeds, which are by the Law?
Yes doubtless, for those (says he) are of an indispensible, and eternal
obligation, which were first written in men's hearts, and originally dictates of
humane nature. page* 8. Mark, Not a dictate of humane nature, or necessary
conclusion on deduction from it, is of an indifferent, but of an indispensible;
not of a transient, but of an eternal obligation. It is only going to God by
Christ, and two other things, that he finds in the Gospel, that of
themselves, are of an indifferent nature.

But how indifferent Even as indifferent in it self, as the blood of a silly
Sheep, or the ashes of an Heifer; for these are his very words. SVCH (that is
such ordinances as in themselves are of an indifferent nature) were all the
Injunctions and Prohibitions of the Ceremonial Law; and some few SUCH we have
under the Gospel. page 7. Then in page 9. ^he tells you what these positive
Precepts under the Gospel or things indifferent are, THAT of going to God by
Christ, is one; and the other two, are Institutions of Baptism; and the Lords
Supper. SVCH therefore as were the Ceremonies of the Law, such (even) SVCH
(says he) is that of going to God by Christ, etc.

Wherefore he that shall lay no more stress upon the Lord Jesus to come to God
by, then this man does, would lay as much (were the old Ceremonies in force)
upon a silly Sheep, as upon the Christ of God. For these are all alike,
positive Precepts, such as were the Ceremonies of the Law, things in themselves
neither good nor evil, but absolutely considered; of an indifferent nature,

So that to come to God by Christ, is reckoned, of it self, by him, a thing of
a very indifferent nature, and therefore this man cannot do it* but with a very
indifferent heart; his great; and most substantial coming to God must needs be
by some other way: Joh. 10. 1.
But why should this THIEF love thus to Clamber, and seek to go to God by other
Means; such which he reckons of a more dispensible nature, and eternal;
seeing Christ only (as indifferent as he is) is the only way to the Father. I
am the Way (says he) the Truth, and the Life; No man comes to the Father but
by me. If he be the only Way, then there is none other; if he be thus the
Truth, then is all other the Lie; and if he be here the Life, then is all other
the Death; let him call them indispensible and eternal never so often.

So then, how far off this man's Doctrine is, of sinning against the Holy Ghost,
let him that is wise consider it. For if coming to God by Christ, be in it
self, but a thing indifferent, and only made a Duty upon the account of
certain Circumstances: then to come to God by Christ is a duty incumbent upon
us only by reason of certain Circumstances, not that the thing in it self is
good; or that the nature of sin, and the Justice of God lays a necess^y on us
so to. But what be these certain Circumstances? For it is because of these, (if
you will believe him) that God the Father, yea, the whole Trinity, did consult
in Eternity, and consent, that Christ should be the Way to Life: Now I say, it
is partly because by Him was the greatest safety, he being naturally, the
Justice, Wisdom, and Power of God; and partly, because it would (we having
sinned) be utterly impossible we should come to God by other means and live. He
that will call these Circumstances, that is, things over and above besides the
Substantials of the Gospel, will but discover his unbelief and ignorance, etc.

As for your saying, That Calvin, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchy, and others,
did not question, but that God could have Pardoned sin, without any other
Satisfaction, then the Repentance of the Sinner. pag^ 84, It matters nothing to
me, I have neither made my Creed out of them, nor other, then the Holy
Scriptures of God.

But if Christ was from before all Worlds ordained to be the Savior, then was
he from all Eternity so appointed and prepared to be: And if God be, as you
say, infinitely, page 136. and I will add, Eternally, just; how can he Pardon
without he be presented with that Satisfaction for Sin, that to all points of
the highest perfection does answer the Demands of this Infinite, and Eternal
Justice? unless you will say, that the Repentance of a Sinner is sufficient to
answer whatever could be justly demanded as a Satisfaction thereto; which if
you should, you would in consequence say, that Man is, or may be in himself,
just, that is, equal with God; or that the sin of Man was not a transgression
of the Law that was given, and a procurer of the Punishment that is threatened,
by that Eternal God that gave it. (But let me give you a Caution, Take heed
that you belie not these men) Christ cries, If it be possible let this Cup pass
from me. Mat. 26. 39. Heb ^. 22. Luke 24. 26. Acts 17. 3.
If what be possible: why, that Sinners should be saved without His Blood.
Ought not Christ to have suffered? Christ must needs have suffered, not because
of some certain Circumstances; but because the Eternal Justice of God, could
not consent to the salvation of the Sinner, without a Satisfaction for the Sin
committed. Of which more in the next; if you shall think good to reply.

Now that my Reader may see, that I have not abused you, in this Reply to your
sayings, I will repeat your words at large, and leave them upon you to answer
it.

You say, Actions may become duties, or sins, two ways: first as they are
compliances with or transgressions of Divine positive Precepts: These are the
declarations of the arbitrary Will of God, whereby he restrains our liberty,
for great and wise reasons in things that are of an indifferent nature, and
absolutely considered are neither good nor evil; and so makes things not good
in themselves (and are capable of becoming so, only by reason of certain
Circumstances) Duties; and things not evil in themselves, sins. SUCH were all
the Injunctions and Prohibitions of the Ceremonial Law; and some few SUCH we
have under the Gospel. page. 7. Then page 9. you tell ^s, That the reason of
the Positive Laws (that is, concerning things in themselves i^different) in the
Gospel are declared; of which, say you, I know but three that are purely so,
viz. That of Coming to God by Christ, the Institution of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper.

Here now let the Reader note, That the positive Precepts, declarations of the
arbitrary Will of God, in things of an indifferent nature, being such, as
absolutely considered, are neither good nor evil; some few SUCH (say you) we
have under the Gospel, namely, that of coming to God by Christ, etc. I am the
more punctual in this thing, because you have confounded your weak, Reader with
a crooked Parenthesis in the midst of the Paragraph, and also by deferring to
spit your intended venom at Christ, till again you had puzzled him, with your
Mathematics, and Metaphysics, etc. putting in another Page, betwixt the
beginning, and the end of your blasphemy.

Indeed in the seventh Chapter of your Book, you make a great noise of the
Effects and Consequences of the Death of Christ, as that it was a Sacrifice for
sin, an expiatory, and propitiatory Sacrifice. ( page 83.) Yet, he that well
shall weigh you, and compare you with your self, shall find that words and
sense, with you are two things; and also, that you have learned of your
Brethren of old, to dissemble with Words, that thereby your own heart-errors,
and the Snake that lies in your bosom, may yet there abide the more
undiscovered. For in the conclusion of that very Chapter, even is and by a word
or two, you take away that glory, that of right belongs to the Death and
Blood of Christ, and lay it upon other things. For you s^y,

The Scriptures that frequently affirm; that the end of Christ's Death wa^ the
forgiveness of our sins, and the reconciling of us to the Father, we are not SO
to understand, as if the blessings were absolutely thereby procured for us. (
page 91.) any otherwise, then upon the account of our effectual believing. I
answer.

By the Death of Christ was the Forgiveness of Sins effectually obtained for
all that shall be saved, and they even while yet Enemies, by that were
reconciled unto God. So that, as to forgiveness from God, it is purely upon the
account of grace in Christ; Col. 1. 20.
We are justified by his Blood, we are reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son. Ecclus. 4. 3^:
Romans 5^. Yea peace is made by the Blood of his Cross; And God for Christ's sake
has forgiven us. So then, our effectual believing, is not a procuring cause in
the sight of God; or a condition of ours foreseen by God, and the motive that
prevails with him to forgive us our manifold transgressions: Believing being
rather that which makes Application, of that Forgiveness, and that possesses
the Son with that Peace, that already is made for us with God, by the Blood of
his Son Christ Jesus; Being justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1:
we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. The peace and comfort of
it comes not to the Soul, but by believing. Yet the Work is finished* Pardon
procured, Justice being satisfied already, or before, by the precious Blood of
Christ.

Observe; I am commanded to believe, but what should I believe? or what should
be the object of my Faith in the matter of my justification with God? Why, I am
to believe is Christ, I am to have Faith in his Blood. But what is (...) to
believe in Christ? and what to have faith in his Blood? Verily, To believe that
while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us; That even then when we were
Enemies, we were Reconciled to God by the Death of his Son: To believe that
there is a Righteousness already for us completed.

I had as good give you the Apostles Argument and Conclusion in his own
language. Romans 5. 6, 7, 8.
But God commended his love toward us, in that while we were YET sinners,
Christ-dyed for us; much more then being NOW justified by his Blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. And note that this word [now] respects the
same time with [yet] that went before. For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God, by the Death of his Son; much more being Reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life: or Intercession.

Believing then 1 Timothy 1. 15.
(as to the business of my deliveranc from the Curse before God) is an
accepting of, Ephesians. 1. 12, 13*
a trusting to, or a receiving the benefit that Christ has already obtained
for me; Joh. 1. 12.
by which act of Faith, I see my interest in that Peace that is made before
with God by the Blood of his Cross: For if Peace be made already by his Blood,
then is the Curse taken away from his sight; if the Curse be taken away from
his sight, then there is no sin with the Curse of it to be charged from God by
the Law, for so long as sin is charged by the Law, with the Curse thereto
belonging, the Curse, and so the wrath of God remains.

But (say you) Christ dyed to put (...) into a capacity of pardon, 10 page 91.

Answ. True; But that is not all, He dyed to put us into the Parsonal
Possession of Pardon: Yea, to put us into a personal Possession of it; and that
before we know it.

But (say you) the Actual removing of our Guilt is not the necessary and
immediate Result of his Death, Page 91.

Answ. Yea, but it is, from before the Face of God; and from the Judgment and
Curse of the Law; For before God the Guilt is taken away, by the Death and
Blood of his Son, immediately, for all them that shall be saved; else how can
it be said we are Justified by his Blood; Rev. 1. 5.
He has made Peace by his Blood; He loved us, and washed us from our Sins in
his own Blood, and that we are Reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; which
can by no means be: If notwithstanding, his Death and Blood, Sin in the Guilt,
and Consequently the Curse that is due thereto, should yet remain in the sight
of God. 2 Cor. 5.
But what says the Apostle? God was in Christ Reconciling the World to
himself; not Imputing their Trespasses unto them. Those that are but
Reconciling, are not yet Reconciled: I mean, as Paul, not yet come aright over
in their own Souls by Faith: Yet to these he imputes not their Trespasses:
Wherefore? because they have none: or because he forgiveth them as they Believe
and Work: Neither of both; but because he hat, First, made his Son to be Sin
for them; and laid all the Guilt and Curse of their Sin upon him; that they
might be made the Righteousness of God in him. Therefore even because by him
their Sin and Curse is taken off, from before the Law of God; therefore, God
for the sake of Christ, seeks for, and beseeches the Sinner to be
Reconciled: That is, to believe in, and embrace his Majesty.

No (say you) The Actual Removing of Guilt, is not the necessary and immediate
Result of his Death; but Suspended until such time as the forementioned
Conditions, by the help of his Grace are performed by us.

Answ. 1. Then may a Man have the Grace of God within him; Yea, the Grace and
Mercy of the New Covenant, viz. Faith, and the like, that yet remains under
the Curse of the Law; and so has yet his Sins untaken away from before the
Face of God: For where the Curse is only suspended, it may stand there:
Notwithstanding, in Force against the Soul. Now, let the Soul stand accursed,
and his Duties must stand accursed: For, First, the Person, and then the
Offering must be accepted of God. Genesis 4.
God accepted not the Works of Cain, because he had not accepted his Person:
But having first accepted Abel's Person, he therefore did accept his Offering.
Hebr. 11
And here it is said, that Abel Offered by Faith: He belived that his Person
was accepted of God, for the sake of the promised Messiah; and therefore
believed also that his Offering should be accepted.

2. Faith, As it respects Justification in the sight of God, must know
nothing to rest upon, but the Mercy of God, through Christ's Blood: But if the
Curse be not taken away, Mercy also hangs in Suspense; yea, lies as drowned,
and hid in the bottom of the Sea. This Doctrine then of yours, overthrows
Faith, and rusheth the Soul into the Works of the Law, the Moral Law; and so
quite Involveth it in the fear of the Wrath of God, makes the Soul forget
Christ, takes from it the Object of Faith; and if a Miracle of Mercy prevent
not, the Soul must dye in everlasting Desperation.

But (say you) it is Suspended till such time as the forementioned Conditions,
by the help of his Grace, be performed by us, Page 92.

Answ. Had you said the Manifestation of it is kept from us; it might, with
some Allowance, have been Admitted* But yet the Revelation of it in the Word,
which in some Sense may be called a Manifestation thereof, is first Discovered
to us by the Word: Yea, 1 John 5. 11.
is seen by us; and also believed as a truth Recorded; before the Enjoyment
thereof be with comfort in our own Souls.

But, you Proceed and say, Therefore was the Death of Christ Designed, to
Procure our Justification, from all Sins past, that we might by this means be
Provoked to become New Creatures.

Answ. That the Death of Christ is a mighty Argument to persuade with the
Believer, to Devote himself to God, in Christ, in all things, as becomes one
that has received Grace, and Redemption, by his Blood, is True: But that it is
in Our Power, as is here Insinuated, to become New Creatures, is as Untrue. The
New Cre^^ure, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18.
is of God; yea, Immediately of God; Man being as Incapable to make himself
Anew, as a Child to Beget himself: Neither is our Conformity to the Revealed
Will of God, any thing else, (if it be Right) then the Fruit and Effect of
that: All things are already, or before become New in the Christian Man. But to
return:

After all the Flourish you have made about the Death of Christ, even as he is
an Expiatory, and Propitiatory Sacrifice; In Conclusion, you Terminate the
Business far short of which it was intended of God: For you almost make the
Effects thereof but a bare Suspension of present Justice, and Death for Sin: or
that which has delivered us at present from a Necessity of dying; that we
might live unto God: That is, according as you have Stated it; That we might
from Principles of Humanity, and Reason, act toward the First Principles of
Morals, etc. till we put our selves into a Capacity of Personal and Actual
Pardon.

Answ. The Sum of your Doctrine therefore is, That Christ by his Death only
holds the Point of the Sword of Justice, Not that he Received it into his own
Soul. That he Suspends the Curse from us; Not that himself was made a Curse for
us; that the Guilt might be Remitted by our Virtues: Not that Sin was made to
be our Sin: But Paul and the New Testament, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
gives us Account far otherwise: viz. Gal. 3. 13.
That Christ was made our Sin, our Curse, and Death; that we by him (not by the
Principle of pure Humanity, or our Obedience to your first Principles of
Morals, etc.) should be set free from the Law of Sin and Death.

If any Object that Christ has designed the Purifying our Hearts and Natures;
I Answer,

But he has not designed to Promote, or to Perfect that righteousness that is
Founded on, and Flows from, the Purity of our Humane Nature: for then he must
design the setting up Man's righteousness; that which is of the Law: and then he
must design also the setting up of that which is directly in opposition, both
also, to the Righteousness, that of God is designed to Justify us: and that by
which we are inwardly made Holy. As I have showed before.

You have therefore, Sir, in all that you have yet Asserted, showed no other
Wisdom then a Heathen, or of one that is short, even of a Novice in the Gospel.

In the next place, I might Trace you Chapter, by Chapter; and at large Refute,
not only the whole design of your Book, by a particular Replication to them;
but also sundry, and damnable Errors, that like venom drop from your Pen.

But, as before I told you in general, so here I tell you again, That neither
the Scriptures of God, the Promise, or Threatenings, the Life, or Death,
Resurrection, Assention, or coming again of Christ to Judgment; has the least
Syllable, or Tendency in them, to set up Your Heathenish, and Pagan Holiness,
or Righteousness: Wherefore your whole Discourse is but a mere abuse of, and
Corrupting the Holy Scriptures, for the fastening, if it must have been, your
Errors upon the Godly. I Conclude then upon the whole, that the Gospel has
cast out Man's Righteousness to the Dogs: and Conclude that there is no such
thing as a Purity of Humane Nature, as a Principle in us, thereby to Work
Righteousness withal. Farther, It never thought of returning us again, to the
Holineness we lost in Adam: or to make our perfection to Consist in the
Possession of so Natural, and Ignorant a Principle as that is, in all the
things of the Holy Gospel: But has declared another, and far better way, which
you can by no means understand by all the Dictates of your Humanity.

I will therefore content my self at present, with gathering up some few
Errors, out of those abundance which are in your Book; and so leave you to God,
who can either Pardon these grievous Errors, or Damn you for your Pride and
Blasphemies.

You pretend in the beginning of your Second Chapter, to prove your Assertion;
Viz. That the great Errand that Christ came upon, was to put us again into
possession of that Holiness which we had lost. For Proof whereof you bring John
the Baptist's Doctrine, and the Angels saying to Zacharias, and the Prophet
Malachi (Mat. 3. 12. Luke 1. 16, 17. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3.) In which Texts there is
as much for your purpose, and no more, then there is in a perfect Blanck: For
which of them speak a Word of the Righteousness or Holiness which we have lost?
Or, where is it said, either by these mentioned, or by the whole Scripture,
that we are to be restored TO, and put again into Possession of that Holiness?
These are but the Dictates of your Humane Nature.

John's Ministry was, To make ready a People prepared for the Lord Jesus: not
to Possess them with themselves, and their own (but now lost) Holiness. And so
the Angel told his Father, saying, Many of the Children of Israel shall he turn
to the Lord their God: Not to Adam's Innocence, or to the Holiness that we lost
by him. Neither did the Prophet Malachi Pro^hesie that Christ at his coming
should put men again in Possession of the Holiness we had lost. And I say
again, As you here fall short of your Purpose, so I Challenge you to produce
but one piece of a Text, that in the least looks to such a thing. The whole
Tenor of the Scripture, that speaks of the Errand of Christ Jesus, tells us
another Lesson, to wit, That he himself came to save us, and that by his own
Righteousness; not that in Adam, or which we have lost in him, unless you can
say, and prove, that we had once, even before we were Converted, the Holiness
of Christ within us, or the Righteousness of Christ upon us.

But you yet go on; and tell us, That this was also the Phrophesie of the Angel
to Joseph, (Page 14.) in these Words, HE (Jesus) shall save his People from
their Sins. Not (say you) from the Punishment of them: although that be a true
Sense too: but not the Primary, but Secondary, and employed only, and the
Consequence of the former Salvation, Page 15.

Answ. Thus PEN the Quaker and you run in this, in one and the self same
Spirit: He Affirming that Sanctification is antecedent to Justification, but
not the Consequence thereof.

2. But what Salvation? Why Salvation? say you: First from the Filth: For that
is the Primary and First Sense: Justification from the Guilt, being the
never-failing Consequence of this. But how then must Jesus Christ, first save
us from the Filth? You add in Page 16. That he shall bring in, instead of the
Ceremonial Observations, a far more Noble, viz. An inward Substantial
Righteousness: and by Abrogating that (namely of the Ceremonies) he shall
Establish only this inward Righteousness. This is, that Holiness, or
Righteousness you tell us of, in the end of the Chapter going before, that You
acknowledge we had lost; so that the Sum of all that you have said, is, That
the way that Christ will take to save his People from their Sins, is, First to
Restore unto them, and give them Possession of the Righteousness that they had
lost in Adam: And having established this in them, he would accquit them also
of Guilt. But that this is a shameless Error, and Blasphemy, is apparent from
which has already been Asserted of the Nature of the Holiness, or
Righteousness, that we have lost: viz. That it was only Natural of the Old
Covenant, Tipical: And such as might stand with perfect Ignorance of the
Meditation of Jesus Christ: And now I add, That for Christ to come to Establish
this Righteousness, is alone; as if he should be sent from Heaven, to
overthrow, and Abrogate the eternal Purpose of Grace, which the Father had
purposed should be manifested to the World by Christ: For Christ came not to
Restore, or to give us Possession of that which was once our own Holiness, but
to make us Partakers of that which is in him, That we might be made Partakers
of HIS Holiness. Neither (were it granted that you speak the truth;) is it
possible for a man to be filled with inward Gospel-Holiness, Heb. 12.
and Righteousness, that yet abides, as before the Face of God, under the
Curse of the Law, or the Guilt of his own Transgressions. The Guilt must
therefore, first be taken off, and we set free by Faith in that Blood, that did
it, before we can Act upon Pure Christian Principles: Pray tell me the meaning
of this one Text; which speaking of Christ, says, Who when he had by himself
Purged our Sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, Heb. 1. 13.
Tell me, I say, by this Text, whether is here intended the Sins of all that
shall be saved? If so, what a kind of Purging is here meant, seeing thousands,
and thousands of thousands, of the Persons intended by this Act of Purging were
not then in being, nor their Personal Sins in Act? And note, he says, he
Purged them, before he sat down at the Right hand of God: Purging then, in this
place, cannot First, and Primarily, Respect the Purging of the Conscience: But
the taking; the complete taking of the Guilt; and so the the Curse from before
the face of God, according to other Scriptures: He has made him to be Sin, and
accursed of God for us. Now he being made the Sin which we committed, and the
Curse which we deserved; there is no more Sin nor Curse: I mean to be charged
by the Law, to Damn them that shall believe; not that their believing takes
away the Curse; but puts the Soul upon trusting to him, that before Purged this
Guilt, and Curse: I say, before he sat down on the Right Hand of God: Not to
Suspend, (as you would have it) but to take away the Sin of the World. The Lord
has LAID upon him the Iniquities of us all: Isaiah 53. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
And he BARE them in his own Body on the Tree: Nor yet that he should OFTEN
Offer himself; for then must he OFTEN have suffered since the Foundation of the
World: Heb 9. 24. 25, 26.
But NOW, (and that at) Once) in the end of the World, has he Appeared, to put
away Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself. Mark, he did put it away by the
Sacrifice of his Body and Soul, when he dyed on the Cross: but he could not
then put away the inward Filth of those, that then remained Unconverted; or
those that as yet wanted being in the World. The putting away of Sin therefore,
that the Holy Ghost here intends, is, such a putting of it away, as
respects the Guilt, Curse, and Condemnation thereof, as it stood by the
Accusations of the Law, against all Flesh before the Face of God; which Guilt,
Curse, and Condemnation, Christ himself was made in that day, when he dyed the
Death for us. And this is the First and Principle Intendment of the Angel, in
that blessed saying to Godly Joseph, concerning Christ; He shall save his
People from their Sins; from the Guilt and Curse due to them, first: and
afterward from the Filth thereof. This is yet manifest, farther; because the
Heart is Purified by Faith, and Hope, Acts 9. 15. 1 John 3. 3, 4. Now it is not
the Nature of Faith; I mean, of Justifying Faith; to have any thing for an
Object; from which fetches Peace with God? and Holiness before, or besides the
Christ of God himself, for he is the way to the Father: and no Man can come to
the Father, but by him. Come; that is, so as to find Acceptance, and Peace with
him: The Reason is, because without his Blood, Guilt remains, Heb. 9. 22. He
has made Peace by the Blood of his Cross: so then, Faith in the first place
seeks Peace: But why Peace First? because till Peace is fetched into the
Soul, by Faiths laying hold on the blood of Christ, Sin remains in the Guilt
and Curse, though not in the sight of God, yet upon the Conscience, through the
Power of Unbelief: John 3. 18,
He that believes not stands yet Condemned. Now, so long as Guilt, and the
Curse in Power remains, there is not Purity, but Unbelief: not Joy, but
Doubting: not Peace, but Peevishness: not Content, but Murmuring, and Anger,
against the Lord himself. The Law Works Wrath, Romans 4. Wherefore, as yet
there can be no Purity of Heart; because that Faith yet wants his Object: But
having once found Peace with God by believing what the Blood of Christ has
done, Joy follows, so does Peace, Quietness, Content, and Love; Which is also
the fulfilling of the Law: Yet not from such Dungish Principles as yours: For
so the Apostle calls them, Phil. 3. But from the Holy Ghost it self; which God,
by Faith, has granted to be received by them that believe in the Blood of his
Jesus.

But you add, That Christ gives, First Repentance, and then forgiveness of
Sins. Page 17.

Answ. 1. This makes nothing for the Holiness which we lost in Adam: for the
Proof of which you bring that Text, Acts 5. 31.

2. But for Christ to take away Guilt, and the Curse, from before the Face of
^ods is one thing; and to make that discovery is another.

3. Again, Christ does not give forgiveness for the sake of that Repentance,
which has it is rise, Originally from the Dictates of our own nature, which is
the thing you are to prove; for that Repentance is called the Sorrow of this
World; and must be again Repented of: But the Repentance mentioned in the Text,
is that which comes from Christ: But,

4. It cannot be for the sake of Gospel Repentance, that the forgiveness of
Sins is Manifested, because both are his Peculiar Gift.

5. Therefore, both Faith, and Repentance, and Forgiveness of Sins, are given
by Christ; and come to us, for the sake of that Blessed Offering of his Body,
once for all: For after he Arose from the Dead, having led Captivity Captive,
and taken the Curse from before the Face of God: therefore his Father gave him
Gifts for Men, even all the things that are Necessary, and Effectual, for our
Conversion, and Preservation in this World, etc. Ephesians. 4. 6, 7, 8.

This Text therefore, with all the rest you bring, falls short of the least
show of Proof, That the great Errand for which Christ came into the World was
-- to put us in Possession of the Holiness that we had lost.

Your Third Chapter is as Empty of the Proof of your Design, as that through
which we have passed: there being not one Scripture therein Tited, that gives
the least intimation, that ever it entered into the Heart of Christ to put us
again into Possession of that Holiness which we had before we were Converted:
for such was that we lost in Adam.

You tell us the Sum of all is, That we are Commanded to add to, our Faith,
Virtue, etc. Page 35. I suppose you intend a Gospel Faith, which if you can
prove Adam had before the fall, and that we lost this Faith in him; and also
that this Gospel Faith is none other, but that which Origianally arises from,
or is the Dictates of Humane Nature, I will confess you have Scripture, and
Knowledge beyond me. In the mean time you must suffer me to tell you you are as
far in this from the mind of the Holy Ghost, as if you had yet never in all
your days heard whether there be a Holy Ghost, or no.

Add to your Faith. The Apostle here lays a Gospel Principle, viz. Faith in the
Son of God: which Faith lays hold of the forgiveness of Sins, alone for the
sake of Christ: Therefore he is a great way off, of laying the Purity of the
Humane Nature, the Law, as written in the heart of natural man, as the
Prenciple of Holiness; from whence is produced good Works in the Soul of the
Godly.

In your Fourth Chapter also (Page 28.) even in the beginning thereof; even
with one Text you have overthrown your whole Book.

This Chapter is to prove, that the only Design of the Promises, and
Threatenings of the Gospel, is to Promote, and put us again in Possession of the
Holiness we had lost: (For that the Reader must still remember, is the only
Design of your Book, Page 12.) Whereas the First Text you speak of, 2 Pet. 1.
makes mention of the Divine Nature, or of the Spirit of the Living God, which
is also received by the Precious Faith of Christ, and the Revelation of the
Knowledge of him; this Blessed Spirit, and therefore not the Dictates of Humane
Nature, is the Principle that is laid in the Godly: But Adam's Holiness had
neither the Knowledge, or Faith, or Spirit of the Lord Jesus, as it is
Foundation, or Principle: Yea, Nature was his Foundation; even his own Nature
was the Original, from whence his Righteousness and good Works arose.

The next Scriptures also ( viz. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Romans 12. 1.) overthrow you; for
they urge the Promises as Motives to stir us up to Holiness. But Adam had
neither the Spirit of Jesus, or Faith in him, as a Principle; nor any Promises
to him as Motives: Wherefore this was not that to which, or which we Christians
are Exhorted to seek the Possession of; but that which is Operated by that
Spirit which we receive by the Faith of Jesus, and that which is encouraged by
those Promises, that God has since given to them that have closed by Faith
with Jesus.

The rest also, (in Page 29.) not one of them does promise us the Possession of
the Holiness we have lost, or any mercy to them that have it.

You add: And whereas the Promises of Pardon, and of Eternal Life, are
Frequently made to believing; there is nothing more Evidently declared, then
that this Faith is such as Purifieth the Heart, and is Productive of good
Works, Page 30.

Answ. If the Promise be made at all to believing, it is not made to us upon
the account of the Holiness we had lost; for I tell you yet again, that
Holiness is not of Faith, neither was Faith the Effect thereof. But,

2. The Promises of Pardon, though they be made to such a Faith as is Fruitful
in good Works: Yet not to it, as it is Fruitful in doing, but in receiving
Good. Sir, the quality of Justifying Faith, is this, Not to Work, but to
Believe, as to the Business of pardon of Sin: and that not only, because of
the Sufficiency that this Faith sees in Christ to Justify, but also for that
it knows those whom God thus Pardons, he Justifies as ungodly. Now to him
that Works not, but believes; (Mark, here Faith and Works are Opposed) Now
to him that Works not, but Believes in him that Justifies the Ungodly, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness, Romans 4.

You add farther, That the Promises may be Reduced to these three Heads; that
of the Holy Spirit, of Remission of Sins, and Eternal Happiness, in the
Enjoyment of God.

Answ. If you can prove that any of these Promises were made to the Holiness
that we had lost, or that by these Promises we are to be Possessed with that
Holiness again; I will even now lay down the Bucklers. For albeit, The time
will come when the Saints shall be absolutely, and perfectly Sin-less; yet then
shall they be also Spiritual, Immortal, and Incorruptible; which you cannot
prove Adam was, in the best of his Holiness, even that which we lost in him.

The Threatenings you speak of ( Page 35.) are every one made against Sin, but
not one of them to drive us into a Possession of that Holiness that we had
lost: Nay, contrariwise, he that looks to, or seeks after that, is as sure to
be Damned, and go to Hell, as he that Transgresses the Law; because that is
not the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of Christ, the Righteousness of
Faith, nor that to which the Promise is made.

And this was manifested to the World betimes, even in that day when God drove
the Man and his Wife out of Eden, and placed Cherubines, and a Flaming Sword in
the way by which they came out, to the end, that by going back by that way,
they might rather be Killed and Dye, then lay hold of the Tree of Life, Genesis 3.

Which the Apostle also Respects, when he calls the way of the Gospel, the
New and Living Way, even that which is made by the Blood of Christ; Concluding
by this Description of the Way that is by Blood, that the other is Old, and the
Way of Death; even that which is by the Morral Law, or the Dictates of our
Nature, or by that fond Conceit of the Goodly Holiness of Adam, Heb. 10.

Your Fifth Chapter tells us that the Promoting of Holiness was the design of
our Saviors whole Life and Conversation among Men, Page 36.

Answ. 1. Were this granted, it reaches nothing at all the Design, for which
you in your way Present us with it: For,

2. That which you have Asserted is, That the Errand about which Christ came,
was, as the Effecting our Deliverance out of that Sinful State we had brought
our selves into; so to put us again in Possession of that Holiness which we had
LOST: For that you say, is the Business of your Book ( Page 12.) Wherefore you
should have told us in the Head of this Chapter, not so much that our Savior
Designed the Promoting of Holiness, in General, by his life; but that the whole
Design of our Saviors Life and Conversation, was to put us again into
Possession of THAT Holiness which we had lost, into a Possession of that
Natural, Old Covenant, Figurative, Ignorant Holiness. But it seems you count
that there is no other, then that now lost, but never again to be obtained,
Holiness, that was in Adam.

3. Farther: You also Faulter here, as to the Stating of the Proposition; for
in the Beginning of your Book you State it thus; That the Enduing Men with
inward Real Righteousness, or True Holiness, was the Vltimate end of our
Saviors coming into the World; still meaning the Holiness we lost in Adam. You
should therefore in this place also, have minded your Reader, of this your
Proposition, and made it manifest if you could, that the Vltimate End of our
Saviors whole Life and Conversation, was the Induing Men with this Adamitish
Holiness. But HOLINESS, and THAT Holiness is alone with you; and to make it his
End, and whole End; his Business, and the whole Business of his Life, is but
the same with you.

But you must know that the whole Life and Conversation of our Savior, was
intended for another Purpose, then to drive us back to, or to Indue us with
such an Holiness, and Righteousness, as I have Proved this to be.

You have therefore in this your Discourse, put an unsufferable Affront upon
the Son of God, in making all his Life and Conversation to Center and Terminate
in the Holiness we had lost: As if the Lord Jesus was sent down from Heaven,
and the Word of God made Flesh; that by a Perfect Life and Conversation he
might show us how Holy Adam was before he fell; or what an Holiness that our
Holiness was, which we had before we were Converted.

Your Discourse therefore of the Life and Conversation of the Lord Jesus, is
none other then Heathenish: For you neither Treat of the Principle (his
Godhead) by which he did his Works; neither do you in the least, in one
Syllable, Aver the First, the main and Prime Reason of this his Conversation;
only you Treat of it so far, as a mean Man might have considered it. And indeed
it stood not with your Design to Treat a right with these things: For had you
Mentioned the First, though but once, your Babel had tumbled about your Ears:
For if in the Holy Jesus did dwell the Word, One of the Three in Heaven; or if
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was Truly, Essentially, and Naturally God;
then must the Principle from whence his Works did Proceed, be better then the
Principle from whence Proceeded the Goodness in Adam; otherwise Adam must be
God and Man. Also you do, or may know that the self same act may be done from
several Principles: And again, that it is the Principle from whence the act is
done, and not the bare doing of the act, that makes it better or worse
Accepted, or not in the Eyes either of God or Men.

Now then to show you the Main, or Chief Design of the Life and Conversation of
the Lord Jesus.

First, It was, not to show us what an Excellent Holiness we once had in Adam;
But that thereby God, the Eternal Majesty, according to his Promise, might be
seen by, and dwell with Mortal Men: For the Godhead being altogether in it is
own Nature Invisible, and yet desirous to be seen by, and dwell with the
Children of Men; therefore was the Son, who is the self same Substance with the
Father, closed with, or Tabernacled in our Flesh; that in that Flesh the
Nature, and Glory of the Godhead, might be seen by, and dwell with us: The Word
was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, John 1. 14.
(and we beheld his glory: What Glory? The Glory, as of the only Begotten of
the Father) full of Grace and Truth. Again, 1 John 1. 2, 3
The Life (that is, the Life of God, in the Works and Conversation of Christ)
was Manifest; Col 1. 15.
and we have seen it, and bear Witness, and show unto you that Eternal Life
which was with the Father, and was Manifested unto us. And hence he is called
the Image of the Invisible God; or he by whom the Invisible God is most
perfectly presented to the Sons of Men. Did I say before that the God of Glory
is desirous to be seen of us? Even so also, have the Pure in Heart, John 14.
a desire that it should be so: Lord, say they, show us the Father, and it
suffiseth us: And therefore the promise is for their comfort, Mat. 5.
that they shall see God: But how then must they see him? Why, in the Person,
and by the Life, and Works of Jesus. When Philip under a mistake, thought of
seeing God some other way, then in and by this Lord Jesus Christ; What is the
Answer? Have I been so long time with you, says Christ, and have thou not
known me Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father, and how say thou
then, show us the Father; Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? The Words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the
Father, that dwells in me, he does the Works. Believe me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; or else Believe me for the very Works sake. John
14.
See here, that both the Words and Works of the Lord Jesus, were not to show
you, and so to call you back to the Holiness that we had lost, but to give us
Visions of the Perfections that are in the Father. 2 Cor. 4 6.
He has given us the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus
Christ. And hence it is that the Apostle, in that brief Collection of the
wonderful Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
places this in the Front thereof, God was Manifested in the Flesh: Was
Manifested, viz. In and by the Person of Christ: when in the Flesh he lived
among us: Manifest, I say, for this, as one Reason, that the Pure in heart, who
long after nothing more, might see him. I beseech thee, said Moses, show me thy
Glory. And will God indeed dwell with Men on the Earth, faith Solomon?

Now to fulfill the desires of them that fear him, has he showed himself in
Flesh unto them; which Discovery Principally is made by the Words and Works of
Christ. But,

Secondly, Christ by his Words and Works of Righteousness, in the days of his
Flesh, neither showed us which was, nor called us back to the Possession of the
Holiness that we had lost; but did Perfect, in, and by himself, the Law for us,
that we had Broken. Man being Involved in Sin and Misery, by reason of
Transgression Committed against the Law, or Ministration of Death, and being
utterly unable to Recover himself therefrom, the Son of God himself; Assumeth
the Flesh of Man, and for Sin Condemned Sin in that Flesh. And that, First, by
walking through the Power of his Eternal Spirit, in the highest Perfection to
every point of the whole Law, in it is most Exact and full Requirements; which
was to be done, not only without Commixing Sin in his doing, but by one that
was perfectly without the least being of it in his Nature: yea, by one that now
was God-Man, because it was God whose Law was broken, and whose Justice was
offended. For, were it now possible to give a Man Possession of that Holiness
that he has lost in Adam, that Holiness could neither in the Principle, nor
Act, deliver from the Sin by him before Committed. This is Evident by many
Reasons: First, because it is not a Righteousness able to answer the Demands of
the Law for Sin; that requiring not only a perfect abiding in the thing
Commanded, but a satisfaction by death, for the Transgression Committed against
the Law. Romans 6.
The Wages of Sin is Death. Wherefore he that would undertake the Salvation of
the World, must be one who can do both these things: One that can perfectly do
the Demands of the Law, in Thought, Word, and Deed, without the least
Commixture of the least Sinful thought, in the whole Course of his Life: He
must be also able to give by Death, even by the Death that has the Curse of
God in it, a complete satisfaction to the Law for the breach thereof. Now this
could none but Christ accomplish; none else having Power to do it. I have
Power, said he, to lay down my Life, and I have Power to take it again: And
this Commandment have I Received of my Father. This Work then must be done, not
by another Earthly Adam, but by the Lord from Heaven; by one that can Abollish
Sin, Destroy the Devil, Kill Death, and Rule as Lord in Heaven and Earth. Now
the Words and Works of the Lord Jesus, declared him to be such a one. He was
first, without Sin; then he did no Sin; neither could either the Devil, the
whole World, or the Law, find any Deceit in his mouth. But by being under the
Law, and walking in the Law; by that Spirit which was the Lord God of the Law,
he not only did always the things that pleased the Father, but by that means
in man's Flesh; he did perfectly accomplish, and fulfill, that Law which all
Flesh stood Condemned by. It is a Foolish, and an Heathenish thing, nay worse,
to think that the Son of God should only, or specially, fulfill, or perfect
the Law, and the Prophets, by giving more and higher Instances of Morral
Duties, then were before expressly given ( Page 17.) This would have been but
the Lading of men with heavy Burdens. But know then, whoever thou art that
Read, that Christ's Exposition of the Law, was more to show thee the
Perfection of his own Obedience, then to drive thee back to the Holiness thou
had lost. For God sent him to fulfill it, by doing it, and dying, to the most
sore Sentence it could Pronounce: not as he stood a single Person, but common,
as Mediator between God and Man; making up in himself the breach that was made
by Sin, betwixt God and the World. For,

Thirdly, He was to dye as a Lamb, as a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot,
Exodus 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
according to the Type: Your Lamb shall be without Blemish: But because there
was none such to be found by, and among all the Children of Men; therefore God
sent his from Heaven. John 1 29.
Hence John calls him the Lamb of God; and Peter, him that was without Spot, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19.
who Washed us by his Blood. Now wherein does it appear that he was without
Spot, and Blemish, but as he walked in the Law. These words therefore WITHOUT
SPOT, are the Sentence of the Law, who searching him could find nothing in him,
why he should be slain, yet he dyed because there was Sin; Isa. 53.
Sin! where? Not in him, but in his People; For the Transgression of my People
was he stricken (Isa. 53.) He dyed then for our Sins, and qualified himself so
to do, by coming Sinless into the World, and by going Sin-less through it; for
had he not done both these, he must have dyed for himself. But being God, even
in Despite of all that stumble at him, he Conquered Death, the Devil, Sin, and
the Curse, by himself, and then sat down at the Right Hand of God.

Fourthly, And because he has a Second Part of his Priestly Office to do in
Heaven, Heb 7.
therefore it was thus Requisite that he should thus manifest himself to be
Holy, and Harmless, Undefiled, and Separate from Sinners on the Earth: As Aron
First put on the Holy Garments, and then went into the Holiest of all. The Life
therefore, and Conversation of our Lord Jesus, was to show us with what a
Curious Robe and Girdle he went into the Holy Place. And not to show us with
what an Adamitish Holiness he would Possess his own. Such an High Priest became
us, who is Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled, Separate from Sinners, and made
Higher then the Heavens, that he might always be Accepted, both in Person and
Offering, when he Presents his Blood to God, the Atonement for Sin: Indeed
in some things he was an Example to us to follow him; but mark; It was not as
he was Mediator, not as he was under the Law to God, not as he dyed for Sin,
nor as he makes Reconciliation for Iniquity. But in these things Consist the
Life of our Soul, and the beginning of our Happiness. He was then Exemplary to
us, as he carried it Meekly, and Patiently, and Self-denyingly toward the
World: But yet not so neither, to any, but such to whom he first offered
Justification by the means of his own Righteousness. For before he says Learn
of me, he says, I will give you Rest; Rest from the Guilt of Sin, and fear of
Everlasting Burnings, Mat. 11. And so Peter, first tells us, he dyed for our
Sins: And next, that he left us an Example. But should it be granted that the
whole of Christ's Life, and Conversation among men, was for our Example, and
for no other end at all, but that we should learn to live by his Example, yet
it would not follow, but be as far from truth, as the ends of the Earth are
assunder, that by this means he sought to Possess us with the Holiness we had
lost; for that he had not in himself; it is true, he was born without Sin, yet
born God and Man; he lived in the World without Sin, but he lived as God-Man;
he walked in, and up to the Law, but it was as God-Man. Neither did his
Manhood, even in those acts of Goodness, which as to action, most properly
respected it; do ought without, but by, and in Conjunction with his Godhead.
Wherefore all, and every whit of the Righteousness, and good that he did, was
that of God-Man; the Righteousness of God. But this was not Adam's Principle,
nor any Holiness that we had lost.

Your Fifth Chapter, therefore Consists of Words spoken to the Air.

Your Sixth Chapter tells us, That to make Men truly Virtuous and Holy, was the
Design of Christ's Unimitable Actions, or mighty Works and Miracles; and these
did only tend to Promote it, Page 68.

He neither did, nor needed, so much as one small piece of a Miracle to
persuade men to seek for the Holiness which they had lost; or to give them
again Possession of that: For that as I have showed, though you would fain have
it otherwise, is not at all the Christan, or Gospel Righteousness. Wherefore,
in one word, you are as short by this Chapter to prove your Natural, old
Covenant, Promise-less, Figurative Holiness, to be here Designed, as if you had
said so much as amounts to nothing. Farther, Christ needed not to Work a
Miracle to persuade men to fall in Love with themselves, and their own Natural
Dictates; to persuade them that they have a Purity of the Humane Nature in
them; or that the Holiness which they have lost, is the only True, Real, and
Substantial Holiness: These things, both Corrupted Nature, and the Devil, have
of a long time fastened, and fixed in their minds.

His Miracles therefore tend rather to take Men off of the Pursuit after the
Righteousness or Holiness that we had lost; and to Confirm unto us the truth of
a far more Excellent, and Blessed thing; to wit, the Righteousness of God, of
Christ, of Faith, of the Spirit, which, that you speak of never knew: neither
is it possible that he should know it, who is hunting for your sound
Complexion, your Purity of Humane Nature, or it is Dictates, as the only True,
Real, and Substantial Righteousness. They are Ignorant of God's Righteousness,
that go about to Establish their own Righteousness; and neither have, nor can,
without a Miracle, submit themselves unto the Righteousness of God. They cannot
submit THEMSELVES thereto; talk thereof they may, notion it they may, profess
it too they may; but for a man to submit himself thereto is by the mighty power
of God.

Miracles and Signs are for them that believe not: 1 Cor. 14. 22.
Why for them? That they might believe, therefore their State is reckoned
fearful, John 12. 37. 38, 39, 40.
that have not yet believed for all his wondrous Works. And though he did so
many Miracles among them, yet they believed him not: But what should they
believe? That Jesus is the true Messiah, the Christ that should come into the
World. Do you say that I Blaspheme (says Christ) because I said I am the Son
of God; if I do not the Works of my Father believe me not; but if I do, though
you believe not me, believe the Works, that ye may know, and believe, that the
Father is in me, and I in him, John 10. 37, 38. But what is it to believe that
he is Messiah, or Christ? Even to believe that this Man, Jesus, was ordained,
and appointed of God, (and that before all Worlds) to be the Savior of Men, by
accomplishing in himself an Everlasting Righteousness for them, and by bearing
their Sins in his Body on the Tree; that it was he that was to Reconcile us to
God, by the Body of his Flesh, when he hanged on the Cross. This is the
Doctrine that at the beginning Christ Preached to that Learned Ignorant
Nicodemus. John 3. 14, 15.
As Moses (said he) lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the Son of
Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not Perish, but have
Everlasting Life. The Serpent was lifted up upon a Pole; Christ was hanged on a
Tree: Numb 21 1 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
the Serpent was lifted up for Murmurers: Christ was hanged up for Sinners: the
Serpent was lifted up for them that were bitten with Fiery Serpents, the fruits
of their wicked Murmuring: Christ was hanged up for them that are bitten with
Guilt, the rage of the Devil, and the fear of Death, and Wrath: the Serpent was
hanged up to be looked on: Christ was hanged up that we might believe in him,
that we might have Faith in his Blood: They that looked upon the Serpent of
Brass lived; They that believe in Christ shall be saved, and shall never
perish. Was the Serpent then lifted up for them that were good and Godly? No,
but for the Sinners: So God commended his Love to us, in that, while we were
yet Sinners Christ dyed for us. But what if they that were Stung, could not,
because of the swelling of their face, look up to the Brazen Serpent? then
without remedy they dye: So he that believes not in Christ shall be Damned.
But might they not be healed by humbling themselves? one would think that
better then to live by looking up only: No, only looking up did it; when
death swallowed up them that looked not. This then is the Doctrine, Christ came
into the World to save Sinners: according to the Proclamation of Paul, Be it
known unto you therefore, Men and Brethren, that through this Man is Preached
unto you the forgiveness of Sins; and by him, all that believe are Justified
from all things, from which they could not be Justified by the Law of Moses.
The forgiveness of Sins: But what is meant by forgiveness? Forgiveness does
strictly respect the Debt, or Punishment that by Sin we have brought upon our
selves. But how are we by this Man forgiven this? Because by his Blood he has
answered the Justice of the Law, and so made amends to an offended Majesty.
Besides, this Man's Righteousness is made over to him, that looks up to him for
Life: Yea, that man is made the Righteousness of God in him. This is the
Doctrine, that the Miracles were wrought to confirm, and that both by Christ,
and his Apostles; and not that Holiness, and Righteousness, that is the fruit
of a feigned Purity of our Nature.

Take two or three Instances for all.

The Jews came round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make us
to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them I told
you, and you believed not; the Works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear
witness of me; but ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep, John 10. 24,
25, 26.

By this Scripture the Lord Jesus testifies what was the end of his Words, and
wondrous Works; viz. That men might know that he was the Christ; that he was
sent of God to be the Savior of the World: and that these Miracles required of
them, first of all, that they accept of him by believing: (a thing little set
by, by our Author) for in Page 299. he prefer^eth his doing Righteousness far
before it, and above ALL things else; his words are Verbatim thus, Let us
exercise our selves unto Real and Substantial Godliness, (such as he has
Described in the first part of his Book: viz. That which is the Dictares of his
Humane Nature, etc.) and in keeping our Consciences vsid of Offense, both
toward God, and toward Men; and in studying the Gospel to enable us, not to
Discourse, or only to BELIEVE, but also and above ALL things to DOWELL. But
Believing, though not with this man, yet by Christ and his wondrous Miracles,
is expected first, and above ALL things, from men; and to do well, in the best
Sense (though his Sense is the worst,) is that which by the Gospel is to come
after.

Secondly, Go into all the World, and Preach the Gospel unto every Creature; He
that Believes and is Baptized shall be saved; and he that Believes not shall
be Damned. And these signs shall follow them that Believe: In my Name shall
they cast out Devils, they shall speak with New Tongues, they shall take up
Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, etc. Mark.
16. 16, 17, 18.

Mark you here, it is Believing, Believing; It is, I say, Believing that is
here required by Christ. Believing what? The Gospel; even good Tidings to
Sinners by Jesus Christ; good Tidings of Good, glad Tidings of good things.
Mark how the Apostle has it: the glad Tidings is, that through Jesus is
Preached the forgiveness of Sins; and by him all that BELIEVE are Justified
from ALL things, from which they could not be Justified by the Law of Moses.
Acts 13. 33 -- 39.

These Signs shall follow them that Believe: Mark, Signs before, and Signs
after; and all to Exite to, and Confirm the weight of Believing. And they went
forth and Preached every where; the Lord working with them, and Confirming the
Word with Signs following, Amen. Mark 16. 20.

Thirdly, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that
we have heard, least at any time we should let them slip. For if the Word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression, and Disobedience
received a just Recompense of Reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation? which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
Confirmed to us by them that heard him; God also bearing them Witness with
Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will, Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Here we are Excited to the Faith of the Lord Jesus, under these Words ( so
great Salvation.) As if he had said, Give earnest heed, the most earnest heed,
to the Doctrine of the Lord Jesus, because it is SO great Salvation. What this
Salvation is, he tells us, it is that which was Preached by the Lord himself;
That God so loved the World, that he gave his only Begotten Son, that
whosoever Believed in him should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life, John 3.
God SO Loved, that he gave his Son to be SO great Salvation. Now as is
expressed in the Text, to be the better for this Salvation, is, Romans 10.
to give heed to hear it; for Faith comes by hearing.

He says not, give heed to doing, but to the Word you have HEARD; Faith (I
say) comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. But that this
hearing is the hearing of Faith, is farther Evident:

1. Because he speaks of a great Salvation, accomplished by the Love of God
in Christ, accomplished by his Blood. By his own Blood he entered into Heaven it
self, having Obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.

2. This Salvation is set in Opposition to that which was Propounded before, by
the Ministration of Angels, which Consisted in a Law of Works; that which Moses
received to give to the Children of Israel. For the Law (a command to Works and
Duties) was given by Moses; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. John 1.
To live by doing Works is the Doctrine of the Law, and Moses: but to live by
Faith, and Grace, is the Doctrine of Christ, and the Gospel.

Besides, the threatening being pressed with an HOW shall we escape? Respects
still a Better, a Freer, a more Gracious Way of Life, then either the Morral,
or Ceremonial Law; for both these were long before; but here comes in another
Way, not that Propounded by Moses, or the Angels, but since by the Lord
himself. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? which at First
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was Confirmed to us by then that heard him.

Now Mark, It is this Salvation, this SO great, and Eternal Salvation, that was
obtained by the Blood of the Lord himself: It was this, even to Confirm Faith
in this, that the God of Heaven himself came down, to Confirm by Signs and
Wonders; God bearing them Witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse
Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will.

Thus we see, that to establish a Holiness that came from the First Principles
of Morrals in us, or that arises from the Dictates of our Humane Nature, or to
drive us back to that Figurative Holiness that we had once, but lost in Adam,
is little thought on by Jesus Christ, and as little intended by any of the
Gospel Miracles.

A Word or two more. The Tribute Money you mention, Page 72. was not as you
would clawingly Insinuate for no other Purpose, then to show Christ's Loyalty to
the Magistrate: But First, and above all, to show his Godhead, to Confirm his
Gospel, and then to show his Loyalty, the which Sir, the Persons you secretly
smite at, have respect for, as much as you.

Again, Also the Curse of the Barren Fig Tree, mentioned, Page 73. was not (if
the Lord himself may be believed) to give us an Emblem of a Person void of good
Works; but to show his Disciples the Power of Faith, and what a wonder-working
thing that blessed Grace is. Wherefore when the Disciples wondered at that
sudden Blast, that was upon the Tree, Jesus answered not, Behold and Emblem of
one void of Morral Virtues; but, Verily, I say unto you, if you have Faith, and
doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the Fig Tree, but also
if you shall say unto this Mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
Sea, it shall be done; and all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer,
Believing, ye shall Receive. Again, Mark says, When Peter saw the Fig Tree,
that the Lord had Cursed, dried up from the Roots, he said to his Master,
Behold the Fig Tree which thou Cursed'st is withered away. Christ now does not
say as you, this Tree was an Emblem of a Professor void of good Works; but,
Have Faith in, or the Faith of God; For, verily I say unto you, whosoever shall
say unto this Mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the Sea, and
shall not doubt in his Heart, but shall believe that those things which he
says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he says: Therefore I say
unto you, what things soever you desire when you pray, believe that you receive
them, and you shall have them. (Mat. 21. Mark 11.) Christ Jesus therefore had a
higher, and a better end, then that which you propound, in his cursing the
Barren Fig Tree, even to show, as himself Expounds it, the mighty power of
Faith; and how it lays hold of things in Heaven, and tumbleth before it things
on Earth. Wherefore your Scriptureless Exposition, does but lay you even
Solomen's Proverb, The Legs of the Law are not equal, etc.

I might Enlarge; but enough of this; Only here I add, that the Wonders and
Miracles, that attend the Gospel, were wrought, and are Recorded, to persuade
to Faith in Christ By Faith in Christ, men are Justified from the Curse, and
Judgment of the Law. This Faith works by Love, by the Love of God it brings
up the Heart to God, Ezekiel. 61.
and Goodness; but not by your Covenant, not by Principles of Humane Nature,
but of the Spirit of God; not in a Poor, Legal, Old Covenant, Promiseless,
Ignorant, Shadowish, Natural Holiness, but by the Holy Ghost.

I come now to your Seventh Chapter; but to that I have spoken briefly already,
and therefore here shall be the shorter.

In this Chapter you say, that to make Men Holy was the Design of Christ's
Death.

Answ. But not with your Described Principles of Humanity, and Dictates of
Humane Nature: He Designed not, as I have fully proved, neither by his Death,
nor Life, to put us into a Possession of the Holiness which we had lost, though
the Proof of that be the business of your Book.

2. To make men holy, was Doubtless, Designed by the Death and Blood of Christ:
But the way and manner of the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost therein, you write
not of; although the First Text you mention ( Page 78. 79.) does fairly present
you with it: For the way to make men inwardly Holy, by the Death and Blood of
Christ, is, First, to Possess them with the Knowledge of this, that their Sins
were Crucified with him; or that he did bear them in his Body on the Tree:
Knowing this, that our Old Man is Crucified with him, that the body of Sin
might be Destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin, Romans 6. 6. So he
dyed for all, that they that live, should not henceforth live unto themselves
(as you would have them) nor to the Law or Dictates of their own Nature, as
your Doctrine would persuade them; but to him that dyed for them, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
and rose again.

There are two things, in the right stating of the Doctrine of the Effects of
the Death and Blood of Christ, that do Naturally Effect in us an Holy
Principle, and also a life becoming such a Mercy.

First, For that by it we are set at liberty (by Faith therein) from the Guilt,
and Curse that is due to Guilt, from Death, the Devil, and the Wrath to come:
No Encouragement to Holiness, like this, like the Persuasion, and Belief of
this; because this carries in it the greatest expression of Love, that we are
Capable of Hearing, or Believing; and there is nothing that works on us so
Powerfully as Love. And herein is Love! not that we Loved God, but that he
Loved us, 1 John 4. 10.
and gave his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. He then that by Faith
can see that the Body of his Sin did hang upon the Cross, b^ the Body of
Christ, and that can see by that action, Death and Sin, the Devil and Hell,
destroyed for him; it is he that will say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
that is within me Bless his Holy Name, etc. Psa. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, Moreover, the Knowledge of this gives a man to understand this
Mystery, That Christ and himself are united in one: For Faith says, If our Old
man was Crucified with Christ, then were we also Reckoned in him, when he
hanged on the Cross, I am Crucified with Christ: Gal. 2. 20.
All the Elect did Mystically hang upon the Cross in Christ. We then are Dead
to the Law, and Sin, First, by the Body of Christ, Romans 7. 4. Now he that is
Dead is free from Sin; now if we be dead with Christ, we Believe that we shall
live with him, knowing that Christ being raised from the Dead, Dies no more,
Death has no more Dominion over him; for in that he dyed, he dyed unto Sin
once; but in that he lives, he lives unto God: Likewise reckon your selves
also dead unto Sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. This
also Peter does lively Discourse of, Forasmuch then (says he) as Christ has
suffered for us in the Flesh, Arm your selves likewise with the same mind; for
he that has suffered in the Flesh has ceased from Sin, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2. By
which Words he Insinuates the Mystical Union, that is between Christ the Head,
and the Elect his Body; Arguing; from the Suffering of a Part, there should be
a Sympathy in the whole: If Christ then suffered for us, we were (even our
Sins, Bodies and Souls) reckoned in him, when he so suffered. Wherefore, by his
sufferings, the Wrath of God for us is appeased, the Curse is taken from us:
For as Adam by his acts of Rebellion, made all that were in him Guilty of his
Wickedness; so Christ by his acts, and doings of Goodness, and Justice, made
all that were reckoned in him good, and Just, also: But as Adam's Transgression
did First, and immediately Reside with, and remain in the Person of Adam only,
and the Imputation of that Transgression to them that sprang from him; so the
Goodness, and Justice, that was accomplished by the Second Adam, First, and
Immediately Resideth in him, and is made over to his also, by the Imputation of
God. But again, As they that were in Adam, stood not only guilty of Sin, by
Imputation, but Polluted by the Filth that Possessed him at his fall; So the
Children of the Second Adam, do not only (though first) stand Just by Virtue
of the Imputation of the Personal acts of Justice, and Goodness done by Christ,
but they also receive of that inward quality, the Grace, and Holiness that was
in him, at the Day of his rising from the Dead.

Thus therefore come we to be Holy, by the Death, and Blood of the Lord: This
also is the Contents of those other Scriptures, which abusively you Cite, to
Justify your Assertion, to wit:

That the great Errand of Christ in coming into the World, was -- to put us
again into Possession of the Holiness which we had lost: And that only
Designed the Establishing such a Holiness, as is Sealed Originally in our
Natures, and Originally Dictates of the Humane Nature. The rest of the Chapter
being spoken to already, I pass it, and Proceed to the next.

Your Eighth Chapter tell us, That it is only the Promoting of the Design of
making Men Holy, that is Aimed at by the Apostles, Insisting on the Doctrines
of Christ's Resurrection, Assention, and coming again to Judgment.

Though this should be granted, as indeed it ought not; yet there is not one
Syllable in all their Doctrines, that tends in the least to drive Men back to
the Possession of the Holiness we had lost; which is still the thing Asserted
by you, and that, for the Proof of which you make this noise, and ado. Neither
did Christ at all Design the Promoting of Holiness, by such Principles as you
have Asserted in your Book; neither does the Holy Spirit of God, either help us
in, or excite us to our Duty, Simply from such Natural Principles.

But the Apostles in these Doctrines you mention, had far other Glorious
Designs; such as were truly Gospel, and tended to strengthen our Faith yet
farther: As,

First, For the Resurrection of Christ; They Urge that, as an Undeniable
Argument, of his doing away Sin, by his Sacrificing, and Death: He was
delivered for our Offenses, because he put himself into the Room, and State of
the Wicked, as undertaking their Deliverance from Death, and the Everlasting
Wrath of God: Now putting himself into their Condition, he bears their Sin, and
dies their Death; but how shall we know that by undertaking this Work he did
accomplish the thing he intended? The answer is, He was raised again for our
Justification, Romans 4. 25. even to make it manifest that by the Offering of
himself he had Purged our Sins from before the Face of God. For in that he was
raised again, and that by him, for the appeasing of whose Wrath he was
delivered up to Death; it is evident that the Work for us, was by him
effectually done: For God raised him up again. And hence it is that Paul calls
the Resurrection of Christ, the sure Mercies of David, Act. 13. And as
concerning that he raised him up from the Dead, now no more to return to
Corruption; he says on this wise, I will give thee the sure Mercies of David.
For Christ having Conquered and overcome Death, Sin, the Devil, and the Curse,
by himself, as it is manifest he did; by his rising from the Dead; what now
remains for him, for whom he did this, but Mercy and Goodness for ever?

Wherefore the Resurrection of Christ is that which Seals the truth of our
being delivered from the Wrath by his Blood.

Secondly, As to his Ascension, they urge, and make use of that, for diverse
weighty Reasons also.

1. As a farther Testimony yet, of the Sufficiency of his Righteousness to
Justify Sinners withal: For if he that undertaketh the Work, is yet
entertained by him, whose Wrath he was to appease thereby: What is it? but that
he has so completed that Work. Wherefore he says, that the Holy Ghost shall
Convince the world, that he has a sufficient righteousness, and that because
he went to the Father ( John. 16.) And they saw him no more, because he, went
he Ascended up to the Father, was there Entertained, Accepted, and Embraced of
God. That is an Excellent Word. He is Chosen of God, and Precious: Chosen of
God, to be the Righteousness, that his Divine Majesty is pleased with, and
takes Complacency in; God has Chosen, Exalted, and set down Christ at at his
own Right Hand; for the sweet Savor that he smelled in his Blood, when he dyed
for the Sins of the World.

2. By his Ascension he shows how he returned Conqueror, and Victor over our
Enemies. His Ascension was his going home, from whence he came, to deliver us
from Death: Now it is said* that when he returned home, or Ascended, he led
Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4. that is, carried them Prisoners, whose Prisoners we
were: He rode to Heaven in Triumph, having in Chains the Foes of Believers.

3. In that he Ascended, it was, that he might perform for us, the Second Part
of his Priestly Office, or Mediator-ship. He is gone into Heaven it self,
there, now to appear in the presence of God for us. Wherefore, Heb. 9. 7.
he is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by him, (as
indifferent a thing as you make it to be) seeing he ever-liveth (viz. in
Heaven, whether he is Ascended) to make Intercession for them.

4. He Ascended, that he might be Exalted not only above, but be made head
over all things to the Church. Wherefore now in Heaven, as the Lord in whose
hand is all Power, he Rules over, both Men, and Devils, Sin, and Death, Hell,
and all Calamities, for the good and profit of his Body, the Church, Ephesians. 1.
19, 20, 21.

5. He Ascended to prepare a place for us, who shall live and dye in the Faith
of Jesus, John 14. 1, 2, 3.

6. He Ascended, because there he was to receive the Holy Ghost, the great
Promise of the New Testament; that he might Communicate of that unto his chosen
ones, to give them light to see his wonderful Salvation, and to be as a
Principle of Holiness in their Souls: For the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus was not yet Glorified. But when he Ascended on High, even as
he led Captivity Captive, so he received Gifts for Men; by which Gifts he
means the Holy Ghost, and the Blessed and saving Opperations thereof, Luke
24. Acts 1. 2.

Thirdly, As to his coming again to Judgment, that Doctrine is urged, to show
the benefit, that the Godly will have at that day, when he shall gather
together his Elect, and Chosen, from one end of Heaven unto the other. As also
to show you what an end he will make with those, who have not obeyed his
Gospel, Mat. 25. 2 These. 1. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Now it is true, all these Doctrines do Forcibly Produce an Holy, and Heavenly
life, but neither from your Principles, nor to the end you Propound; to wit,
that we should be put into Possession of our first, Old Covenant Righteousness,
and act from, Humane, and Natural Principles.

Your Ninth Chapter is spent, as you as you suppose, to show us the Nature, and
Evil of Sin; but because you do it more like a Heathen Philosopher, then a
Minister of the Gospel, I shall not much trouble my self therewith.

Your Tenth Chapter Consists in a Commendation of Virtue, but still of that,
and no other, though Counterfeited for another, then at first you have
Described, ( Chap. 1.) even such, which is as much in the Heathens you make
mention of, as in any other man, being the same both in Root, and Branches,
which is Naturally to be found in all men, even as is Sin and Wickedness it
self. And hence you call it here, A living up to your feigned highest
Principle, like a Creature Possessed of a Mind and Reason. Again, While we do
thus, we act most agreeable to the right frame and temper of our Souls; and
Consequently most Naturally; and all the actions of Nature, are confessedly
very sweet and Pleasant; of which very thing you say, the Heathens had a very
great Sense. Page 113. 114.

Answ. No marvel, for it was their Work, not to search the deep things of God,
but those which be the things of a man, and to Discourse of that Righteousness,
and Principle of Holiness, which was Naturally founded, and found within
themselves, as Men; or, as you say, as Creatures Possessed with a mind, and
Reason: But as I have already showed, all this may be, where the Holy Ghost and
Faith is absent, even by the Dictates, as you call them, of Humane Nature; a
Principle, and actions, when trusted to that, as much please the Devil, as any
Wickedness, that is committed by the Sons of Men. I should not have thus boldly
Inserted it, but that your self did ( Page 101.) tell me of it: but I believe
it was only Extorted from you; your Judgment, and your Apollo suit not here,
though indeed the Devil is in the right; for this Righteousness and Holiness
which is our own, and of our selves, is the greatest enemy to Jesus Christ; the
Post, against his Post, and the Wall, against his Wall. I came not to call the
Righteous (puts you quite of the World) but Sinners to Repentance.

Your Eleventh Chapter, is, to show what a miserable Creature that man is, that
is Destitute of your Holiness.

Answ. And I add, as miserable is he, that has, or knows no better: For such
an one is under the Curse of God, because he abides in the Law of Works, or in
the Principles of his own Nature, which neither can cover his Sins from the
sight of God; nor Possess him with Faith or the Holy Ghost.

There are two things in this Chapter, that Proclaim you to be a^^ ^gnorant of
Jesus Christ.

^ First you say, It is not possible a wicked Man should have God^^ Pardon.
Page 119. Page 130.

Secondly, You Suppose it to be impossible for Christ's Righteousness to be
Imputed to an unrighteous man. Page 120.

Answ. To both which, a little briefly* God does not use to Pardon Painted
Sinners, Tim. 1. 15.
but such as are Really so* Christ dyed for SINNERS, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and God Justifies the UNGODLY, even him that works not, Romans 4. 3, 4, 5.
nor has no Works to make him Godly. Besides, Pardon supposes Sin; now he
that is a Sinner* is a Wicked man; Romans 9. 18, Isa. 33 11.
by Nature a Child of Wrath, and as such an Object of the Curse of God, because
he has broken the Law of God. But such God Pardons; not because they have
made themselves Holy, or have given up themselves to the Law of Nature, or to
the Dictates of their Humane Principles, but because he will be Gracious, and
because he will give to his beloved Son Jesus Christ the benefit of his Blood.

As to the Second Head* What need is there, that the Righteousness of Christ
should be Imputed, where men are Righteous first? God uses not thus to do;
his Righteousness is for the stout hearted, and for them that are far from
Righteousness, Isa. 46. 12, 13.

The Believing of Abraham was, while yet he was Uncircumcised; and Circumcision
was added, not to save him by, but as a Seal of the Righteousness of THAT
Faith, which he had being yet Uncircumcised. Romans 2.
Now we know that Circumcision in the Flesh, was a Type of Circumcision in the
heart; wherefore the Faith that Abraham had, before his outward Circumcision,
was to show us, that Faith if it be right, lays hold upon the Righteousness
of Christ, before we be Circumcised inwardly* and this must needs be so; for if
Faith does Purify the Heart; then it must be there before the Heart is
Purified. Now this inward Circumcision is a Seal, or Sign of this; That that is
the only saving Faith, that lays hold upon Christ before we be Circumcised.
But he that believes, before he be inwardly Circumcised, must believe in
another, in a Righteousness without him, and that as he stands at present in
himself Ungodly, for he is not Circumcised; which Faith, if it be right
approves it self also, so to be, by an after Work of Circumcising inwardly.
But, I say, the Soul that thus lays hold on Christ, takes the only way to
please his God, because this is that also, which himself has determined shall
be accomplished upon us. But unto him that works, is the Reward, not reckoned
of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that Works not, but Believes in him that
Justifies the UNGODLY, his Faith is counted for Righteousness, Romans 4. He that
is Ungodly has a want of Righteousness, even of the inward Righteousness of
Works: But what must become of him? Let him Believe in him that Justifies the
Ungodly; because for that purpose there is in him a Righteousness. We will now
return to Paul himself; he had Righteousness before he was Justified by Christ;
yet he chose to be Justified, rather as an unrighteous man, then as one Endued
with so brave a Qualification. That I may be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness* away with mine own Righteousness; I choose rather to be Justified
as Ungodly by the Righteousness of Christ, than by mine own, and his together,
Phil. 3.

You Argue therefore like him that desires to be a Teacher of the Law, (nay
worse) that neither knows what he says, nor whereof he Affirms. But you
say,

Were it possible that Christ's Righteousness could be imputed to an
Unrighteous man, I dare boldly affirm that it would signify as little to his
Happiness, while he continues so, as would a Gorgeous, and Splendid Garment,
to one that is almost starved, etc.

Answ, 1. That Christ's Righteousness is Imputed to men, while Sinners is
sufficiently testified by the Word of God, Ezekiel. 16. 1, -- 8. Zech. 3. 1, 5.
Romans 3. 24, 25. Chap. 4. 1, -- 5. Chap. 5. 6, -- 9. 2 Cor. 5. 18, -- 21. Phil.
3. 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. Rev. 1. 5.

2. And that the Sinner, or unrighteous Man, is happy in this Imputation, is
also as abundantly Evident. For,

1. The Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law, are both taken off, by this
Imputation.

2. The Graces, and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, are all Intailed to, and
followers of this Imputation. Blessed is he, to whom the Lord will not Impute
Sin: It says not, that he is Blessed that has not Sin to be imputed; but he
to whom God will not Impute them, he faith, Therefore the non Imputation of
Sin, does not argue a non being thereof in the Soul, but a Glorious act of
Grace, Imputing the sufficiency of Christ's Righteousness, to Justify him that
is yet Ungodly.

But what Blessedness does follow, the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, to one that is yet Ungodly?

Answ. Even the Blessing of Abraham, to wit, Grace, and Eternal Life: For
Christ was made the Curse, and Death that was due to us, as Sinners; that the
Blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, through Faith in Jesus
Christ: That we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith, Gal. 3.
13, 14. Now Faith has it is eye upon two things, with respect to it is act of
Justifying. First, it acknowledges that the Soul is a Sinner, and then that
there is a sufficiency in the Righteousness of Christ, to Justify it in the
sight of God, though a Sinner.

We have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be Justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law. Therefore they that believe aright,
receive Righteousness, even the Righteousness of another, to Justify them,
while yet in themselves they are Sinners.

Why do they believe in Christ? The answer is, That they MIGHT be Justified,
not because in their own Eyes they are. They therefore at present stand
Condemned in themselves, and therefore they believe in Jesus Christ, that they
might be set free from present Condemnation. Now being Justified by his Blood,
as Ungodly, they shall be saved by his Life, that is, by his Intercession: For
whom he Justifies by his Blood, he saves by his Intercession: For by that is
given the Spirit, Faith, and all Grace that preserves the Elect unto Eternal
Life and Glory.

I Conclude therefore, that you argue not Gospelly, in that you so boldly
Affirm, that it would signify as little to the Happiness of one, to be
Justified by Christ's Righteousness, while a Sinner; as would a Gorgeous and
Splendid Garment to one that is ready to perish. For farther, Thus to be
Justified is Meat and Drink to the Sinner; and so the beginning of Eternal Life
in him. My Flesh is Meat indeed, said Christ, and my Blood is Drink indeed: And
he that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, has Eternal, or Everlasting
Life. He Affirms it once again. As the living Father has sent me, and I live
by the Father, so he that Eats me, even he shall live by me, John 6. Here now
is a Man an Hungered; what must he feed upon? Not his pure Humanity, not upon
the sound Complexion of his Soul, nor yet on the Dictates of his Humane Nature,
nor those neither, which you call, truly Generous Principles: But upon the
Flesh, and Blood of the Son of God, which was once given for the Sin of the
World. Let those then, that would be saved from the Devil, and Hell, and that
would find a Fountain of Grace in themselves, first receive, and feed upon
Christ, as Sinners, and Ungodly. Let them believe that both his Body, and
Blood, and Soul, was offered for them, as they were Sinners. The believing of
this, is the Eating of Christ; this eating of Christ, is the beginning of
Eternal Life, to wit, of all Grace, and health in the Soul; and of Glory to be
Enjoyed most perfectly in the next World.

Your Twelfth Chapter is to show, That Holiness being Perfected, is Blessedness
it self; and that the Glory of Heaven Consists chiefly in it.

Answ. But none of your Holiness, none of that inward Holiness which we have
Lost before Conversion, shall ever come to Heaven: That being as I have showed,
a Holiness of another Nature, and arising from another Root, then that we shall
in Heaven enjoy.

2. But farther, Page 123. 124.
Your Description of the Glory that we shall ^ossess in Heaven, is
questionable, as to your notion of it; your ^^^^on is, That the substance of it
Consists in a perfect resemblance to the Divine Nature.

Answ. Therefore not in the Enjoyment of the Divine Nature it self; For that
which in Substance is but a bare Resemblance, though it be a most perfect one,
is not the thing it self, of which it is a Resemblance. But the Blessedness
that we shall enjoy in Heaven, in the very Substance of it, Consists not
wholly, nor Principally, in a Resemblance of, but in the Enjoyment of God
himself; Heirs of God. Rom* 8.
Wherefore there shall not be in us a Likeness only to, but the very Nature of
God: Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8. Hence the Apostle tells
us, that he rejoiced in hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5. Not only in hope of
a Resemblance of it. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul. But this is like
the rest of your Discourse. You are so in Love with your Adamitish Holiness,
that with you it must be God in Earth, and Heaven.

Who they are that hold, our Happiness in Heaven, shall come by a mere fixing
our Eyes upon the Divine Perfections? I know not; But thus I Read, We shall be
like him: Why? or how? For we shall see him as he is. Our Likeness then to God,
even in the very Heavens, will in great part come by the Visions of him. And to
speak the truth, our very entrance into eternal life, or the beginnings of it
here, they come to us thus, But we all (every one of us that shall be saved,
come by it only thus) with open Face beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the
Lord, are changed from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2.
Cor. 3. 18.

And whereas you tell us, Page 124. That the Devils themselves have a large
measure of some of the Attributes of God, as Knowledge, Power, etc. though
themselves are unlike unto him.

In this you most Prodigiously Blaspheme.

Your Thirteenth Chapter is to show, That our Saviors preferring the Business
of making Men Holy, before any other, witnesses, that this is to do the best
Service to God.

But still respecting the Holiness, you have in your first Chapter Described,
which still the Reader must have his eye upon, it is false, and a slander of
the Son of God. He never intended to Promote, or Prefer, your Natural Old
Covenant, Holiness, viz. that which we had lost in Adam, or that which yet from
him, in the Dregs thereof, remains in Humane Nature; but that which is of the
Holy Ghost, of Faith, of the New Covenant.

I shall not here again take notice of your 130 Page, nor with the Error
Contained therein, about Justification by Imputed Righteousness.

But one thing I observe, that in all this Chapter you have nothing Fortified
what you say, by any Word of God, no though you Insinuate ( Page 129. and Page
131.) that some Dissent from your Opinion. But instead of the Holy Words of
God, being as you Feign, Conscious to your self, you cannot do it SO well, as
by another Method, viz. The Words of Mr. John Smith* therefore you Proceed with
his; as he with Plato's, and so wrap you up the Business.

You come next to an Improvement upon the whole, where you make a Comparison
between the Heathens and the Gospel; showing how far the Gospel helps the
Light the Heathens had, in their Pursuit after your Holiness. But (...) the
Excellency of the Gospel, as you have vainly Dreamt, is, to make Improvement,
First of the Heathens Principles; such good Principles, say you, as were by the
Light of Nature Dictated to them. Page 133, 134, 135. As, 1. That there is but
one God, that he is Infinitely perfect, etc.

2. That we owe our lives, and all the comforts of them to him.

3. That he is our Sovereign Lord.

4. That he is to be Loved above all things.



Answ. 1. Seeing all these are, and may be known, as you your self confess, by
them that have not the Gospel; and I add, nor yet the Holy Ghost, nor any
saving Knowledge of God, or Eternal Life: Therefore it cannot be the Design of
Jesus Christ, by the Gospel, to Promote, or help forward this Knowledge, simply
from this Principle: viz. Natural Light, and the Dictates of it. My Reason is,
because when Nature is strained to the highest Pin, it is but Nature still; and
so all the improvement of it is Light, and Knowledge, is but an increase of that
which is but Natural. Now, says Paul, The Natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.

But the Gospel is the Ministration of the Spirit; a Revelation of another
thing then is found in, or can be acquired to, by Heathenish Principles of
Nature.

I say, a Revelation of another thing; or rather, another discovery of the
same. As,

1. Concerning the Godhead; the Gospel gives us another discovery of it, then
is possible to be obtained by the Dictates of Natural Light, even, a discovery
of a Trinity of Persons, and yet Unity of Essence, in the same Deity. 1 John 5.
1, 5, 8.

2. The Light of Nature will not show us, that God was in Christ, Reconciling
the World to himself.

3. The Light of Nature will not show us, that we owe what we are, and have, to
God, because we are the Price of the Blood of his Son.

4. The Light of Nature will not show, that there is such a thing as Election
in Christ.

5. Or, that there is such a thing, as the Adoption of Children to God, through
him.

6. Nor that we are to be saved by Faith in his Blood.

7. Or, that the Man Christ shall come from Heaven, to Judgment.

These things, I say, the Light of Nature teaches not; but these things are
the Great and Mighty things of the Gospel, and those, about which it chiefly
bends it self, touching upon other things, still as those that are knowable,
by a Spirit Inferior to this of the Gospel.

Besides, as these things are not known by the Light of Nature, so the Gospel,
when it comes, as I also told you before, does Implant in the Soul, another
Principle, by which they may be received, and from which the Soul should act
and do, both toward God, and toward Men; as Namely, the Holy^Ghost, Faith,
Hope, the Joy of the Spirit, etc.

The other things you mention, Page 138, 140, 142, 143. viz.

1. The Immortality of the Soul.

2. The Doctrine of Rewards, and Punishments in the Life to come.

3. Of the forgiveness of Sin upon true Repentance, etc.

Answ. All these things may be Assented to, where yet the Grace of the Gospel
is not; but yet the Apprehension must be such, as is the Light, by which they
are discovered; but the Light of Nature cannot discover them, according to the
Light and Nature of the Gospel; because the Gospel Knowledge of them, arises
also from another Principle: So then, these Doctrines are not Cofirmed by the
Gospel, as the Light of Nature teaches them: Wherefore, Paul, speaking of the
things of the Gospel, and so consequently of these, 1 Cor. 2, 13.
he says, Which things also we speak, NOT in the WORDS which MAN'S Wisdom
teaches, but which the HOLY GHOST teaches, comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual. As if he shoul say, We speak of God, of the Soul, of the Life to
come, of Repentance, of Forgiveness of Sins, etc. Not as Philosophers DO, nor
yet in their Light; but as Saints, Christians, and Sons of God; as such who
have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God;
that we may know the things that are freely given to us, of God.

But you add (for the Glory of the Gospel) That we have other things, which no
man could, without Divine Revelation, once have Dreamed of* As,

1. That God has made miserable Sinners the Objects of such Transcendent Love,
as to give them his only begotten Son.

Answ. I must confess, If this one Head had by you been handled well, you would
have Written like a Worthy Gospel Minister. But you add, Page 146.

1. That when Christ was sent, it was to show us upon what terms God was
Re^nciled to us: viz. By laying before us all the Parts of* Holiness, which are
necessary to Restore our Natures to his Likeness^* and most Pathetically,
moreover to entreat us to do what lies or our* Parts to put them in Practice,
that so to Eternity it may be well (...).

What these things are, you mention not here; therefore I shall leave them to
be spoken to, under the Third Head.

2. A Second thing you mention is, That this Son of God Conversed upon equal
terms with Men, becoming the Son of Man, b^rn of a Woman: (a great
Demonstration that God has a liking to the Humane Nature.) But little to the
purpose as you have handled it.

3. That the Son of God taught men their Duty, by his own Example, and did
himself perform what he required of them; and that himself did tread before us
EVERY step of that which he has told us leads to Eternal Life.

Answ. Now we are come to the point: viz. That the way to Eternal Life, is,
First of all to take Christ for our example, treading his step: And the Reason,
if it be true, is weighty; For he has trod every step before us, which he has
told us leads to Eternal Life.

1. Every step. Therefore he went to Heaven by Virtue of an Imputative
Righteousness; For this is one of our steps thither.

2. Every step. Then he must go thither, by Faith in his own Blood, for Pardon
of Sin; For this is another of our steps thither.

3. Every step. Then he must go thither, by Virtue of his own Intercession at
the Right Hand of God, before he came thither; For this is one of our steps
thither.

4. Every step. Then he must come to God, and ask mercy for some great
Wickedness, which he had Committed; For this is also one of our steps thither.

But again, we will Consider it the other way.

1. Every step. Then we cannot come to Heaven, before we first be made accursed
of God; For so was he before he came thither.

2. Every step. Then we must first make our Body and Soul an Offering for the
Sin of others; For this did he before he came thither.

3. Every step. Then we must go to Heaven for the sake of our own
Righteousness; For that was one of his steps thither.

O Sir! What will thy Gallant, Generous mind do here? Indeed you talk of his
being an Expiatory Sacrifice forus, but you put no more trust to that, then to
Baptism, or the Lords Supper; counting that, with the other two, but things
indifferent in themselves, Page 6, 7, 8.

You add again, That this Son of God being raised from the Dead, and Ascended
to Heaven, is our High Priest there: But you talk not at all, of his sprinkling
the Mercy Seat with his Blood, but clap upon him, the Heathens Demons,
Negotiating the Affairs of Men with the Supreme God; and so wrap up, with a
testification that it is needless to enlarge on the Point, Page 150.

But to be plain, and in one word to tell you; About all these things you are
Heathenishly dark; there has not in these 150 Pages, one Gospel truth been
Christianly handled by you; but rather a darkening of truth, by Words without
Knowledge. What Man that ever had Read, or Assented to the Gospel, but would
have spoken (yet kept within the bounds of truth) more Honorably of Christ,
then you have done? His Sacrifice must be stepped over, as the Spider stradleth
over the Wasp, his Intercession is needless to be Enlarged upon. But when it
falls in your way to talk of your Humane Nature, of the Dictates, of the
first Principles of Morrals within you, and of your Generous mind to follow it:
Oh what need is there now of Amplifying, Enlarging, and Pressing it on Men's
Consciences! As if that poor Heathenish, Pagan Principle, was the very Spirit
of God within us: And as if Righteousness done by that, was that, and that
only, that would or could fling Heaven Gates off the Hinges.

Yea, a little after you tell us, That the Doctrine of ^ending the Holy Ghost,
was to move, and Excite us to our Duty; and to Assist, Cheer, and Comfort us in
the Performance of it. Still meaning our close Adhering by the Purity of our
Humane Nature to the Dictates of the Law, as Written in our hearts as Men.
Which is as false as God is true. For the Holy Ghost is sent into our Hearts,
not to Excite us to a Compliance with our Old and Wind-shaken Excellencies,
that came into the World with us, but to Write new Laws in our Hearts; even the
Law of Faith, the Word of Faith, and of Grace, and the Doctrine of Remission of
Sins, through the Blood of the Lamb of God; that Holiness might flow from
thence.

Your 15th. Chapter is to show, That the Gospel gives for greater helps to an
Holy Life, then the Jewish Ceremonies did of Old I Answer.

But the Reader must here well weigh, that in the Gospel you find also, some
po^sitive Precepts, that are of the same Nature with the Ceremonies under the
Law; of which, that of coming to God by Christ, you call one, and Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, the other two. So then by your Doctrine, the Excellency of
the Gospel does not lie in that we have a Christ to come to God by* but in
things as you feign more substantial. What are they* Inward Principles of
Holiness, Page 159. Spiritual Precepts, P. 16^. That height of Virtue, and true
Goodness, that the Gospel Designeth to raise us to: All which are General
Words, falling from a staggering Conscience, leaving the World, that are
Ignorant of his mind, in a Muse; but tickling his Brethren with the Delights of
their Morral Principles, with the Dictates of their Humane Nature, and their
gallant Generous Minds. Thus making a very Stalking-horse of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the Words of Truth and Holiness, thereby to slay the silly one;
making the Lord of Life and Glory, instead of a Savior, by his Blood, the
Instructor, and Schoolmaster only of Humane Nature, a Chaser away of evil
Affections, and an Extinguisher of Burning Lusts; and that not so neither, but
by giving perfect Explications of Morral Precepts, ( Page 17.) and setting
himself an Example before them to follow him, Page 297.

Your Sixteenth Chapter Contains an answer to those that Object against the
Power of the Christian Religion to make Men Holy.

Answ. And to speak truth; what you at first render as the cause of the
Unholiness of the Professors thereof ( Page 171*) is to the Purpose, had it
been Christianly Managed by you, as namely, Men's Gross* Unbelief of the truth
of it; for it Effectually^Worketh in them that Believe (1 These. 2. 13.) but
that you only touch, and away, neither showing what is the Object of Faith,
nor the cause of it is being so Effectual to that Purpose; neither to you at all
treat of the Power of Unbelief, and how all Men by Nature are shut up therein,
Romans 11. 32. But presently, according to your Old and Natural Course, you fall
First, upon a supposed Power in Men, to embrace the Gospel, both by closing
with the Promise, and shuning the threatening ( Page 172.) farther adding, That
mankind is Endued with a Principle of Freedom, and that this Principle is as
Essential, as any other to the Humane Nature (Page 173.) By all which it is
Manifest, that however you make mention of Unbelief, because the Gospel has
laid the same in your way; yet our Old Doctrine, of the Purity of the Humane
Nature, now broken out into a freedom of Will, and that as an Essential of the
Humane Nature, is your great Principle of Faith, and your following of that, as
it Dictateth to you Obedience to the first Principles of Morrals, the Practice
of Faith, by which you think to be saved. That this is so, must unavoidably be
gathered from the good opinion you have your self of coming to God by Christ:
viz. That in the Command thereof; it is one of these Positive Precepts, and a
thing in it self absolutely considered indifferent, and neither Good nor Evil.
Now he that looks upon coming to God by Christ, with such an Eye as this,
cannot lay the stress of his Salvation upon the Faith, or Belief thereof;
Indifferent Faith, will serve for Indifferent things: Yea, a Man must look
beyond that, which he Believes is but one with the Ceremonial Laws, but not
the same with Baptism, or the Lord's Supper; for with those you compare that of
coming to God by Christ. Wherefore Faith, with you, must be turned into a
Cheerful, and Generous Complying with the Dictate; of the Humane Nature, and
Unbelief, into that which Opposes this, or that makes the Heart backward, and
sluggish therein. This is also gathered from what you aver of the Divine Morral
Laws, that they be of an Indispensible, and Eternal Obligation ( Page 8) things
that are good in themselves (Page 9.) Considered in an Abstracted Notion ( Page
10.) Wherefore things that are good in themselves, must needs be better then
those that are in themselves but Indifferent: neither can a Possitive Precept
make that which of it self is neither Good nor Evil, better then that which in
it is own Nature remains the Essentials of Goodness.

I Conclude then, by Comparing you with your self, by bringing your Book to
your Book, that you understand neither Faith, nor unbelief, any farther then by
obeying, or disobeying the Humane Nature, and it is Dictates in Chief; and that
of coming to God by Christ, as one of the things that is indifferent in it self.

But a little to touch upon your Principle of Freedom, which in Page 9. you
call an understanding and liberty of Will.

Answ. First, That there is no such thing in Man by Nature, as Liberty of Will,
or a Principle of Freedom, in the saving things of the Kingdom of Christ, is
Apparent by several Scriptures. Indeed there is in Men, as Men, a willingness
to be saved their own way, even by following (as you) their own Natural
Principles, as is seen by the Quakers, as well as your self; but that there is
a freedom of will in Men, as Men, to be saved by the way which God has
Prescribed, is neither asserted in the Scriptures of God, neither stands with
the Nature of the Principles of the Gospel.

The Apostle says, The Natural Man receives not the things that be of the
Spirit of God. And the Reason is, not because, not Principally because he
lays aside a Liberty of Will, but because they are foolishness to him (1 Cor.
2.) Because in his Judgment they are things of no Moment, but things (as you
have imagined of them) that in themselves are but indifferent. And that this
Judgment that is passed by the Natural Man, concerning the things of the
Spirit of God (of which, that of coming to God by Christ, is the chief) is that
which he cannot but do as a Man; is Evident from that which follows; neither
CAN he know them, because they are Spiritually Discerned: Neither CAN he know
them as a Man, because they are Spiritually Discerned. Now if he cannot know,
them, from what Principle should he will them: For Judgment, or Knowledge must
be, before the Will can act. I say, again, a Man must know them to be things in
chief, that are Absolutely, and Indispensibly Necessary, and those in which
rests the greatest Glory; or else his Will will not Comply with them, nor
Center, and Terminate in them, as such, but still count themselves (as you)
though somewhat Convinced that he ought to adhere unto them) things that in
themselves, are only indifferent, and absolutely Considered neither Good nor
Evil.

A farther enlargement upon this Subject, will be time enough, if you shall
Contradict.

Another Reason, or cause (which you call an immediate one of the
unsuccessfulness of the Gospel, is, Men's unaccountable mistaking the Design of
it (not to say worse) as to conceive no better of it, then as a Science, and a
matter of Speculation, etc. Page 173.

Answ. If this be true, you have showed us the Reason, why your self have so
base and unworthy thoughts thereof: For although coming to God by Christ, be
the very chief, first, the substance, and most Essential part of obedience
thereto; yet you have reckoned this but like one of the Ceremonies of the Law,
or as Baptism with Water, and the Lord's Supper, Page 7, 8, 9. Falling more
Directly upon the Body of the Morral Law, as written in the Heart of Men, and
inclining more to the teaching, or Dictates of Humane Nature, (which were
neither of them both ever any Essential part of the Gospel) then upon that
which indeed is the Gospel of Christ.

And here I may (if God will) timely Advertise my Reader, that the Gospel, and
it is Attendants, are to be accounted things Distinct: The Gospel properly
taken, being Glad Tidings of good things; or, the Doctrine of the for giveness
of Sins freely by Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. For to
speak strictly; neither is the Grace of Faith, Hope, Repentance, or Newness of
Life, the Gospel; but rather things that are wrought by the Preaching thereof;
things that are the Effects of it; or its unseperable Companions, to all them
that shall be saved. Romans 16
Wherefore the Gospel is said to be Preached in all Nations, for the obedience
of Faith: Hope also is called, the Hope of the Gospel, not the Gospel it self.
So again, the Gospel is Preached that Men should repent, but it is not Preached
that men should Gospel.

But your Gospel, which Principally, or Chiefly Centers in the Dictates of
Humane Nature, and your Faith, which is chiefly a subjecting to those Dictates,
are so far off from being at all, any near attendants of the Gospel, that they
never are urged in the New Testament, but in order to show men they have
forgotten to act as men, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. Chap. 2. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 11. 14.

Your last Reason is, because of several untoward opinions, the Gospel is very
unsuccessful, Page 175.

Answ. But what these opinions are, we hear not; nor how to shun them you tell
us here nothing at all. This I am sure, there are no Men in this day have more
opposed the Light, Glory, and Luster of the Gospel of Christ, then those (as
the Quakers and others) that have set up themselves, and their own Humanity, as
the Essential parts of it.

You in Answer to other things add many other Reasons to prove they are
mistaken that count the Gospel a thing of but mean Operation to work Holiness
in the heart: at which you ought your self to tremble, seeing the Son himself,
who is the Lord of Gospel, is of so little esteem with you, as to make coming
to God by him so trivial a business as you have done.

Your large Transcript of other men's sayings, to prove the good success of the
Gospel of Old, did better become that People and age, then you and yours; they
being a people that lived in the power thereof, but you such Bats as cannot see
it. That Saying, you mention of Rigaltias, does better become you and yours:
Those now adays do retain the Name, and the Society of Christians, which live
altogether Antichristian Lives: For take away Publicans, and a wretched Rabble,
etc. And your Christian Churches, will be la^entable, weak, small, and
insignifieant things.

I shall add to yours another reason of the unsuccessfulness of the Gospel in
our days, and that is, because so many ignorant Sir John's, on the one hand, and
so many that have done Violence to their former Light, and that have Damned
themselves in their former Anathematizing of others, have now for a long time,
as a Judgment of God, been permitted to be, and made the mouth to the People:
Persons whose Lives are Debauched, and who in the Face of the World, after
seeming serious Detestings of Wickedness, have for the Love of filthy Lucre,
and the Pampering their idle Carcasses, made Shipwreck of their former Faith,
and that Feigned good Conscience they had. From which number if you, Sir, have
kept your self clear, the less Blood of the Damned will fall upon your head: I
know you not by Face; much less your Personal Practice; yet I have heard as if
Blood might pursue you, for your Unstable Weathercock Spirit, which doubtless
could not but stumble the Weak, and give advantage to the Adversary to speak
Vilifyingly of Religion.

As to your Seventeenth and Eighteenth Chapters, I shall say little, only I
wish that your Eighteenth had been more express in discovering how far a man
may go, with a notion of the truth of the Gospel, and yet perish because he
has it not in Power.

Only in your Inveighing so much against the Pardon of Sin, while you seem so
much to cry up Healing; you must know that Pardon of Sin is the beginning of
Health to the Soul: He Pardons our Iniquities, and Heals all our Diseases,
Psa. 103. 3. And where he says, by the stripes of Christ we are healed, it is
Evident that healing begins at Pardon, and not Pardon after healing, as you
would rather have it, 1 Pet. 2. 24. compare, Isa. 53. As for your Comparison of
the Plaster, and the Physicians Potion, Page 217. I say, you do but abuse your
Reader, and muddy the way of the Gospel. For the first thing of which the Soul
is sick, and by which the Conscience receives wounding, it is the guilt of
Sin, and fear of the Curse of God for it. For which is provided the wounds and
Precious Blood of Christ, which Flesh and Blood, if the Soul eat thereof by
Faith, gives deliverance therefrom. Upon this the filth of Sin appears most
odious, for that it has not only at present Defiled the Soul, but because it
keeps it from doing those Duties of Love, which by the Love of Christ it is
constrained to endeavor the perfecting of. For Filth, appears Filth; that is
irksome, and odious to a contrary Principle now implantin the Soul; which
Principle had its Conveyance thither by Faith in the Sacrifice and death of
Christ going before. The Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge;
That if one dyed for all, then are all Dead; and that he dyed for all, that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but to him that
dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The man that has received Christ,
desires to be Holy, because the Nature of the Faith that lays hold on Christ
(although I will not say as you, it is of a Generous mind) works by love, and
longs, yea, greatly longs that the Soul may be brought, not only into an
universal Conformity to his Will, but into his very likeness; and because that
State stands not with what we are now, but with what we shall be hereafter:
Therefore in this we groan, being burdened (with that which is of a contrary
Nature) to be clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven: 2 Cor. 5. 1,
2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Which state is not that of Adam's Innocence; but that which is Spiritual, and
Heavenly, even that which is now in the Lord in Heaven.

But I will Descend to your Nineteenth. Chapter, it may be more may be
discovered there.

Your Nineteenth Chapter is to show; That a right understanding of the Design
of Christianity (viz. as you have laid it down) will give satisfaction
concerning the true Notion.

First, Of Justifying Faith.

Secondly, Of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, Page 221.

First, Of Justifying Faith; It is ( say you) such a Belief of the truth of the
Gospel, as Includes a sincere Resolution of Obedience to all it is Precepts.

Answ. To this I shall Answer; First, that the Faith which we call Justifying
Faith, 2 Pet 1. 1. Jude 20.
is like Precious Faith with all the Elect, and that which is most Holy: but
those Acts of it, which Respect our Justification with God from the Curse of
the Law that is due for Sin; are such, as respect not any good Work done by us,
but the Righteousness that Resideth in the Person of Christ; and is made ours
by the imputation of Grace. This Faith I say, accounts him in whom it is now
a Sinner, and without Works; yea, if he have any that in his own eyes are such,
this Faith rejects them, and throws them away; for it sees a Righteousness
in the Person of Christ sufficient; even such as is verily the Righteousness of
God. Now to him that works not, but believes. Works and Faith are put here
in oppposition, Faith being considered as Justifying, in the sight of God from
the Curse. The Reason is, because the Righteousness by which the Soul must thus
stand Justified, is a Righteousness of God's appointing, not of his Prescribing
us; a Righteousness that Entirely is Included in the Person of Christ. The
Apostle also, when he speaks of God's saving the Election, which hangs upon
the same Hinge, as this of Justification does, to wit, on the Grace of God; he
opposes it to Works; and that, not to this or that sort only, but even to
Work, in the Nature of Work (Romans 11.) If it be of Grace, then it is no more of
Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be of Works, then it is no
more of Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. By this Text, I say, the Apostle
does so thoroughly Distinguish between Grace and Works, as that which so ever
stands in the Case, the other must be Annihilated: If it be by Grace, then
must Works be no more, then it is no more of Works: but if it be of Works, then
is Grace no more, then it is no more of Grace.

But this, notwithstanding, you urge farther; That Faith Justifies, as it
includes, a sincere Resolution, etc.

Answ. Although, as I have said before, the Faith which is the Justifying
Faith, is that of the Holiest Nature, yet in the Act, by which it lays hold
of Justifying Righteousness, it respects it, simply, as a Righteousness offered
by Grace, or given unto the Person that by Faith lays hold thereon as he
stands yet ungodly and a Sinner.

Faith Justifies not separate from the Righteousness of Christ as it is a
Grace in us, nor as it subjecteth the Soul to the obedience of the Morral Law,
but as it receives a Righteousness offered to that Sinner, that as such will
lay hold on, and accept thereof. Christ Jesus came into the World to save
Sinners, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
by being their Redemption, and Righteousness himself.

But you add, The Faith that Intaileth the Sinner to SO High a Privilege as
that of Justification, must needs be such as complyeth with all the purposes of
Christ's coming into the World, etc.

Answ. By this supposition, Faith Justifies, not by receiving of the
Righteousness that Christ by himself accomplished for Sinners; but by falling
in with all good Works, which because they cannot be known, much less done, by
the Soul at first, his Faith being then, as to the perfection of knowledge of
Duties, weak, he stands still before God unjustified, and so must stand until
he does comply with all those purposes of Christ's coming into the World.

But yet again you recall your self, and distinguish one purpose from the rest,
as a grand one, Page 222. And that is to receive Christ as Lord, as well as a
Savior.

Answ. 1. Although the Soul that in truth receives Christ, receives him
wholly, and entirely as Christ, and not as chopped, and pulled in Pieces: Yet I
distinguish between the act of Faith, which lays hold of Christ for my
Justification from the Curse before God, and the consequences of that act,
which are to engage me to newness of Life. And indeed, as it is impossible for
a Man to be a new Man, before he be Justified in the sight of God; so it is
also as impossible, but that when Faith has once laid hold on Christ for
Life, it should also follow Christ by Love. But,

2. Christ may be received at first as Lord, and that in our Justification, and
yet not at all be considered as a Lawgiver, for so he is not the Object of
Faith for our Justification with God, but a requirer of Obedience to Laws, and
Statutes of them that already are Justified by the Faith that receives him as
Righteousness. But Christ is as well a Lord for us, as to, or over us, and it
highly concerns the Soul, when it believes in, or trusts to the
Righteousness of Christ, for Justification with God, to see that this
Righteousness Lords it over Death, and Sin, and the Devil, and Hell for us: The
Name wherewith he shall be called, is, Romans 8.
The Lord our Righteousness. Our Righteousness, then is Lord, and Conqueror
over all, and we more then Conqerours through this Lord that loved us. The
Author to the Hebrews calls him King of Righteousness, Heb. 7.
because by his Righteousness he rules as Lord and King, and can reign and
Lord it, at all times over all those that seek to separate us from the
presence, and Glory of God.

Now, how you will brook this Doctrine I know not; I am sure he stands in need
thereof, that is Lorded over by the Curse of the Law, the guilt of Sin, the
Rage of the Devil, and the fear of the Death and Hell; He, I say, would be glad
to know that in Christ there is a Righteousness that Lords it, or that Christ,
as he is Righteousness, is Lord.

Wherefore Reader, when thou shall Read or Hear, that Jesus Christ is Lord, if
thou art at the same time under guilt of Sin, and fear of Hell, then do thou
Remember that Christ is Lord more ways then one, he is Lord as he is
Righteousness; he is Lord as he is Imputative Righteousness; he is the Lord OUR
Righteousness. Je^e 23. 6.
Of the same import is that also, he is a Prince, and a Savior, he is a Prince
as he is a Savior; because the Righteousness by which he saves, bears Rule
in Heaven, and Earth: And hence we Read again, that even when he was in the
Combat with our Sins, the Devils, the Curse, and Death, upon the Cross, he even
in that place made a show of them openly, Colos. 2. 15, 16.
and triumphed over them. Now in these things he is Lord for us, Ephesians 4. 8, 9.
and the Captain of our Salvation; as also in that he has Led Captivity
Captive; all which places, with many more, being Testimonies to us, of the
sufficiency of that Righteousness which saves us from the Justice of the Law
and Wrath of God. But you respect not this his manner of Lording; but will have
him be a Savior, as he gives Laws, especially those you call Indispensible,
and Eternal, the Morral Law. You would have him a Savior, as he brings us
back to the Holiness we had lost. But this is none other then Barbarous
Quakerisme, the stress of their Writing, also tending to no other purpose.

But you tell us, That you scarcely admired at any thing more in all your Life,
then that any, worthy Men especially, should be so difficulty persuaded, to
receive or embrace this account of Justifying Faith, and should perplex, and
make intricate, so plain a Doctrine.

Answ. And doubtless they far more groundedly stand amazed at such as you, who
while you pretend to show the design of the Gospel, make the very Essential of
it, a thing in it self indifferent; Page 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
and absolutely considered neither good nor evil, that makes obedience to the
Morral Laws, more Essential to salvation, then that of going to God by Christ,
that makes it the great Design of Christ, to put us into a Possession of that
promiseless, natural old Covenant holiness which we had lost long since in
Adam, that makes as if Christ, rejecting all other Righteousness, Page 16.
or Holiness, has Established only this: Yea, that makes the very Principle
of this Holiness to consist in a sound Complexion of Soul, the Purity of Humane
Nature in us, a habit of Soul, truly Generous Motives and Principles, Divine
Morral Laws, which were first written in Men's Hearts, and Originally Dictates
of Humane Nature. All this Villainy against the Son of God, with much more as
bad, is Comprised within less then the first sixteen ^ages of your Book.

But, say you, what pretense can there be for thinking that Faith is the
Condition, or Instrument of Justification, as it complyeth with only the
Precept of relying upon Christ's Merits, for the obtaining of it: especially
when it is no less manifest then the Sun at Noonday, that obedience to the
other Precepts must go before obedience to this: And that a Man may not rely
upon the merits of Christ, for the forgiveness of his Sins, and he must be
presumptuous in so doing, and puts an affront upon his Savior too, till he be
sincerely willing to be reformed from them, Page 223.

Answ. That the Merits of Christ, for Justification, are made over to that
Faith that receives them, while the Person that believes it, stands in his
own account, by the Law a Sinner, has already been showed. And that they are
not by God appointed for another purpose, is manifest through all the Bible.

1. In the Type, when the bloody Sacrifices were to be offered, and an
Atonement made for the Soul, the People were only to confess their Sins over
the head of the Bullock, or Goat, or Lamb, by laying their Hands thereon, and
so the Sacrifice was to be slain. They were only to acknowledge their Sins.
And observe it, in the day that these offerings were made, they were not to
Work all; For he that did any Work therein, was to be cut off from his People,
Lev. 4. chapter 16. chapter 23.

2. In the Antitype thus it runs; Christ dyed for our Sins; Christ gave himself
for our Sins; He was made to be Sin for us; Christ was made a Curse for us.

Yea, but, say you, What pretense can there be, that Faith is the Condition, or
Instrument of Justification, as it Complyeth with only the Precepts of relying
upon Christ's Merits; that is, first, or before the Soul does other things.

Answ. I say (avoiding your own Ambiguous terms) that it is the Duty, the
indispensible Duty of all that would be saved, First, Immediately, now to close
in by Faith with that work of Redemption, which Christ by his blood has
purchased for them, as they are Sinners.

1. Because God does hold it forth, yea, has set it forth to be received by
us, as such, Romans 3. 23. to 27.

2. Because God has Commanded us by Faith to receive it as such, Act. 16.

And I add, If the Jailer was altogether ignorant of what he must do to be
saved; and Paul yet bids him then, before he knew any thing else, Believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and he should be saved, that then Believing (even
Believing on Christ for a Righteousness to justify, and save him) must go
first, and may, nay ought to be pressed, even then, when the Soul stands
ignorant of what else he ought to do, Act. 16. 30, 31, 32.

But, you say, It is evident as the Sun at Noonday, that obedience to the
other Precepts must go before obedience to THIS; that is, before Faith in
Christ.

Answ. This you say; But Paul said to the ignorant Jailer, that knew nothing of
the mind of God in the Doctrine of Justification, that he should first believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ; and so should be saved. Again when Paul Preached to
the Corinthians, The first Doctrine that he delivered unto them was, That
Christ dyed for their Sins, according to the Scriptures, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2,
3, 4.

But what be these other Precepts? Not Baptism, nor the Supper of the Lord; for
these you say are (as poor and inconsiderable) as that of coming to God by
Christ, even all three, things in themselves neither good nor evil, but of an
indifferent Nature; they must be therefore, some more weighty things of the
Gospel, then these possitive Precepts. But what things are they? It is good
that you tell us, seeing you Tacitly forbid all men upon pain of Presumption,
and of doing affront to Jesus Christ, that they rely not on the merits of
Christ for forgiveness, till they be sincerely willing to perform them first;
yet I find not here one particular Precept instanced by you: But perhaps we
shall hear of them hereafter, therefore now I shall let them pass. Page 223.
You tell us farther, that such a relyance as that, of acting Faith, First, on
the Merits of Christ for Justification, is ordinarily to be found amongst
Unregenerate, and even the worst of Men.

Answ. This is but a falsehood, 1 John 3.
and a slander, for the Unregenerate know him not; how then can they believe on
him: Besides, the worst of men, so far as they pretend Religion, set up your
Idol in their hearts; viz. their own good meanings, their own good Nature, the
Notions and Dictates of their Nature, living that little which they do live
upon the Snuff of their own Light, the Sparks of their own fire, and therefore
woe unto them.

But you add, How can it be otherwise, then that that act of Faith must needs
have a Hand in Justifying, and the special Hand too, which distinguishes it
from that which is found in such Persons.

Answ. 1. There is no Act of Faith does more distinguish true Faith from false,
and the Christian from the painted Hypocrite, then that which first lays hold
on Christ, while the Person that has it stands in his own esteem, ungodly; all
other like your self, being fearful and unbelieving ( Rev. 20. 8.) despise it,
and wonder, and perish ( Act. 13. 40, 41.)

2. And this Faith, by thus acting, does more subdue Sin (though it does not
Justify, as subduing, but as applying Christ's Righteousness) then all the
Wisdom and Purity of Humane Nature, or the Dictates of that Nature, that is
found in the whole World.

But you add farther; What good ground can Men have for this fancy, when as our
Savior has Merited the Pardon of Sin for this end, that it might be an
Effectual motive to turn from it?

Answ. Although you speak this in great Derision to Faith when it works
right, yet know that therefore (seeing you would hear it) I say, therefore, has
our Savior merited pardon, and bestowed it on men freely, and bid them believe
or receive it, and have it; that thereby they might be encouraged to live to
him, and love him, and comply with his commandments. For scarcely for a
Righteous Man will one dye, yet for peradventure for a good Man some would even
dare to dye: But God commended his love to us, in that while we were yet
Sinners Christ dyed for us. Much more then being NOW Justified, we shall be
saved from Wrath through him. Now, as here we are said to be Justified by his
Blood, that is, as his Blood appeaseth the Justice of God; so again, it is said
that this Blood is set forth by God for us to have Faith in it, by the term of
a Propitiation. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation) or a Sacrifice to
appease the displeasure of God) through Faith in his Blood. To declare at this
time his Righteousness, that he might be Just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus, Romans 3.

Again, As we are thus Justified by Blood in the sight of God, by Faith in it,
so also it is testified of his Blood, that it sprinkleth the Conscience of the
faithful, but still only as it is received by Faith. But from what is the
Conscience sprinkled, but from those dead Works that remain in all that have
not yet been Justified by Faith in this Blood. Now if Faith in this Blood does
sprinkle the Conscience, and so does purge it from all dead Works, then must
Faith go first to the Blood of Christ for Justification, and must bring this
home to the Defiled Conscience, before it be delivered from those dead Works
that are in it, and made Capable of serving the Living God, Romans 5. 7, to 10.
chapter 3. 24, 25. Heb. 9. 14. chapter 10. 19, 20, 21, 22.

But you say, you will never trust your discoursive faculty so long as you
live, if you are mistaken here, Page 224.

Tell not me of your discoursive faculty: The Word of God is plain: And never
challenge Man, for he that Condemns your way to Heaven, to the very Pit of
Hell, as Paul does, can yet set forth a better.

I come now to the Second thing; viz. The Doctrine of the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, which you thus Expound.

It Consists in dealing with sincerely Righteous Persons, as if they were
perfectly so, for the sake, and upon the account of Christ's Righteousness,
Page 225, 226.

Answ. 1. Any thing but truth; But I would know how sincerely Righteous they
were that were Justified without Works? or how sincerely Righteous they were,
whom God Justified, as Ungodly? Romans 4. 3, 4, 5.

2. Your Explication of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness makes it
respect our Works rather then our Persons; It Consists, say you, in dealing
with sincerely Righteous Persons, as if they were Perfectly so: That is, it
Justifies their imperfect Righteousness First, and so Secondarily their
Persons for the sake of that.

But Observe a few things from this Explication.

1. This Concludes that a man may be sincerely Righteous in God's account,
WITHOUT the Righteousness of Christ: for that is to be imputed to such, and
none but such.

2. The Concludes that Men may be sincerely Righteous, BEFORE Christ's
Righteousness is imputed: For this sincere Righteousness is Precedent to the
Imputation of Christ's.

3. This Concludes that a Man may have true, yea, saving Grace in great and
mighty action in him, before he has Faith in the Righteousness of Christ. For
if a Man must be sincerely Righteous first; then he must not only have that we
call the Habit, but the powerful Acts of Grace.

Besides, if the Righteousness of Christ is not to be looked to First, but
Secondarily; not before, but after we be made sincerely Righteous; then may not
Faith be thus acted if a man should have it, until he be first a sincerely
Righteous Person.

4. This Concludes that a Man may be brought from under the Curse of the Law
in God's sight, before he have Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, yea,
before it be imputed to him: For he that in God's account is reckoned sincerely
Righteous, is beloved of his God.

5. This Concludes that a Man may be from under the Curse of God, without the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ: For if a Man must be sincerely
Righteous in God's account without it, then he is from under the Curse of God
without it.

6. This Doctrine teaches farther, that Christ came to call, and Justify the
Righteous, contrary to his express Word. In short, By this account of things,
first, we must be healed, and then the Plaster comes.

Yea, so Confident is this Man in this his Assertion, that he says, it is not
possible any other notion of this Doctrine should have truth in it, Page 226. O
this Jesus! this Rock of offense! But he that believes on him shall not be
Confounded.

But Blessed be God for Jesus Christ, and for that he took our Nature, and Sin,
and Curse, and Death upon him: And for that he did also by himself, by one
Offering Purge our Sins. We that have believed have found rest, even there
where God and his Father has smelled a sweet savor of rest; because we are
presented to God, even now complete in the Righteousness of him, and stand
discharged of guilt, even by the Faith of him: Yea, as Sins past, so Sins to
come, were taken up and satisfied for, by that offering of the Body of Jesus,
we who have had a due sense of Sins, and of the Nature of the Justice of God,
we know that no Remission of the guilt of any one can be, but by Atonement
made by Blood, Heb. 9. 22. We also know that where Faith in Jesus Christ is
wanting, there can be neither good Principle, nor good Endeavor; Romans 14.
for Faith is the first of all Graces, and without it there is nothing but Sin.
We know also, that Faith as a Grace in us, severed from the Righteousness of
Christ, is only a beholder of things, but not a Justifier of Persons, and that
if it lay not hold of, and applies not that Righteousness which is in Christ,
it carries us no farther then to the Devils. We know that this Doctrine
kills Sin, Zech. 12 10.
and curses it, at the very roots; I say, we know it, who have mourned over
him whom WE have pierced, and who have been confounded to see that God by his
Blood should be pacified toward us, E^ek. 16 63
for all the Wickedness we have done. Yea, we have a double Motive to be Holy;
and Humble before him; one because be dyed for us on Earth, another because he
now appears for us in Heaven, there sprinkling for us the Mercy-Seat with his
Blood, there ever-living to make Intercession for them that come unto God by
him. 1. John 2 1, 2, 3.
If any man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, who is the Propitiation for our Sins; Yet this Works in us no
looseness, nor farvour to Sin, but so much the more an abhorrence of it: Luke
^. 17.
She loves much, for much was forgiven her: Yea, she weeps, she washes his
Feet, and wipeth them with the hairs of her Head, to the confounding of Simon
the Pharisee, and all such ignorant Hypocrites.

But I pass this, and come to the Twentieth Chapter, which is to learn us by
what Measure, and Standard we are to Judge of Doctrines; and that is, by the
Design of Christianity, as stated, you must know, by Mr. Fowler: Wherefore it
will be requisite here again, that a Collection of Principles, and Doctrines be
gathered out of this Book, that the Man that has a short Memory may be helped
the better to bear them in mind, and to make them, if he shall be so bewitched
by them, instead of the Bible, a Standard for Truth, and a Rule for him to
obtain Salvation by.

First, Then he must know that the Principle by which he must walk, must be the
Purity of the Humane Nature, a Divine or God-like Nature, which yet is but an
Habit of Soul, or more plainly the Morral Law, as Written in the Heart, and
Originally the Dictates of Humane Nature, a Generous Principle, such an one as
although it respects Law, yet acts in a Sphere above it; above it as a Written
Law, that acts even in the first Principles of it, Page 7, 8, 9, 10.

Secondly, He must know, that the Holiness Christ designed to Possess his
People with, is that which we had lost in Adam, that which he had before he
fell, that Natural Old Covenant Christ-less Holiness, Page 12.

Thirdly, He must put a difference between those Laws of the Gospel that are
Essential to Holiness, and those Positive Precepts that in themselves are
indifferent, and absolutely considered neither good nor evil; but must know
also that of these Possitive Precepts he allows but three in the Gospel, but
three that are purely such; to wit, that of coming to God by Christ, the
Institutions of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, Page 7, and 9.

Fourthly, He must hold for certain, that the Faith which Intituleth a Sinner
to so high a Privilege as that of Justification, must needs be such as
Complieth with all the purposes of Christ's coming into the world; (whiter at
present it understands them or not) and it is no less necessary it should
Justify as it does so, P. 222.

Fifthly, He must know that a Man may not rely upon the Merits of Christ for
the forgiveness of his Sins, before he have done other good Works first, Page
223.

Sixthly, And that the right explication of the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, is this, that it Consists in having to do with persons that
are sincerely Righteous, Page 225. For it is not possible for Christ's
Righteousness to be imputed to an unrighteous Man, Page 120.

These things, with many like to them, being the main points by this Man
handled, and by him asserted to be the design of Christianity, by these we
must, as by a Rule, and Standard, understand how to Judge of the truth of
Doctrines. And (says he) Seeing the Design of Christianity is to make Men
Holy, (still meaning from Principles of Humanity, and by Possessing us again,
with the often repeated Holiness which we had lost) whatsoever opinions do
either directly, or in their evident Consequences obstruct the promoting of it,
are perfectly false. Page 227, 228.

Answ. Thus with one Word, as if he were Lord, and Judge himself, he sends to
the Pit of Hell, all things that Sanctify, or make Holy the hearts of Men, if
they oppose the Design of his Christianity. But what if the Holy Ghost will
become a Principle in the hearts of the Converted, and will not now suffer them
to act simply, and alone, upon the Principles of pure Humanity; or what now if
Faith will become a Principle to act by, instead of these that are Originally
Dictates of Humane Nature? Or, what if a Man should act now as a Son, rather
then simply as a Creature endued with a Principle of Reason? I question here,
whether these things thus doing do not obstruct, put by, yea, and take the way
of his Pure Humanity, Dictates of Humane Nature; and instead thereof, Act, and
Govern the Soul by, and with their own Principles. For albeit, there be the
Dictates of Humane Nature in the Sons of Men, yet neither is this Nature, nor
yet the Dictates of it, laid by Jesus Christ as the truly Christian Principles
in his. But you add:

Those Doctrines which in their own Nature do evidently tend to the serving of
THIS design of Christianity, we may conclude are most True, and Genuine, Page
229.

Answ. The Holiness which you so often call the Design of Christianity, being
by your self said to be that which we had lost, (for this one Sentence is it,
on which your whole Book is built ( P. 12.) whatsoever Doctrine, or Doctor it
be that asserts it, both that Doctrine is of the Devil, and that Doctor an
Angel of darkness, or rather a Minister of Satan, become as a Minister of
Rigteousness. For where is it said in all the whole Book of God, that ever the
Lord Christ Designed, yea made it his Errand from Heaven, to put us again in
Possession of the Holiness which we had lost? Yet this you affirm, and tell us
the business of your Book is to prove it: But blessed be God, your shifts are
discovered, and your Fig Leaves rent from off you, and the Righteousness or
Holiness so much cried up by you, proved to be none of the Holiness of the
Gospel, but that which stood with perfect ignorance thereof. I might speak to
what yet remains of falsehood, in the other part of this Chapter; but having
overthrown the Foundation, and broken the Head of your Leviathan; what remains
falls of it self, and dies of it is own accord.

What you say of Modes, or Forms, and Sticklers for little Trifles, such as
place their Religion in mere Externals, you may fasten them where of due they
belong: Yet I tell you, the least of the Commandments of Christ is better then
your Adamitish Holiness.

Your Twenty first Chapter tells us (if we will believe you) how we shall Judge
of the necessity of Doctrine, to be embraced, or rejected; also, you say, it
gives us a brief discourse of the Nature of Fundamentals. But because your
discourse of them is general, and not any one Particularized, I might leave you
in your generals, till you dealt more Heartily, both with the Word of God, and
your abused Reader.

Indeed you tell us of Primary Fundamentals, such as without the Knowledge, and
belief of which it is impossible to acquire that inward Righteousness, and
Holiness which the Christian Religion Aims at; but the Particulars of these,
say you, I shall not enumerate, because (as will appear from what will be said
anon) it is not needful to have a just table of them.

Answ. Deep Divinity! First, They are such as without the Knowledge and Belief
of them, it is not possible we should acquire your true Holiness; and yet for
all that it is not needful that we be told what they are, or that we should
have a just Table of them.

Secondly, But if they be things necessary, things without the Knowledge of
which it is impossible we should be truly Holy, then is it needful that we
understand what they are: Yea, then is it needful that they be written, and
presented one by one unto us, that our Knowledge of them being distinct and
full, we may the better be able to obtain or acquire your Glorious (so
pretended) Holiness.

But I know your Primary Fundamentals, they are your first Principles of
Morrals, not Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, for that is comprehended in
your possitive, and in themselves indifferent things: Your Morrals are the
things in themselves absolutely necessary, of an indispensible and Eternal
Obligation, Page 8, 9.

But Secondly you tell us of Points of Faith that are Secondarily Fundamental;
the disbelief of which cannot consist with true Holiness, in those to whom the
Gospel is sufficiently made known.

Answ. The Secondary Fundamentals also, are all kept close, and hid; and not
otherwise to be understood, but by implication; however the disbelief of these
is not of so sad a consequence as is that of the former; because, say you, They
are not in their own Nature, Holiness, Page 235. Yea, he insinuates that the
disbelief of them may stand with true Holiness in those to whom the Gospel is
not sufficiently made known.

Of these Secondary Fundamentals therefore, (whatever is their number) this is
one, even coming to God by Christ; for as in Page 7, and 9. he calls it a
Possitive Precept, a thing that in it self is neither good nor evil; so here he
speaks of such as are not in their own Nature Holy; not such, as that Holiness
is not in some degree or other attainable without the belief of them.

That one of these Secondary Fundamentals is intended by Mr. Fowler, that of
coming to God by Christ; I farther gather, because ^e says, that in the number
of these, are all such Doctrines, as are with indisputable clearness revealed
to us (that is, by the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, Page 235.) For
therein is this Revealed to be a Fundamental; but he says, not a Primary one,
because, that in it self it is but indifferent, and not in it is own Nature
good. Now the belief of these; says he, though it is not in it self any more,
then in higher, or lower degrees profitable, (Confusion! Darkness! Confusion!)
yet it is absolutely necessary from an External cause: That is, with such
abundant clearness, as that nothing can cause men to refuse to admit them, but
that which argues them to be stark naught.

Answ. 1. Then, hence it seems* that the reason why you admit these Secondary
sort of Fundamentals, is not from any Internal Power, but an External
Declaration only.

2. Nay, and you do but ADMIT them neither, and that too, for some External
cause; not because of the worthiness of the Nature of the points themselves.

3. And were it not, but that you are loath to be counted stark naught in the
eyes of Men, so far as I can descern, you would not at all make profession of
them, with pretense as unto God* For, say you, We must take notice here, that
all such Points (viz. these Fundamentals) are not of equal necessity to be
received by all Christians, because that in regard of the Diversity of their
Capacities, Education, and other means and advantages, some of them may be most
plainly perceived by some to be delivered in the Scriptures, which cannot be so
by others, with the like ease.

Answ. From these words I take notice of four things.

1. That by this Universal (all Christians) is Comprehended the Heathen, and
Pagan People, that give heed to, and mind to follow that light, that
Originally, and Naturally stirs them to Morral Duties. These be they that
want the Education, and Vantages of other, and are not in such a Capacity, as
they to whom these things are delivered by the Scriptures.

2. That this People, notwithstanding they want a Scripture Revelation of these
Secondary Fundamentals, yet have the more necessary, the first sort of
Fundamentals: For the secondary sort, say you, are not in their own Nature
such, as that Holiness is not in some degree or other attainable without the
belief of them.

3. That therefore these Secondary sort of Fundamentals, are only necessary to
be believed by them that have the indisputable (the Scripture) Revelation of
them; and that in truth the others may be saved without them.

4. But yet, even those that are made capable by education, and other
advantages, to obtain the belief of them, ought notwithstanding, not to have
the same respect for them, as for those of the first sort of Fundamentals,
because they are not in their own Nature such.

But will this man know that Christ is not only a Fundamental, but the very
foundation of all other Fundamental truths, revealed both in the Old Testament,
and the New? and that his pure Humane Nature, with the Dictates of it, with his
feigned Adamitish Holiness is no Fundamental at all; I mean no Fundamental of
Faith, no Gospel Fundamental, 1 Co. 3. 14. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. Yea, will he know
that from Heaven there is none other Name given, then the Name of Jesus Christ,
whereby we must be saved, none other Name given under the whole Heavens, Act.
4. 12.

Oh the Witchcrafts by which some Men's Spirits are Intoxicated! and the
strength of delusion, by which some are infatuate, and turned aside from the
simplicity that is in Jesus Christ! But I proceed:

Your great Question, or rather Urim and Thummim, by which you would have all
men make Judgment of their saveable, or damnable state, Page 236. is according
to your description of things, most Devilish and Destructive. For to obey God
and Christ, in all things with you, is to do it from Principles purely Humane
in the Faith of this; that Christ has designed to possess us again with that
Holiness we had lost. Again, to obey God, and Christ with you, is, so to obey
all their Laws, as respecting the first Principles of Morrals, and our
obedience to them, far more indispensible then that of coming to God by Christ.
Farther, he that obeys them in all things with your directions, must not look
upon Faith in the Blood of Christ, and Justification by his Righteousness, as
the main and first, but the second part of our duty; other Commands or Precepts
more naturally Holy, and Good, first being embraced, and lived in the practice
of by, us.

This, I say, being the Doctrine you have asserted, and the Foundation on which
your Urim and Thummim stands; the Foundation, with your trial are both from the
Devil and Hell, as has at large been proved, and discovered in this Book.

And I now will add (and bid you take your advantage) that should a man with
all his might strive to obey all the Morral Laws, either as they are contained
in the first Principles of Morrals, or in the express Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments, without Faith, First, in the Blood, and Death, and Resurrection
of Christ, etc. For his Justification with God; his thus doing would be counted
Wickedness, and he in the end accounted a Rebel against the Gospel, and shall
be Damned for want of Faith in the Blood of the Lord Jesus.

Your Twenty Second Chapter says That the Design of Christianity teaches us
what Doctrines and Practices we ought as Christians to be most Zealous for, or
against, Page ^37.

Answ. But there is not by that (it being rightly stated) one Syllable that
tends to encourage any Man, to have lower thoughts of coming to God by
Christ, then of keeping the Morral Law. For even the first Text you bring, does
utterly overthrow it. Contend, say you, for the Faith: I Answer then, not for
the Law of Work; for the Law is not of Faith, but the Man that does these
things shall live in them, by them. Contend earnestly for the Faith, for there
are certain men crept in unawares, which were before of old ordained unto this
Condemnation; even the Condemnation that is to come upon them that Contend
against the Faith;) for these ungodly Men turn the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, and deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now
these creeping ungodly Men, may be divided into three Rancks.

1. Such as by Principle, and Practice both, say, Let us do evil, that good may
come thereon; and their Damnation in Just, Romans 3. 8, 9.

2. Such as by Practice only, appear to be such, denying to profess the
Principle thereof, such are they that made excuse and delay, when invited to
come to the Wedding, Mat. 22. 1, 2, 3. Luke 14.

3. There is yet another sort; And they are such as seem to deny it, both in
Principle, and Practice also; only they do it Covertly, PRIVILY bringing in
Damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. These bring upon
themselves swift destruction, 2. Pet. 2. 1.

This Third sort, make of the Doctrine of Grace, and of the forgiveness of
Sins, through the Faith of the Righteousness of Christ, a Loose, and
Liscentious Doctrine, or a Doctrine that gives liberty to the Flesh: By reason
of THESE the way of truth is evil spoken of, and the Hearts of Innocent ones
Alienated therefrom: These will not stick to charge it upon the very chief of
the Brethren, if they shall say, As Sin abounded, Grace has much more
abounded; that they press men to do evil, that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8,
9. But (as I said) these Vilisie Christ, not with open Words, but Covertly;
PRIVILY they bring in their Blasphemy under a Cloak, crying, the Law, Holiness,
Strictness, good Works, etc. Besides, these cloth their Doctrines with Names
and Notions that belong not at all unto them; as of Christ, Grace, the Spirit,
the Gospel, when there is only there, the Devil, and his Angels, and Errors;
as Angels of Light, and Ministers of Righteousness. Of this last sort, are you,
and the subject matter of your Book; for you bring into the World an Antigospel
Holiness, Holiness, Antigospel Principles, and Antigospel Fundamentals; and
that these things might be Worshipped by your Disciples, you give them the Name
of Holiness, the Design of Christ, and of Christianity; by which means you
remove the Christ of God, from before, and set him behind, forbiding Men to
believe on him, till they have Practiced your things first: Nay, after they
have Practiced yours, they then must come to God by him; still respecting the
Principles and Dictates of Humanity, as things of the greatest weight, things
that are good in themselves; Still considering that coming to God by Christ, is
not good in it self, but so, only upon the account of certain Circumstances; a
thing in it self of an indifferent Nature, and absolutely considered neither
good nor evil.

Wherefore, Sir, laying aside all fear of men, not regarding what you may
procure to be inflicted upon me, for this may plain dealing with you, I tell
you again, that your self is one of them, that have Closely, Privily, and
Devilishly, by your Book, turned the Grace of our God into a Lascivious
Doctrine, bespattering it with giving liberty to looseness, and the hardening
of the ungodly in Wickedness, against whom shall you persist in your
Wickedness: I shall not fail (may I live, and know it, and be helped of God to
do it) to discover yet farther the rottenness of your Doctrine, with the
accursed tendencies thereof.

What you say about doubtful Opinion, alterable Modes, Rites, and Circumstances
in Religion, Page 239. I know none so wedded thereto as your selves, even the
whole gang of your rabling counterfeit Clergy; who generally like the Ape you
speak of, lie blowing up the Aplause and Glory of your Trumpery, and like the
Tail, with your Foolish and Sophistical arguings, you cover the filthy parts
thereof; as you sweetly argue in the next Chapter, Page 242. saying, Whatsoever
of such are Commended by the custom of the place we live in, or commanded by
Superiors, or made by ANY Circumstance convenient to be done, our Christian
liberty Consists in this, that we have leave to do them. So that do but call
them things indifferent, things that are the customs of the place we live in,
or made by ANY Circumstance convenient, and a man may not doubt but he has
leave to do them, let him live at Rome or Constantinople, or amidst the
greatest Corruption of Worship and Government. These are therefo^^ doubtless, a
Third sort of Fundamentals, by which you can Wrestle with Conviction of
Conscience, and stifle it; by which you can suit your self for every Fashion,
Mode, and Way of Religion. Here you may hop from Presbiterianism, to a
Prelatical Mode; and if time and chance should serve you, backwards, and
forwards again: Yea, here you can make use of several Consciences, one for this
way now, another for that anon; now putting out the Light of this by a
Sophistical Delusive Argument, then putting out the other, by an argument that
best suits the time. Yea, how often is the Candle of the Wicked put out, by such
glorious Learning as this. Nay, I doubt not, but a man of your Principles, were
he put upon it, would not stick to count those you call Gospell-possitive
Precepts, of no Value at all in the Christian Religion; for now, even now, you
do not stick to say that, that even that of going to God by Christ, is one of
these, and that such an one, as if absolutely Considered in it self, is neither
good nor evil. How then, if God should cast you into Turkey, where Mahomet
Reigns as Lord? It is but reckoning that it is the Religion, and Custom of the
Country, and that which is Authorized by the Power that is there; wherefore it
is but sticking to your Dictates of Humane Nature, and remembering that coming
to God by Christ is a thing of an indifferent Nature in it self, and then for
peace sake, and to sleep in a whole skin, you may comply, and do as your
Superior commands. Why? Because in Turkey, are your first sort of Fundamentals
found: There are Men that have Humane Nature, and the Law of Morrals written in
their hearts; they have also the Dictates thereof written within them, which
teach them, those you call the Eternal Laws of Righteousness; wherefore you
both would agree in your Essential, and immutable differences of good and evil,
Page 6. and differ only about these possitive Laws, Indifferent things. Yea,
and Mahomet also for the time, because by a custom made convenient, might be
now accounted worshipful, and the Circumstances that attend his Worship,
especial those of them, that clash not with the Dictates of your Humane
Nature, might also be swallowed down.

Behold you here then (good Reader) a glorious Latitudinarian, that can, as to
Religion, turn and twist like an Eel on the Angle; or rather like the
Weathercock that stands on the Steeple.

But ( says he) our refusing to comply with these can hardly proceed from any
thing better then a proud affection of singularity, or at best, from
Supersticious Scrupulosity, Page 242.

Do but believe him therefore in what he says, and you cannot choose but be
ready with him to comply with all Modes, that may serve for advantage.

Besides, he says, that the Word Superstition, in the Greek implies, a
frightful, and over-timerous apprehension of the Divine Nature; and
consequently abase and under-valuing conception of it.

So that to be tender of Conscience, especially in things of Divine Worship,
binding up the Soul to the words of the everlasting Testament, in such things
especially, as a Fool can call little, and insignificant trivial matters,
renders a man such an one as has a very Erroneous Conscience.

But he would not be understood ( Page 244.) as if he here intended to vilify
things that are plainly commanded, or to tolerate that which is plainly
forbidden, only he would have all things that may fall within the reach of
these two general Heads, be examined by this general Rule, HIS description of
the Design of Christianity.

Answ. But I could tell him, that whatsoever is imposed as a part of God's
Worship, is Judged by a better rule then his, both as to it is goodness and
badness, neither can we account any thing indifferent that is a part thereof.
Besides, whatsoever is reputed a part of God's Worship, lays hold on the
Conscience of the Go^ly: Although a ranting Latitudinarian may say, If the
Devil should Preach, I would hear him, before I would suffer Persecution: (As a
brave fellow which I could name, in his Zeal was pleased to declare.)

But what trust should any man put to the rule to which you direct him for
help, and relief therein; seeing that from the beginning to the end, from the
top to the bottom, it is a cursed Blasphemous Book; a Book that more vilifieth
Jesus Christ, then many of the Quakers themselves: for which of them said worse
of him, and make coming to God by him, a more insignificant thing, then you by
your pretended design of Christianity have done.

We have therefore a more sure Word of the Prophets, to the which we do well to
take heed; 2 Pet. 1. 19.
by which, both your Doctrine, and practice, is already judged to be naught, as
will be farther discovered time enough, when you shall Justify or Condemn
Particulars.

Your Twenty Fourth Chapter I shall now pass by, until I can better compare you
and Popery, against which you there so stoutly diggle together.

Your Twenty Fifth Chapter carries in it an hideous outcry against many of
your Ministers and Guides, complaining, and confessing, That nothing has so
conduced to the Prejudice of your Church of England, and done the seperating
parties so much service, as the Scandalous lives of some that exercise your
Ministerial Function, P. 258.

Answ. I will grant it, if you respect these poor carnal People, who yet have
been shamed from your Assemblies, by such Vicious Persons you mention: But the
truly Godly, and Spiritually Judicious have left you from other Arguments, of
which I shall not here Dilate.

But from Page 261. to the end of the Chapter, you take upon you to
particularize other of your Ministers that are an offense to you, and to the
Design of your Christianity.

1. Such as affect to make people stare at their high flown bumbast Language,
or to please their Phantacies with foolish Jugglings, and Poedantick or Boyish
wit; or to be admired for their ability in dividing of an hair, their
Metaphysical Acuteness, and Scholastic subtilety, or for their Daughty
Dexterity in Controversial Squabbles. And I add, had you joined herewith, such
as vilify, and trample upon the Blood of the Lord Jesus, preferring the Snivel
of their own brains before him, you had herein but drawn your own Picture, and
given your Reader an Emblem of your self.

2. The Second sort you blame, are such as seek to approve themselves to their
Auditories to be Men of Mysteries, and endeavor to make the plain and easy
Doctrines of the Gospel as Intricate and obscure as ever they are Able. I will
add to these, such as take away the Doctrine of Faith, and that set themselves
and their Works in the room thereof: Such as have sought to overturn the
Foundation, Jesus Christ, and have made coming to God by him, in it self of a
far more indifferent Nature then the Dictates of our Humanity.

3. Another sort (you say) are such as Preach upon free Grace, and Christian
Privileges, otherwise then as Motives to cite to obedience, and never scarce
insist upon any Duties, but those of believing, laying hold on Christ's
Righteousness, applying the promises, and renouncing our own Righteousness,
which they that have none at all to renounce, have a mighty kindness for.

Answ. 1. Who they are that Preach free Grace in your Church, to excite Men to
uncleanness, you may know better then I. But if these Words (otherwise then to
Cite men to obedience) be thus thrust in, of purpose thereby to speak evil of
the Preachers of free Grace, and the exalters of the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, then look to it; for such venom Language as this, does but involve you
within the bowels of that most dreadful Prophecy, concerning the false Prophets
of the last days, that shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them.

2. The Preaching of free Grace, pressing to believing, and laying hold on
Christ's Righteousness, is the most available means under Heaven, to make Men
Holy, and Righteous: 1. Before God. 2. Then before Men.

3. The Phreaching of these are first, and principally to beget Faith, to beget
Life, to beget Souls to God; yea, to beget in Men such a Principle, whereby
they may serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear.

4. But to Preach free Grace, does much condemn your freewill; to Preach
Christ's Righteousness does utter Curse, and Condemn yours; and to Preach the
Promise of Grace, does quite shut out a Covenant of Works: Therefore no marvel
if you, who are so Wedded to these things, be such an Enemy to free Grace, the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Gospel-promises, that you make even these
things a Characteristical note (first abusing the Consequences of them) of a
Church-troubling-Preacher.

5. You tauntingly proceed, saying, Such Preachers also press us to renounce
our own Righteousness, which they that have none at all to renounce, have a
mighty kindness for.

Answ. Indeed those that have a Righteousness of their own, as the Pharisees,
and Hyprocrites of old, had never much kindness for the Doctrine of Grace, and
the Ministers of Christ, but the Publicans and harlots had: and therefore these
(while they that had Righteousness stumbled and fell) entered into the Kingdom
of Heaven. The Publicans and Harlots entered the Kingdom of Heaven, before you.
But what Righteousness have you of your own, to which you so dearly are Wedded,
that it may not be let go, for the sake of Christ? Romans 10. 3.
seeing also so long as you go about to establish it, you submit not your self
to the Righteousness of God: Yea, Why do you taunt those Ministers that
persuade us to Renounce our own Righteousness, and those also that follow their
Doctrine? seeing this was both the Doctrine and Practice of Paul and all
others, save only those that had Moses Vail over their Hearts.

Another sort of Ministers that you say are Enemies to the promoting of
Holiness, are such as are never in their Element, but when they are talking of
the Irrespectiveness of God's Decrees, the absoluteness of his promises, the
utter disability, and perfect impotency of Natural Men, to do any thing toward
their own Conversion, and that insists with great Emphasis, and Vehemence, upon
such like false, and dangerous opinions. Page 262.

Answ. The Men that Preach these things, being rightly stated, Preach the truth
of God, if the Scriptures may bear sway; they having all been prooved the truth
of the Gospel, both by the Prophets and Apostles: And when you shall think meet
by argument to contradict them, either I, or some other may show you the folly
of your undertaking. In the mean time let the Reader take notice that here you
have judged not by Scripture, nor by Reason, but upon a bare Presumption, a
rising from your Pride or Ignorance. Wherefore pray you in your next, show us.

1. What is in Man that the decree of Election should respect as a thing
foreseen of God, to prevail with him to predestinate him to Eternal life by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. Make it manifest that in the Word of God there neither is, nor can be any
absolute promise contained.

3. Show us what ability there is in a Natural Man, as such, to do things
toward his own Conversion; I mean things immediately tending to, and that must
infallibly consummate therein, and let us see what things they are: And know
that when you have well done all this, according to the Scriptures of truth,
that then it will be time enough to condemn the contrary, for false, and
dangerous opinions.

But shall I speak the truth for you? The reason of this your presumptuous
exclamation, and condemnation of these things, is because they stand in the way
of promoting your ignorant, tottering, promiseless, and Gospelless Holiness;
they stand in the way of old Adam, they stand in the way of your dunghill
rebellious Righteousness, they stand in the way of your freedom of will, and a
great rabble more of such like pretended Virtues. Yea, they do, and must, and
shall stand there, when you and the rest of the Socinians, and Quakers, have
said their all against them.

There is yet another sort of Preachers whom you condemn, and so do I as well
as you, though not in your Spirit, nor to advance your Pestiferous Principles:
and they are such as make it their great business, to advance the petty
interest of any party whatsoever, and concern themselves more about doing this,
then about promoting, and carrying on that, wherein consists the chief good of
all Mankind, and are more Zealous to make Prosilites to their particular Sects,
then Converts ( I will add first to Jesus Christ, and then) to an Holy Life,
and press more exact and ridged conformity to their Modes and Forms, then to
the Laws of God, and the Essential Duties of the Christian Religion.

Lastly, the Caution which you give to Ministers, because there wants for it,
among you, a Foundation, is to be esteemed but an Error, and an abuse of the
words, and practices of the Apostle. And as for your subtle and close
incensing the power to persecute Non-conformists, know that we are willing, God
assisting, to overcome you with truth, and patience, not sticking to Sacrifice
our lives, and dearest concerns in a faithful Witness-baring against your
filthy errors, Compiled and Foisted into the World, by your Devilish design to
promote Paganism, against Christianity, Page 265, 266.

I come now to your Twenty Sixth Chapter, which is spent to prove, that an
obedient temper of mind is a necessary, and excellent qualification to prepare
men for a firm belief, and a right understanding of the Gospel of Christ, Page
267.

Answ. 1. For as much as the obedient temper you mention, is Precedent to, or
before Faith, and the right understanding of the Gospel, it must needs be also,
that which stands with unbelief, and ignorant of the same. Now that this should
be an excellent, and necessary qualification, to a firm belief, and right
understanding of the Gospel, is altogether without proof, and truth. But this
is affirmed for the farther promoting of your Humane Nature, and the things
that Originally are Dictates thereof. But,

2. The obedience or inclination to obedience that is before Faith, or the
understanding of the Gospel, is so far off from being an excellent preparative,
or good qualification for Faith, and the knowledge of the Gospel, that in its
own Nature (which is more then in its Consequences) it is a great obstruction
thereto.

For, while a Man remains faithless and ignorant of the Gospel, to what does
his obedient temper of mind incline? Not to Faith, nor the Gospel of Christ;
for with these, as yet you suppose he has not to do; therefore he inclines
to the Law of Morrals, either as it was delivered in Tables of Stone from
Sinai, or as written in the hearts of all the Children of Men, to it under the
last consideration, (which is in truth the most Heathen and Pagan) to it, as so
you intend your obedient temper of mind should incline, Page 7, 8, 9, 10.

Now this Doctrine being in it self of quite another Nature then the Doctrine
of Faith, and also, as such, a Covenant by it self, it requires the mind by
virtue of it is Commands, to stand to THAT, and to rest in THAT: For of
necessity the heart and mind of a Man, can go no farther, then it sees, and
has learnt; but by this Morral Doctrine, the heart and mind is bound and
limited to it self, by the power of the Dictate to obedience, and the promise
of obtaining the Blessing, 2 Cor 3.
when the preceptive part of it is fulfilled. Hence Paul tells us that though
that Ministration, that was Written, and Engraven in Stones, (which in Nature
is the same with this) is glorious, yet these imperfections attended, the Man
that was in it.

1. He was but within the bounds of the Ministration of Death.

2. In this estate he was blind, and could not see how to be delivered
therefrom: The vail is over their heart, so that they could not heretofore,
neither can they now see to the end of that which was commanded, neither to the
perfection of the command, nor their own insufficiency to do it, nor to the
Death and Curse of God, that attended him, that in every thing continued not in
that was Written in the Book of the Law to do them.

3. Every Lecture, or Reading of this Old Law, is as a fresh Hood-winking of
it is Disciples, and a doubling of the hindrance of their coming to Christ for
life. But their minds were blinded, for until this day the same Vail remains
untaken away, in reading of the Old Testament, which Vail is done away in
Christ; But even unto this day when Moses is read, the Vail is over their
Hearts, 2 Cor. 3. 6, to 15.

And let the Reader note, that all these things attend the Doctrine of Morrals;
Gal. 3 24.
the Ceremonies being in themselves more apt to instruct Men in the Knowledge
of Christ, they being by God's Ordaination, Figures, Shadows, Representations,
and Emblems of him; but the Morrals are not so, neither as Written in our
Natures, nor as Written and Engraven in Stones. Wherefore your so highly
commended obedient temper of mind (you intending thereby an hearty compliance
before Faith, with Morrals for Righteousness) is so far off from being an
excellent temper, and a necessary qualification, to help a Man to a firm
belief, and right understanding of the Gospel; that it is the most ready way of
all ways in the World, to keep a man perpetually blind, and ignorant thereof.
Wherefore the Apostle says, that the Vail, the Ignorance cannot be taken away,
but when the Heart shall turn to the Lord, that is from the Doctrine of Morrals
as a Law and Covenant in our Natures, or as it was Written, and Engraven in
Stones, to Christ for mercy to pardon our transgressions against it, and for
imputative Righteousness to Justify us from it. While Moses is Read, the Vail
is over the Heart; that is, while Men with their minds stand bending also to do
it: But mark, when it, the Heart, shall turn to the Lord, or to the Word of the
Gospel, which is the Revelation of him, then the Vail shall be taken away.

And hence it will not be amiss, if again we consider how the Holy Ghost
compares, or sets one against another, these two Administrations.

The Law he calls the Letter, even the Law of Morrals, that Law that was
Written and Engraven in Stones. The other Ministration he calls the
Ministration of the Spirit, even that which Christ offered to the World, upon
believing.

Again, he denies himself to be a Minister of the Law of Morrals. He has made
us able Ministers of the New* Testament; no^ of the Letter (or Law) but of the
Spirit (or Gospel.) The reason is, for the Letter, or Law, can do nothing but
kill, Curse, or Condemn, but the Spirt or the Gospel, gives life. Farther, in
comparing, he calls the Law, the Ministration of Death; or that which lays
Death at the Doors of all Flesh; but the Gospel the Ministration of
Righteousness, because by this Ministry there is a Revelation of that
Righteousness that is fulfilled by the Person of Christ, and to be imputed for
Righteousness to them that believe, that they might be delivered from the
Ministration of death. How then? has the Ministration of God no Glory? Yes,
forasmuch as it is a Revelation of the Justice of God, against Sin. But yet
again, it is Glory is turned into no Glory, when it is compared with that which
excels. For if the Ministration of Death, Written and Graven in the Stones
was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the
face of Moses, for the Glory of his countenanc^ which Glory was to be done
away: how shall not the Ministratio^ of the Spirit be rather Glorious: For if
the Ministration of Condemnation be Glory, much more does the Ministration of
Righteousness exceed in Glory: For even that which was made Glorious has no
Glory in this respect, by reason of the Glory that excels, 2 Cor. 3. 9, 10.

So then, your obedient temper of mind, forasmuch as it respects the Law of
Morrals, and that too, before Faith, or a right understanding of the Gospel, is
nothing else but an obedience to the Law, a living to Death, and the
Ministration of Condemnation, and is a persuading the World, that to be
obedient to that Ministration, that is not the Ministration of the Gospel, but
holds it is Disciples in blindness and ignorance, in which it is impossible
Christ should be revealed, is an excellent, yea, a necessary qualification to
prepare Men for a firm belief, and a right understanding of the Gospel of
Christ, which yet even blinds, and holds all blind that are the followers
of that Ministration. I come now to your Proof, which indeed is no Proof of
this Antigospel Assertion, but Texts abused, and wrestled out of their place,
to serve to underprop your erroneous Doctrine. The First is, If any Man will do
his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of my self, John 7. 17. P. 268.

Answ. This Scripture respects not at all the Morral Law, or obedience to the
Dictates of Humane Nature, as an acceptable qualification precedent to Faith,
or that, for the sake of which God will give Men Faith in, and a right
understanding of the Gospel; but is it self an immediate exhortation to
believing, with a promise of what shall follow; as who shall say, The Father
has sent me into the World to be Salvation to it, through Faith in my Blood:
My Fathers will therefore is, that Men believe in me; and if any will do his
will, he shall know of the Doctrine, he shall feel the power thereof, by the
peace and comfort that will presently possess the Soul, and by the holy effects
that follow.

That this is the true exposition of this place, will be verified if you
consider, that to do the will of God, in a New Testament sense, is to be taken
under a double consideration. 1. As it respects Christ. 2. Man.

1. As it respects Christ, so it concerns his completing the Redemption of
Man by himself, by his own personal performances, John 6. 38, 39. Heb. 10. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. As it respects Man, it does first, and immediately respect our believing
on him for Remssion of Sins, and Eternal Life. And this is the Will of the
Father which sent me, (says Christ) that every one that sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting Life, and I will raise him up at the
last day, John 6. 40. This then is the will of God; That Men do believe in
Jesus Christ.

Again, when the Jews asks Jesus Christ what they should do, that they might
work the works of God, he did not send them first to the Morral Precept, or to
it is first Principles in the hearts of Men, by obeying that, to fit themselves
for Faith; but immediately he tells them, This is the Work of God, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent, John 6. 29. This is the Work of God; that is,
this is his Commandment, that we believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
etc. and love one another as he gave us Commandment. 1 John 3. 23. If any Man
will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, that is, (as I have said) he
shall feel, and have the Authourity of this Faith in his heart, both to give
Peace, and Joy in his heart, and assurance, and the Sealing of his Soul to
Glory. For all these things come in upon believing, First in Christ.

1. By Faith we have Peace with God, Romans 5. 1.

2. We have Joy and Peace, through Believing, Romans 15. 13.

3. Assurance comes also through Believing, Joh. 6. 69. Heb. 10. 22.

4. Yea, and the Sealings up to Eternal Life; In whom also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1. 13.

5. Sanctification, and a right obedient temper, is not to be found in Men
before, but after they have believed; He purified their hearts by Faith. Yea,
Heaven and Eternal Happiness is promised to them who are Sanctified by Faith
which is in Christ, Act. 15. 9. Chap. 26. 18.

This First Text therefore, has been by you abused, in that you have ungodly
strained it, (but in vain) to make it warrant your Heathenish preparations to
Faith.

The Second Scripture; He that is of God hears Gods Words; ye therefore hear
them not, because you are not of God, John 8. 47.

Answ. This Scripture supposes Men must first be of God, before they can hear
God's Word; before they can hear it with the hearing of Faith; and therefore
nothing respects those that before they have Faith, live in the Law of Works;
and least of all, those that become obedient thereto, that thereby they may
obtain everlasting life: For these are not of God, not of him in a New
Testament Sense; not Sons, because they are born of Men, of the will of Men, of
the Law, and according to the Wisdom of Flesh and Blood, John 1. 12, 13.

Your Third Scripture is; And as many as were ordained to Eternal Life,
believed, Act. 13. 48. Which Text you thus expound: That as many of the
Gentiles as were disposed, or in a ready preparedness for Eternal Life,
believed; that is those which were Proselites of the Gate, who were admitted by
the Jews, to the hope of Eternal Life, and to have a Portion in the Age to
come, without submitting to the whole Law, or any more then owning the God of
Israel, and observing the Seven Precepts of Noah.

Answ. 1. That obedience to the Morral Law, is not a preparative to Faith, or
an excellent and necessary qualification to the right understanding of the
Gospel I have proved.

2. That to be a Jewish Proselite, was to live in the Faith of Messiah to come,
is the strain of all the Scriptures that have to deal with them.

3. But that ordaining men to Eternal Life, respects an act of the Jews, or
that the Jews did dispense with the Gentile Proselites, in their casting off
all their Laws, but the seven Precepts of Noah.

4. Or that God counted this a fit, or forerunning qualification to Faith in
Jesus Christ, neither stands with the Word of God, nor the Zeal of that People.

5. Besides, the Words presently following seem to me to insinuate more; viz.
That the Jews, and Religious Proselites, that adhered to Paul, at his first
Sermon, verse 43. did Contradict and Blaspheme at his second, verse 45. And
moreover, that it was they that raised Persecution upon him, and expelled him
out of their Coasts, verse 50. When the Gentiles, even those that were more
Barbarously ignorant at his coming, when they heard that by Christ there was
offered to them the forgiveness of Sins, they believed, verse 48. and Glorified
the Word of the Lord. The Wisdom of Heaven so disposing such of their hearts,
that were before by him, not by Jews, ordained to Life. And as many as were
ordained to Eternal Life, believed.

But you come again in Page 269. to the Scripture first urged by you; If any
man will do his will, etc. and you tell us, That this must also needs be
employed, he shall rightly understand the Doctrine too. Which word (understand)
you so carry, as may best help you, in case you should meet with an Adversary.
As if any should thus object, that here you have granted that the Words make
promise of an understanding of the Gospel; yea, require in it the very first
act of the will; then you readily shift it, by saying, That this is employed
only, suggesting that obedience to Morrals is expressed, and therefore muh
first be thought on, and done. But if one of your Brotherhood stop here, and
make the objection; then you add, It is Knowledge, at least, in all the
necessary points thereof, absolutely necessary, and Essential parts; from among
which, you long since did cast out, Coming to God by Jesus Christ: Yea, you
add; That by (that which you call) the design of the Gospel, it may be
presumed, that whosoever considers it, with a design of being so, (that is,
of living up to Humane Principles, and that desires to be possessed again of
the Holiness he has lost; for that is it, for the proof of which you have
Written above 300 Pages,) he must needs believe the Gospel to have come from
God, and also be enlightened in the true Knowledge of, at least the necessary
points of it; viz. All Morral Duties contained therein, which are never a one
of them as such an Essential of the Gospel, but are such Duties as are
consequential to the belief thereof.

Wherefore (although you feign it) this honest temper, as you call it, will not
help you, 1. To judge of the Gospel without Prejudice; nor, 2. To evidence it
with satisfaction; nor, 3. Secure those in whom it is, from Error and Delusion;
No Man being more Brutish or Heathenish, nor so void of satisfaction about it,
nor more involved in Error concerning it, then your self; being truly what you
charge upon others. 1. Grosely ignorant. 2. Too highly Opinionate. 3. Proud in
affection. 4. Lignorish. 5. A Self-Lover. 6. And for your Blasphemy under the
just Judgment of God. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:
In whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them that believe not;
least the light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

I am come now to your last Chapter, Page 281. which tells us wherein the
essence and life of Christianity Censisteth: viz. In a good state and habit of
mind, in a holy frame and temper of Soul.

Answ. 1. It consists in a Life of Faith, when I live in the belief of this,
that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. The Life that I now live in the
Flesh ( says Paul) it is by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me:

2. And besides, a good state and habit of mind, or an Holy frame and temper of
Soul, in your notion of them, which respects purely obedience to Morrals,
from Natural Impulses, or Dictates of our Humanity, they are rather Heathenish
then Christian, and being alone, end in Death, rather then Life. As many as are
of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse; (he says not, they that Sin
against it, but they that are OF the Works of it) such as do Justice,
Righteousness, Charity, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, and all kind of Morral
Duties, from Principles Humane, Natural, or as Men, they are under the Curse,
because they have sinned first, and also are in firm and weak in their pursuit
after the perfections they desire. These follow after Righteousness, Rom 9. 30,
31, 32.
but that flies from them; wherefore they do not obtain it, because they seek
it not by Faith in Christ, but as it were by the Works, the Righteous, Good,
and Holy Works of the Law. But you add;

It is such a habit of mind, such a frame* and temper of Soul, as esteems God
as the chiefest good, and prefers him and his Son Jesus Christ before all
the World; and that prizeth above all things an interest in the Divine
Perfections, etc.

Answ. 1. God must needs be esteemed the chiefest good, by all that have but,
and are ruled by the light of Nature; because they see him by his Works, to be
Almighty; Merciful, Romans 1. 20.
and Eternal; but this may be where the Knowledge of the Man, the Mediator is
not, therefore this, in this, and in your sense, cannot be of the Essence of
Christianity, for that it is common to all the World. That estimation of God,
which is common to Natural Men, cannot be of the Essence of Christianity,
because they want that knowledge of him, that comes by Jesus Christ, and so are
not capable to esteem of him under a Christian consideration.

But; you say, it is that good habit, and temper of mind, that prefers* God,
and his Son Jesus Christ, before all the World.

Answ. He that esteems God above all, must needs, at least in his Judgment,
so prefer him; but whereas you add (and his Son Jesus Christ) you put in them
Words, but as a Cloak; For your self have not preferred his Son Jesus Christ;
no, not before a Morral Law; no, not before your obedience to it, although but
by Humane Principles; Yea, you have accounted the Command of God, by which we
are enjoined by him, to come to God, a thing in it self but like Levitical
Ceremonies, or as Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; a thing in it^self
indifferent, and absolutely considered neither good nor evil, Page 7, 8, 9.

You add; It is such a temp^r as prizeth above all things; an interest in the
Divine Perfections; such as Justice* and Righteousness, Universal Charity,
Goodness, Mercy, Patience, and all kind of Purity.

Answ. Seeing by these expressions you only intend Morral Virtues, and those
that are inherent in you, and originally operations of Humanity, it is evident
that you have but Impiously, and Idolatrously Attributed to your own goodness,
so high, and blessed a Title. For whatsoever is in your Nature, and Originally
the Dictates thereof, and whatsoever proficiency you make therein, by Humane
Principles, and helps of Natural Indowments; these things are but of your self,
your own Justice, your own Righteousness, your own Charity, Goodness, Mercy,
Patience, Kindness, etc. Now to call these the Divine Perfections, when they
are only your own Humane Virtues, bespeaks you, I say, Fond, Impious, and
Idolatrous, and shows you, in the midst of all your prentended design to
Glorify God, such an one, who have set up your own goodness with him, yea, and
given it the Title of his blessed Grace and Favor.

That Scripture you mention, Romans 14. 17. Although by the Word ( Righteousness)
there, is intended obedience to the Morral Law, yet to it by persons already
Justified by Christ's Righteousness; hence they are said to do it in the Joy,
and Peac^ of the Holy Ghost; or by the Joy and Peace, which they had by Faith
in Christ's Righteousness, as Revealed to them by the Spirit of God Hence
again, they are said in IT to serve Christ, or to receive the Law at his hand,
which he gives to them to walk after, having first justified them from the
Curse thereof by his Blood.

2. The Law was given twice on Sinai; the last time, with a Proclamation of
Mercy going before, and he that receives it thus, receives it after a Gospel
manner. For they as Justified persons are dead to the Law, Rom 7. Gal. 2 19.
as a Covenant of Works, by the Body of Christ, that they might live to
another, even to him that is raised from the Dead. But you by this Scripture
intend not this Doctrine, for you make Justification by Christ, come after, not
before obedience to the Law: Yea, you make obedience thereto, the Essential,
and coming to God by Christ, but a thing of a more remote Nature, from true and
substantial Gospel-Righteousness.

In Page 283. you speak again of the old Principle, and thus you comment, A
Principle of Holiness that respects Duty, as with respect to the Nature of
the Command, so not with respect to the Duty as occasioned by certain External
Inducements, and Motives, but from a good temper, and disposition of Soul.

Answ. This I say, still respecting your old Principle of Humanity, and the
Purity of your Nature, the most amounts but to this: Your Principle is confined
to a liberty of Will and Affections, with respect to doing of the Law of Work,
which many have professed to have, and do, before you, and yet have come short
of the Glory of God. For as I told you before, I tell you now again, that the
Gospel-Principles are the Holy Ghost and Faith, which help that Soul in whom
they dwell, to count believing in Jesus Christ the great and Essential part of
our Christianity, and our reckoning our selves pardoned, for the sake of him:
And thus being set free from Sin, we become the Servants of God, and have our
fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life, Romans 6. 20.

Your description of a Child of Abraham, you meaning in a new Testament sense,
is quite beside the truth: For^albeit, the Sons of Abraham will live Holy
Lives, and become obedient to the substantial Laws; yet it is not their
subjection to Morrals, but Faith in Jesus, that gives them the Denomination of
Children of Abraham. Gal. 3. 7, 9.
Know ye therefore that they: that are of Faith, are the Children of faithful
Abraham: They that are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham: Yea,
they that are of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. In Page 284. You
say, That there is not one Duty more affectionately recommended to us in the
Gospel, then is Almsgiving.

Answ. Yes, That there is, and that which more immediately respects our
Justification with God, then Ten Thousand such Commandments; and that is Faith
in Christ. Alms-Deeds is also a blessed Command; yet but one of the Second
Table, such as must flow from Faith going before; Faith I mean that lays hold
on Christ's Righteousness, if it be accepted of God. For before the Heart be
good, the Action must be naught; now the Heart is good by Faith, because Faith,
by applying Christ's Righteousness, makes over whole Christ to the Soul, of
whose fullness it receives, and Grace, for Grace, John 1. 16. Many things in
this last Chapter, are worthy Reprehension, but because you tell us, in the
last two Pages thereof, is the Sum of all that need to be said, I will
immediately apply my self to what is there contained.

You say, (Page 296.) It is not possible we should not have the design of
Christianity accomplished in us, and therefore that we should be destitute of
the power of it, if we make our Saviors most excellent life, the Pattern of
our Lives. (By our Saviors Life (as by a Parenthesis) you also express) you
mean, as your self has in short Described it, Chap. 5. viz. The greatest
Freedom, Affability, Courtesy, Candor, Ingenuity, Gentleness, Meekness,
Humility, Contempt of the World, Contentation, Charity, Tenderness, Compassion,
Patience, Submission to the Divine Will, Love of God, Devoutest temper of mind
toward him, mighty Confidence and trust in God, etc.

Answ. Our Saviors Life, in not only these, but all other Duties that
respected Morrals, was not Principally* or* First, to be imitated by us, but
that the Law, even in the preceptive part thereof, might be fully, and
perfectly fulfilled for us (...) Christ is the (...) of the Law for
Righteousness; the end, not only of the Ceremonial Law, but the ten
Commandments too: For if the word (Righteousness) respects in special them.
Jesus increased in favor with God. This respects him as made under the Law,
Luke 2. 52.
and his pleasing of God in that Capacity. Mat. 3. 17.
So also does that, In him I am well pleased. Now I say, as Jesus stood in this
Capacity, he dealt with ^lse Law in it is greatest force, and severity, as it
immediately came from God, without the advantage of a Mediator; and stood by
his perfect complying with, and fulfilling every Title thereof. Besides, as
Jesus Christ had thus to do with the Law, he did it in order to his finishing
transgression, Dan. 9. 24.
and putting an end to Sin; and so consequently as Mediator, and Undertaker for
the World: For his perfect complying withal, and fulfilling every Title of the
Law, respected nothing his own private person, that he for himself might be
Righteous thereby; for in himself he was eternally Just and Holy, even as the
Father, but it respected us, even us; For US he was made under the Law, Gal. 4.
4, 5.
that we, by his fulfilling the Law, might by him be Redeemed from under the
Law, and also receive the Adoption of SONS. For we having sinned, ^^nd
transgressed the Law, and the Justice of God, yet requiring obedience thereto,
and the Law being too weak through our Flesh to do it, God therefore sent his
own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh; who himself for us did first of all,
Walk in the Law, and then for Sin suffered also in his Flesh, the Sentence, and
Curse pronounced against us by the Law: For it was nothing less necessary, when
the Son of God became undertaker for the Sin of the World, that he should walk
in obedience to the whole of the Precepts of the Law, to deliver us from the
Judgment of the Law; I say it was no less necessary he should so do, then that
he should bear our Curse and Death: For it would have been impossible for him
to have overcome the last, if he had not been Spotless touching the first: For
therefore it was impossible he should be holden of Death, because he did
nothing worthy of Death; no, not in the Judgment of the Law, to which he
immediately stood. Now as Christ Jesus stood thus to, and walked in the Law, it
is Blasphemy for any to presume to imitate him; because thus to do, is to turn
Mediator and Undertaker for the Sin of the World. Besides, whosoever does attempt
it, undertakes an impossibility, for no Man can stand by the Morral Law, as it
immediately comes from the Divine Majesty; he having Sinned first; even before
he goes about to fulfill it: And in this sense is that to be understood, as
many as are of the Works of the Law; are under the Curse, held accursed,
because they have sinned first; accursed in their performances, because of
imperfection, and therefore assuredly accursed at last, because they come short
of the Righteousness thereof.

1. Christ Jesus did never set himself forth for an example, that we by
imitating his steps in Morrals, should obtain Justification with God, from the
Curse of that Law; For this would be to overthrow, and utterly abolish the Work
which himself came into the World to accomplish, which was not to be our
example, that we by treading his steps might have Remission of Sins, but that
through the Faith of him, through Faith in his Blood we might be reconciled to
God.

2. Besides, thus to imitate Christ, is to make of him a Savior, not by
Sacrifice, but by example: Nay, to speak the whole, this would be to make his
Mediatorship wholly to center, rather in prescribing of Rules, and exacting
obedience to Morrals, then in giving himself aransome for Men. Yea, I will add,
to imitate Christ, as you have prescribed, may be done by him, that yet may be
ignorant of the excellency of his Person, and the chief end of his being made
Flesh: For in all these things which you have discoursed in that fifth Chapter
of him; you have only spoken of that, something of which is apprehended by the
light of Nature. Yea, Nature it self will teach, that men should trust in God,
which is the most excellent* Particular that there you mention: Wherefore our
Lord Jesus himself foreseeing, that in Men there will be a proudness, to
contentent themselves with that Confidence, he intimates that it would be in
us insignificant, if it stand without Faith in himself; Ye believe naturally in
God; says he, John 14. 1, 2.
Believe also in me. Faith in Jesus is as absolutely necessary as to believe
immediately in the Divine being: Yea, without Faith in Jesus, whosoever
believes in God is sure to perish, and burn in Hell. If you believe not that I
am he, ye shall dye in your Sins. John 8. 24.
And to take Jesus in Morrals for example, is no where called believing in him;
neither is there one promise of eternal life, annexed to such a practice. But
you say, If we tread in his blessed steps, and be such, according to our
measure, and capacity, as we have understood he was in this World.

Answ. I say, for a Man to confine himself, only to the life of the Lord Jesus
for an example, or to think it enough to make him, in his life, a pattern for
us to follow, leaves us, through our shortness in the end, with the Devil and
his Angels, for want of Faith in the Doctrine of Remission of Sins: For Christ
did no where make another Mediator between God and him, nor did he ever trust
to another Man's Righteousness, to be thereby Justified from the Curse of the
Law, neither did he at all stand in need thereof, without which WE must be
Damned, and Perish: Now I say, these things being no where practiced by him, he
cannot therein be an example to us: And I say again, seeing that in these
things, by Faith in them, is immediately wrapped up our Reconciliation with
God, it follows, that though a Man take the Lord Christ in his whole life,
for an example in the end, that notwithstanding, he abides unreconciled to
God. Neither will that clause (and be such) help such a person at all: For
Justification with God, comes not by imitating Christ as exemplary in Morrals,
but through Faith in his Precious Blood. In the Law I read, that the Paschal
Lamb was neither to be eaten Sodden, nor Raw, but Roast with fire, must it be
eaten, Exodus 12. Now to make Salvation Principally to depend upon imitating
Christ's Life; it is to feed upon him Raw, or at most as Sodden; or Sanctified
and Holy: But the precept is, Eat it Roast with fire; is; the Antitype, as
accursed of God for Sin, Exodus 19.
and enduring the punishment for it. Deuteronomy. 33. ^.
The Law is compared to fire, and it is Curse to a burning Oven: Now under the
Curse of this fiery Law, Mal. 4. 1.
was the Lord Jesus afflicted for the Sins of the World: Wherefore, as so
considered, our Faith must lay hold upon him, for Justification with God. This
is the Law of the Burnt Offering (which was the Offering for Sin;) It is the
Burnt Offering, because of the burning upon the Altar all night, unto the
morning, and the fire of the Altar shall be burning in it, Levit. 6. 9. But now
I would inquire; Had Israel done the Commandment, if they had eaten the
Passover Raw; or Boiled in Water? or if they had offered that Offering; that
was to be burnt as a Sin Offering, otherwise then it was commanded? Even so, to
feed upon Christ, as he is Holy* and of good life only; and also as taking him
therein for an example to us, to follow his steps for Justification with God;
this is to eat the Passover Raw, and not as Roast with Fire; this is to feed
upon Jesus, without respecting him as accursed of God for our Sin, and so
consequently to miss of that eternal life, that by his Blood he has obtained
for every one that believes on him. I have been pleased with this observation,
that none of the Signs and Wonders in Egypt, could deliver the Children of
Israel thence, till the Lamb was slain, and Roast with fire, Exodus 12. 1. And I
have been also pleased with this, that the Father, not Moses, gave the Manna
from Heaven, which was a Type of the Flesh, and Blood of Christ, that whosoever
feeds on, shall live for ever, John 6. 32. Yea, Circumcision also, which was
a Type of inward, and Heart-Holiness, was not of Moses, but of the Fathers, and
Principally a consequence of the Faith of Abraham, John 7. 22. Whence I gather,
That no Wonder, but the Blood of Christ can save: That no Kindess, but the
Mercy of God can give this to us: And that no Law, but the Law of Faith, can
make us truly Holy in heart. But you add, Those that sincerely, and
industrously endeavor to imitate the Holy Jesus in his Spirit, and Actions,
can never be ignorant what it is to be truly Christians. Those that follow
Jesus in his Spirit, must first receive that Spirit from Heaven, which Spirit
is received, as I have often said, by applying first, by Faith, the Merits of
Christ to the Soul, for Life, and Justification with God. The Spirit is not
received by the Works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith; neither comes it
in the Ministry, or Doctrine of Morrals, but in and by the Ministry of Faith;
and the Law is NOT of Faith. Wherefore seeing you have, in Page 223. of your
Book, forbidden Sinners to come first to Jesus for Justification with God; the
Spirit you talk of, however you call it the Spirit Jesus, can be no other then
the Spirit of a Man; which you also your self, in Page 7, 8, 9. call the Purity
of Humane Nature, a Principle of Reason, the first Principles of Morrals, or
those that are Originally Dictates of Humane Nature. Wherefore by these Words
(in his Spirit) you do but Blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and abuse your ignorant
Reader; calling now (Quaker-like) the Dictates of your Humanity, and your
Socinian Complyances therewith, the Spirit of Holy Jesus. I conclude therefore,
that the way of Salvation, or the design of Christianity as prescribed by you,
is none other then the Errors of your own brain, the way of Death, the Sum and
Heart of Papistical Quakerism, and is quite denied by the Lord Jesus, and by
his blessed Testament: And now go your ways, and imitate the Lord Jesus, and
take the whole History of his life for your example, and walk in his steps, and
be such as much as you can, yet without Faith in his Blood, first; yea, and if
you stand not Just before God through the imputation of his Righteousness, your
imitating will be found no better then rebellion, because by that, instead of
Faith in his Blood, you hope to obtain remission of Sins, thrusting him thereby
from his Office, and Work, and setting your dunghill Righteousness up, in his
stead.

I come now to Your Conclusion. First, in Page 198. You pr^se men to betake
themselves to find (that which you call) the design of Christianity,
accomplished in their hearts and lives.

Answ. Seeing that the Holiness that your erroneous Book has exalted, is none
other but THAT which we have LOST; Yea, and again seeing you have set this in
the Head of, and before the the Righteousness of Christ, I admonish my Reader
to tremble at the Blasphemy of your Book, and account the whole design therein
to be none other, but that of an enemy to the Son of God, and Salvation of the
World: For that Holiness as I have showed, is none other, but a Shadowish,
Christless, Graceless* Holiness, and your so exalting of it, very Blasphemy.
You proceed, saying, Let us exercise our selves unto real, and substantial
Godliness* (still meaning your Adamitish Holiness) Let us study the Gospel not
to discourse, or only to believe, but also, and above ALL things, to do well.

Answ. Herein still you manifest, either ignorance of, or malice against the
Doctrine of Faith* that Doctrine, which above all Doctrines, is the
q^intessence of the new Testament, because therein (and not Principally, as you
feign, by doing well) is the Righteousness of God revealed, and that from Faith
to Faith; not from Faith to Works, nor yet from Works to Faith. Besides, the
Gospel is Preached in all Nations for the obedience of FAITH: Romans 16.
Neither Works, the Law, the Dictates of Humanity, nor the first Principles of
Morrals, knowing what to do with the Righteousness of the Gospel, which is a
Righteousness imputed by God, not wrought by us; a Righteousness given, not
earned, a Righteousness recived by believing, not that which flows from our
obedience to Laws, a Righteousness which comes from God to us, not one that
goes from us to God. Besides, as I also have hinted before; the Apostle, and
you are directly opposite. You cry, above ALL things, DO well: that is Work and
do the Law; but he, Above ALL take the SHIELD of Faith, wherewith are quenched
ALL the fiery Darts of the Wicked, Ephesians. 6.

But you add, Page 300. Let us do what lies in us to convince our Atheist,
that the Religion of the blessed Jesus, is no trick or devi^e, and our wanton
and loose Christians, that it is no notional business, speculative Science.

Answ. This you cannot do by your Morral Natural Principles of Humanity: For
even some of your BRAVE Philosophers, whose Godliness you have so much
aplauded, were even then in the must of their, and your Virtues, Athestically
ignorant of the Religion of Jesus. And as to the loose Christian, Christ
neither has need of, nor will he bless your Blasphemous opinions, nor feigned
Godliness, but Real ungodliness, to make them Converts to his Faith and Grace;
neither can it be expected it should, seeing you have not only dirty thoughts,
but vilifying Words, and sayings of his Person, Work, and Righteousness. You
have set your Works before his, Page 223. calling them Substantial,
Indispensible, and Real; but coming to God by him, a thing i^ it self
Indifferent, P. 7, 8, 9. You go on, and say, Let us declare -- that we are not
hearty ^elyers (...) Christ's Righteousness, by being imitators of it. Page
300. You cannot leave off to Contemn and Blaspheme the Son of God. Do you not
yet know that the Righteousness of Christ, on which the sinner ought to rely
for life, is such, as consisted in his standing to, and doing of the Law,
without a Mediator? And would you be doing this? What know you not, that an
Essential of the Righteousness he accomplished for Sinners when he was in the
World? is, That he was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born without Sin, did all
things in the Power of, and Union with his own eternal Godhead. And are you
able thus to imitate him? Again, the Righteousness on which we ought to rely
for life, is that which has in it the Merit of Blood: Romans 5. 4.
We are Justified by his Blood, through Faith in his Blood: Is this the
Righteousness you would imitate? Farther, the Righteousness on which poor
Sinners should rely, is that, for the sake of which, God forgiveth the Sins of
him, that rests by Faith thereupon. But would you be imitating of, or
accompishing such a Righteousness?

Your Book Sir is begun in Ignorance, managed with Error, and ended in
Blasphemy.

Now the God of Glory, if it may stand with his Glory, give you a sight of your
Sins, against the Son of God, that you may as Saul, lie trembling, and being
astonished cry out, to be Justified, with the Righteousness of God, without the
Law, even that which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them
that believe.

Many other gross Absurdities, which I have omitted in your whole Book, may
(perhaps) be more thoroughly gathered up, when you shall have taken the
opportunity to reply. In the mean time I shall content my self with this.

Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, Joh. 1. 29.

Even Jesus, who delivered us from the Wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.

Who when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High, Heb. 1. 3.

Christ dyed for our Sins, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3.

God has made him to be Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Christ was made a Curse for us. Gal. 3. 13.

He bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

He loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1. 5.

God for Christ's sake ^ath forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. 23.

We have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of our Sins,
according to the riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7.

Now unto the King, Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be
Honor, and Glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

The Conclusion.
That my Reader may farther perceive that Mr. Fowler, even by the chief of the
Articles of the Church of England, is adjudged Erroneous, and besides the very
Fundamentals of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and that in those very Principles
that are the main (I say,) and that most immediately concern Christ, Faith, and
Salvation, will be evident to them that compare his Design of Christianity,
with these Articles hereunder Recited.

The Articles concerning Free Will.
THe condition of Man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn, and
prepare himself, by his own Natural strength, and good Works, to Faith, and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good Works, pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will; and working with us when we have that good will.

The Article concerning justification.
WE are accounted Righteous before God, ONLY for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works, or Deservings:
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith ONLY, is a most wholesome Doctrine,
and full of Comfort, etc.

The Article of Works before justification.
WOrks done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ,
or deserve Grace of Congruity: Yea, rather for that they are not done as God
has willed, and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
NATVRE of Sin.

These Articles, because they respect the points incontroversie betwixt Mr.
Fowler, and my self; and because they be also Fundamental truths of the
Christian Religion (as I do heartily believe) let all Men know that I quarrel
not with him, about things wherein I descent from the Church of England, but do
contend for the truth continued, even in these very Articles of theirs, from
which he has so deeply revolted, that he clasheth with every one of them, as
may farther be shown when he shall take heart to reply.

But to wind up this unpleasant Scrible, I shall have done when I have farther
showed, how he joyneth with Papist, and Quaker, against these wholesome, and
Fundamental Articles.

Mr. Fowler's Doctrine compared with Campian the Jesuit, upon that question
whether Faith only Justifies:
says Campian,

1.
Campian. We (Papists) say, that as Grace is put into us in Justification, so
also our Righteousness is enlarged through Good Works, and is inherent in us;
therefore it is not true that God does Justify by Faith ONLY. Fowler Page
221. Justifying Faith is such a belief of the truth of the Gospel as includes
a sincere resolution of obedience unto all its Precepts; and that it justifies
AS it does SO: In short, is it possible that Faith in Christ's Blood, Page 22.
for the forgiveness of Sin, should be the only act which justifies a Sinner?
2.
Campian. So that Faith is urged, but not Faith ONLY; again, by Faith is meant
all Christianity, and the whole Religion of Christians. Fowler, Page 222. For
surely the Faith which intaileth the Sinner to so high a Privilege, as that of
justification, must needs be such as complyeth with all the purposes of
Christ's coming into the World; especially with his grand purpose, as Lord, and
that it is no less necessary that it should justify as it does this. 3.
Campian. Though Works void of Christ are nothing; yet through Grace they serve
to Justification. Fowler, Page 225. 226. Of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, this is the true Explication; It consists in dealing with
sincerely Righteous Persons: as if they were perfectly so, for the sake and
upon the account of Christ's Righteousness: The grand intent of the Gospel
being to make us partakers of an inward real Righteousness; and it being a
Secondary one, that we should be accepted, and rewarded, as if we were
completely Righteous. 4.
Campian. Speaking of Faith, Hope, and Charity, he confesses, that Faith in
Nature is before them, but it does not Justify before they come. Fowler, Page
223. What pretense can there be for thinking that Faith is the condition, or
Instrument of Justification, as it complyeth with only the Precept of relying
on Christ's Merits, for the obtaining of it: especially when it is no less
manifest then the Sun at Noon Day, Page 284.
that obedience to the other Precepts, or Works of Love, must go before
obedience to this. 5.
Campian. I deny (that Faith ONLY does Justify) for you have not in all the
Word of God, that Faith ONLY does Justify. Fowler, Page 225. And for my part,
I must confess, that I would not willingly be he that should undertake to
Encounter one of the Champions of that foul Cause, with the Admission of this
Principle, That Faith Justifies, only as it apprehends (rests or relyeth
on, Page 224.) the Merits, and Righteousness of Jesus Christ, I must certainly
have great luck, or my Adversary but little Cunning, if I were not forced to
repent me of such an engagement. 6.
Campian. Abraham being a Just Man, was made more Just by a living Faith.
Fowler, Page 283. He only is a true Child of Abraham, who in the Purity of the
Heart obeys those substantial Laws, that are imposed by God, upon him. 7.
Campian. I say that Charity and good Work, are not excluded (in the causes of
ruo Justification.) Fowler, Page 215. For we have shown, not only that
Reformation from the practice, and purification of Heart from the liking of
Sin, are as plainly as can be asserted in the Gospel, to be absolutely
necessary to give Men a right to the Promises of it, but also that its great
Salvation does even consist in it. Mr. Fowler's Doctrine compared with William
Pen the Quaker.
1.
Pen's Sandy Foundation, Page 19. Life and Salvation is to them that follow
Christ the Light, in all his Righteousness, which every man comes only to
experience, as he walks in a holy Subjection to that measure of Light and
Grace, wherewith the fullness has enlightened him. Fowler, Page 8. That is,
those which are of an indispensible, and Eternal Obligation, which were first
written in men's hearts, and Originally Dictates of Humane Nature. 2.
Pen, Page 32. I really confess that Jesus Christ fullfilled the Fathers Will,
and offered up a most satisfactory Sacrifice, but not to pay God, or help him
to save Men. Fowler, Page 85. Christ was set forth to be a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for Sin; I will not say that his Father (who is perfectly sui Puris)
might be put by this means into a Capacity of forgiving it. 3.
Pen, Page 16. God's Remission is grounded on Man's Repentance, no tthat it is
impossible for God to pardon without a Plenary Satisfaction. Fowler, Page 84.
There are many that do not question but that God could have pardoned Sin,
without any other satisfaction, then the Repentance of the Sinner, etc. 4.
Pen, Page 27. Justification does not go before, but is subsequential to the
Mortification of Lusts. Fowler, Page 14, 15. This Blessing of making Men Holy,
was so much the design of Christ's coming, that he had his very Name from it;
Observe the Words; He shall save his People from their Sins; not from the
punishment of them, etc. And that is the Primary sense of them which is most
plainly expressed in them; That he shall save his People from the punishment of
Sin, is a true sense too; but it is Secondary, and employed only, as this
latter is the never failing, and necessary consequence of the former Salvation.
5.
Pen, Page 25. Since therefore there can be no admittance had, without
performing that Righteous Will, and doing those Holy, and Perfect sayings;
Alas! to what value will an imputative Righteousness amount? etc. Fowler, Page
16. Christ shall bring in an inward substantial, and everlasting Righteousness,
and by abrogating the outward (Ceremonial) and establishing ONLY this
Righteousness, he should enlarge the Jewish Church, an accession of the
Gentiles, being by that means made unto it. 6.
Pen, Page 24, 25. Since God has prescribed an inoffensive life, as that which
only can give acceptance with him; and on the contrary has determined not to
justify the Wicked, etc. Will not the abomination appear greatest of all, when
God shall be found Condemning the just, on purpose to justify the wicked; and
that he is thereto compelled, or else no Salvation? which is the tendency of
their Doctrine, who imagine the Righteous, and merciful God, to condemn and
punish his righteous Son, that he being sanctified for our Sins, we might be
justified (while unsatisfied) by the imputation of his perfect Righteousness. O
why should this horrible thing be contended for by Christians! Fowler, Page
119. If it were possible (as it has been proved it is not) that a Wicked Man
should have God's pardon, it would not make him cease to be miserable. Fowler,
Page 120. Were it possible that Christ's Righteousness could be imputed to an
unrighteous man, I dare boldly affirm it would signify as little to his
happiness, as would a Gorgeous and Splendid Garment, to one that is almost
starved with Hunger, or that lies racked by the torturing Diseases of the
Stone, or Cholick. Fowler, Page 130. To Justify a Wicked man, while he
continues so, if it were possible for God to do it, would far more disparage
his Justice, and Holiness, then advance his Grace and Kindness. 7.
Pen, Page 26. Unless we be doers of the Law, which Christ came not to destroy,
but as our example to fulfill, we can never be justified before God. Fowler,
Page 296. It is impossible we should not have the design of Christianity
accomplished in us, and therefore that we should be destitute of the power of
it; if we make our Saviors most excellent Life, the pattern of our lives.
Those that sincerely, and industriously endeavor to imitate the Holy Jesus in
his Spirit and Actions, can never be ignorant what it is to be truly
Christians, nor can they fail to be so. 8.
Pen, Page 26. Nor let any fancy that Christ has so fulfilled it for them, as
to exclude their obedience, from being exquesite to their acceptance, but only
as their pattern. Fowler, Page 148. This Son of God taught Men their Duty, by
his own example, and did himself perform among them, what he required of them.
Now that he should tread before us EVERY step of that way, which he has told
us leads to Eternal Happiness, and commend those Duties which are most
ungrateful to our corrupt inclinations, by his own practice; our having so
brave an example is no small encouragement, to a cheerful performance of all
that is commanded. Understand thou what thou Read.
The End.
Reader, thou art desired to mend these Errataes with thy Pen, and to bear with
some mis-pointings that have happened by reason of the Authors absence from the
Press.
PAge 1. line 2. read, and that in it, etc. p. 3. l. 15. r. no. p. 5. l. 39. r.
Sinless. p. 6. l. 36. r. but. p. 8. l. 24. leave out, was. p. 9. l. 28. r.
then. p. 11. l. 35. r. why said you not such. p. 12. l. 24. after Exact, r. it.
l. 13. more. p. 13. l. 3. for Laws r. Law. p. 17. l. 10. after and, r. equal
to. p. 22. l. 25. after Faith, make this, 1. p. 23. l. 6. after is, r. your^ p.
24. l. 3. for last, r. best. p. 27. l. 2. for to, r. in. l. 9. add, as. p. 29.
l. 7. for dispensible, r. indispensible. l. 15. add, in his. l. 22. add, do, p.
32. l. 4. for Son, r. Soul. p. 34. l. 2. for here, r. hence. p. 35. l. 1. after
of, r. that for. l. 13. for Sin, r. he. l. 26. leave out, also. p. 36. l. 3.
for must, r. might. p. 37. l. 37. for for, r. but. p. 38. l. 9. for 13. r. 3.
p. 39. l. 8. after which, r. it. p. 40. l. 22. for cited, r. cited. p. 44. l.
22. leave out, or not. p. 56. l. 19. for sealed, r. seated. p. 60. l. a. leave
out, an. p. 66. l. 35. r. reconcilable. p. 69. l. 33. for our, r. your. p. 74.
l. 1. r. Implanted. p. 78. l. 17. leave out for. l. 20. r. at all. p. 87. l.
18. r. advantages of others. p. 91. l. 32. r. especially. p. 100. l. 28. r.
ungodlily. p. 107. l. 34. r. content.

Books Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near Temple Bar.
BAptism before and after Faith and Repentance, largely discussed; not only in
public disputations managed by many Ministers before thousands of People, but
also Mr. Baxter, Dr. Holms, Dr. Featly, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cook, Mr.
Cotton, and many others, their arguments for, and against, truly controverted;
being a subject very useful in these enquiring Times, for general satisfaction
in this Point, so much Controverted; in Folio.

Mr. Hooles Latin and English Grammar, fitted, not only for the use of
Schools, but very useful for any Person that is desirous to learn the Latin
Tongue; being a more plain and speedy help, then any yet Extant; The Fifth
Edition, in Octavo.

The truth of the Resurrection of the Body, both of the good and bad at the
great Day, asserted and proved by God's Word; also the manner and order of
their coming forth of their Graves; and the Discourse of the last Judgment,
and final conclusion of the World; in Octavo.

Christian Behavior, being the Fruits of true Christianity, teaching Husbands,
Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, so to walk as to please God; The
Third Edition, in Twelves.

Prayer with the Spirit and Understanding; showing what it is to pray with the
Spirit, and with Understanding; The Second Edition, in Twelves.

The young Scholars Pocketbook, containing the first Rudidiments in
Arithmetic, with the Rule of Three: also the way to find the content of Board,
Glass, Land, Timber, Stone, Globes, etc. The Third Edition, in Twelves.

One thing is needful; or, a serious Meditation on the four last things, Death,
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Unto which is added, Abal and Gerizzim, or the
Blessing and the Curse; The Third Edition, in Twelves.

Christianity indeed, or the well disciplined Christian, the delight of Christ:
showing how Believers in Christ ought to go in and out before each other, in
Gospel order; governing, and being governed, as the children of one father; in
Octavo.

Emanuel, or the Doctrine of the Nicene council, about the God head of Christ,
and his two Natures. Also the late vented Socinian Doctrine, f^lly answered and
refuted; in Octavo.

The Holy City, or the new Jerusalem, wherein its Godly Light, Walls, Gates,
Angels, the manner of their standing are expounded. Also her length and
breadth, together with the golden measuring Reed explained, and the glory of
all unfolded. Also the numerousness of its Inhabitants, and what the Tree and
Water of Life are, by which they are sustained. In Octavo.

Blood for Blood, being an impartial narrative of that late horrid Murder
committed by M. C. upon her own and only beloved child, with several
remarkable passages before, and in her imprisonment, and time of execution. In
Octavo.

A new and useful Concordance to the Holy Bible, according to the last
Translation, containing the most material Scriptures in the Line and Margent of
the old and new Testament, together with the chief acceptations of special
words; with notes to distinguish the promises, commands, and threatenings, being
plainer, and much larger then any of this Volume yet extant. In Octavo, and
Twelves. Also to be had bound up with the Bible in both Vollumus. 1. Bunyans.
2. Arminius.

Symtomes of growth, and decay of Godliness in eighty signs of a living and
dying Christian, with the causes of decay, and remedies for recovery. The
second Edition much enlarged, with the Addition also of Twenty signs largely
improved.

The World surveyed; or, a brief account of many remarkable passages, wherein
the Omnipotent Works of God are brought to our knowledge, with a relation of
that dreadful Famine that befell the memorable City of (Jerusalem,) while Grass,
Hay, Leaves, and Barks of Trees, Dogs, Cats, with the dung of Fowl and Beasts,
was their desirable Food, worthy to be known and read, of all men.

The Tridentine Gospel, or Papal Creed, made at Trent, and promulgated at Rome,
by Pope Pius 4. exhibated and demonstrated to be new, (...), and Antichristian.
In a Sermon, by W. Ramsay, lately professor of Philosophy, Priest, and
Confessary, and Misonary Preacher of the order of Franciscans, in the Church of
Rome, now by God's mercy Minister of the Gospel in the Church of England.

A Letter from Dr* Robert Wild, to his friend Mr. I. I. upon occasion of his
Majesty's declaration of liberty of Conscience. Together with his Poetical
Licentia, and a friendly debate between a Conformist, and a Nonconformist.

A true and impartial Narrative of the eminent hand of God, that befell a Quaker
and his Family, at the Town of Panton, in Lincolnshire, who affirmed he was
commanded of God, to pronounce Mr. Ralph ^ames, preacher of the Gospel, a
(Leper.) With a relation of one Mary Brown, that at the hearing of Christ's
Humanity preached, was taken speechless, and with a strange manner of swelling
or heaving, in the face and breast. Also an impartial account of some
remarkable passages of one Charles Baily, another Quaker, who professed himself
a Prophet, with his Prophecy and Revelation.

Youths Tragedy, a Poem drawn up by way of a Dialogue between Youth, the Devil,
Wisdom, Time, Death, the Soul, etc.

Mr. Bunyans confession of his Faith, and the reason of his practice, or with
who, and who not, I can hold Church fellowship, or the Communion of Saints,
showing by diverse arguments, that though I dare not Communicate with the open
profane, yet I can with those visable Saints, that differ about Water Baptism,
wherein is also discoursed whether that be the entering Ordinance into
fellowship or no.

The life and death of James Arminius, and Simon Spiscopius, professors of
Livinity; in the University of Leyden in Holland: both of them famous defenders
of the Doctrine of God's universal Grace, and sufferers for it.

FINIS.

