A Reflection of the sense and mind of the Frontispiece.
NAture relieved by Arts new might,
Reasons obnubilated sight
Cleares up, and things which lay concealed,
Are to her doubtful eyes revealed.
To make the Deaf and Dumb amends,
Illustrious Nature here descends
To dance the Senses Masque; a Ball,
Which we their Anagram may call:
On each Hand the Scene keeping Tact,
Without whom life can naught transact;
The other Senses with this close:
The Right, the Four transposed, oppose,
The impresse of whose shields relate,
Which for the other does officiate.
Terpander who with Lyrique Air,
Could to the Deaf their loss repair,
Directs them by his Musick's sound
To a late consecrated ground;
Where the Common-Sense a Guest,
They find at an exchanging Feast
Of objects where each Sense may taste
The pleasures of that Sense lies wast:
When lo! the Genius of the place,
Spoke thus with a Majestique grace:
Sceptiques henceforth shall this repute,
The Academy of the Mute.
(An Architectures highest grace)
Let there herein be no Deaf place!
You Are welcome all: more would have said,
When Nature thus her self displayed;
Here I Will renounce my Step-Dame part,
To honor so Divine an Art
That lends me crutches when I haul^
Downright, into a sensile fault.
PHILOCOPHVS


Philocophus: OR, THE DEAF AND Dumb Man's Friend.

EXHIBITING THE Philosophical verity of that subtle Art, which may enable one
with an observant Eye, to Hear what any man speaks by the moving of his lips.
UPON THE SAME Ground, with the advantage of an Historical Exemplification,
apparently proving, That a Man borne Deaf and Dumb, may be taught to Hear
the sound of words with his Eye, and thence learn to speak with his Tongue.

By I. B. surnamed the Chirosopher.

Sic canimus Surdis -- London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard 1648.

For the Right Worpll Sir Edward Gostwicke, of Willington, in the County of
Bedford, Baronet, And M William Gostwick his youngest Brother: and all other
intelligent and ingenious Gentlemen, who as yet can neither hear nor speak.
To be communicated unto them that can, and have acquaintance or alliance with
any whom it may concern.
AMong the portentous and prodigious Titles of the King of Bisnaga (so called
by the Portugalls, but by the learned Writers, Narsinga) He styles himself,
Master of those which know not how to speak. And the Grand Signiour, or
Emperor of the Turks, would take it for no disparagement, to be called Great
Master of the Deaf and Dumb; with whom fifty of your Tribe are always in
Delitiis, and he holds it a great part of his state and magnificence, that he
has such sacred persons as you daily to converse with as his Companions: And
although some who understand not the mystery of your condition, look upon you
as misprisions in nature; yet to me who have studied your perfections, and well
observed the strange recompenses Nature affords you, I behold nothing in you
but what may be a just object of admiration! For even your Privative
Qualification is such, that the extent of our apprehension when it is most
excessive, is but able to afford an expression thereof our mind being much put
to it to take a nominall scantling of your Quality, and it argues an admirable
power in our soul, that it is so notable an Engine, that it can raise a
positive notion out of privative: For Deafness and Dumbness being
privations and Negatives, we can easier say what you cannot do, then what you
can: For, that is beyond our reach, positively to state your abilities, which
may be ranked with honor, praise, and glory, which although they have so great
an influence upon us; yet we know not where to find their subsistence, or a
sufficient notion to define them by.

What though you cannot express your minds in those verbal contrivances of
man's invention; yet you want not speech, who have your whole Body, for a
Tongue, having a language more natural and significant, which is common to you
with us, to wit gesture, the general and universal language of Humane nature,
which when we would have our speech to have life and efficacy we join in
commission with our words, and when we would speak with more state and
gravity, we renounce words and use Nods and other natural signs alone.

This language you speak so purely, that I who was the first that made it my
Darling study to interpret the natural richness of our discoursing gestures,
not only to the distinguishing of all the Corporal and National Dialects
thereof, and regulating the natural as Accessories and Adjuncts of Rhetorical
Elocution; but to the following of them down to their spring-heads and
original, even to the finding out their Radical Derivations and Muscular
Etymologies by that thorough progress of observation, am fully satisfied that
you want nothing to be perfectly understood, your mother tongue administering
sufficient utterance upon all occasions: Insomuch as being solicited on your
behalf by a worthy Friend of yours (who had observed you not only to be
affected but seemingly edified upon the sight of the Alphabets of my Chirologia
or natural language of the hand which he had presented you with, to an
endeavor of accommodating them more to your use; I was enforced ingeniously to
confess, I could not improve them to any considerable advantage for you; since
you already can express your selves so truly by signs, from a habit you have
gotten by using always signs, as we do speech: Nature also recompencing
your want of speech, in the invention of signs to express your conceptions:
Yet a while after having well observed by your multiplying signs and gestures,
that you earnestly desired to unfold your lips to an orall elocution; seeming
as if you accounted your dumbness to be your greatest unhappiness; in tender
pity of your case, I began to cast about which way as a Motist to be
serviceable unto you, by supplying a medium of greater Discipline, whereby you
might arrive nearer unto the intimate essences, of things, by apprehension,
whereof your intellect might gain somewhat a more proper perfection: When
coasting along the borders of gesture, and voluntary motion, I discovered a
community among the Senses, and that there was in the continent of Humanity, a
Terra incognita of Ocular Audition; a treasure reserved for these times, which
had escaped their privy search, who guided by the illumination of their own
endeavors had in sudore vultus ransackt the bosom of nature, wherein wisdom
had hid it among other Arts and Sciences which have their foundation in Nature,
and neither grow nor increase but appear when time and observation unlockt
them unto us: Having well scanned this Magnale naturae, I found it to be one of
the subtlest pieces of Recondit learning, and that it bordered upon other
avenewes unto the brain, as Orall and Dentall Audition, of which we have
discovered sufficient ground to raise a new Art upon, directing how to convey
intelligible and articulate sounds another way to the brain then by the ear
or eye; showing that a man may hear as well as speak with his mouth. Upon
which and other unlooked for discoveries, I began in Idea, to conceive the
model of a new Academie, which might be erected in favor of those who are in
your condition, to wit originally deaf and dumb, for which Edifice and
Gymnasium having provided all kind of materials requisite, I soon perceived
by falling into discourse with some rational men about such a design, that
the attempt seemed so paradoxicall, prodigious and Hyperbolicall; that it did
rather amuse then satisfy their understandings, insomuch as they took the
terms and expressions this Art justly usurpes for insufferable violations of
their reason, which they professed they must renounce before they could have
faith to credit such an undertaking: For the satisfaction therefore of such
knowing men, who yet are incredulous, and too superstitiously devoted to the
received Philosophy, I thought good to hint the Phylosophicall verity of this
Art, which I do with the greater assurance, having gained an unanswerable
Demonstration from matter of fact; for other matters hinted they must expect
credit upon the like success: Nevertheless herein I shall not descend to
exact particulars, intending only to present the I^chnography of this Art
referring the inward contriving of accommodations, and the method of operation
to our intended Academy: In the mean time for the enlarging of your Charter,
and to bring you into a nearer incorporation of society and communion with us:
I here commend unto you the Accommodations this Art holds out, wishing you all
in good time a happy metamsychosis or transmigration of your senses, that so at
least by way of Anagram you may enjoy them all: That learning first to write
the Images of words, and to understand the conveyances of a visible and
permanent speech; from that Hand A. B. C. you may proceed unto a Lip-Grammar,
which may enable you to hear with your eye and thence learn to speak with your
tongue, which benefits of Art when you have attained, and are become capable of
perusing this tractate, whose argument is so new and strange, that there was
never so much matter concerning you presented under one object of the eye,
containing a narrative of your original estate with the supplementall
advantages thereof, the novelty and inventive strain of this book may at once
delight and profit you, which is the hopeful wish of

Your officious Friend and Historigrapher PHILOCOPHVS.

AD SUBTILISSIMUM virum, D. Joan Bulwerum, cognomento Chirosophum, sub persona
Philocophi, Surdis mutisque canticum novum, cum discantu feliciter canentem.
ABdita Naturae nobis miracula pandis,
Quae nescit Libris Plebs inimica bonis.
Quae doctos latuere viros: latuere Platonis
Discipulum, quae Tu das, Stagerita novus.
Instituis Surdos, Mutos audire Magistros
Dum Logicum faciunt mota labella sonum.
Sic nunquam frustra narratur Fabula Surdo,
Si detur Surdis, posse videre sonos.
I.H. Oxoniensis (...).

To his ingenious friend Philocophus, on this Foundation of his intended
Academie.
REjoice you Deaf and Dumb, your Arms extend
To Embrace th'inventive goodness of a Friend!
Who here intends, for your relief, to Found
An Academie, on NATVRES highest ground:
Wherein He does strange mysteries unlocke,
How all the Senses have one common Stock.
Shows how indulgent Nature for each sense
Wanting, allows a double recompense.
How she translates a sense, transplants an Ear
Into the Eye, and makes the Optiques hear.
Inoculates an Ear with sight; whereby
It shall perform the office of an Eye.
Presents rich odours Tasted, Viands Smelt,
And Sound and Light in a strange manner felt.
The senses (Arts new Masterpiece) are taught
T'exchange their objects by a new found thought.
The Deaf and Dumb get Hearing Eyes, which break.
Their Bar of Silence, and thence learn to speak
Words may be seen or heard: We Are at our choice
For to give Ear, or Eye unto a Voice.
Where men by their transposed senses gain,
This Anagramme of Art and Nature's plain.
Amicitiae and Artis Transcendentiae ergo Tho. Diconson, Med. Templ.

A Table of such hints and notions as more directly concern Deaf and Dumb
men.
That men born Deaf and Dumb, have a kind of significant speech and natural
Language; and what that is.

Wherefore it is that Deaf and Dumb men can express themselves so lively by
signs.

That all Deaf and Dumb men, seem to have an earnest desire to unfold their
lips to speech, as if they accounted their Dumbness, their greatest
unhappiness.

That a man born Deaf and Dumb, may be taught to hear the sounds of words with
his eyes.

The strangeness of that expression, abated and qualified, by proving a
community among the Senses, and their mutual exchanging of objects.

And Hearing to be nothing else but the due perception of motion.

A notable example of Hearing sounds with the eye, in a Spanish Lord, who was
borne Deaf and Dumb.

The causes why men are borne Deaf and Dumb, various and unknown.

Supposed by some to happen through a propriety of their place of birth.

An example seconding that opinion.

The opinion of Astrologers, why men are borne Deaf and Dumb.

That the sin of the Parents is sometimes thus punished in their children.

An example of Gods justice in a Boy borne Deaf and Dumb.

That Deafness is sometimes ex Traduce, and an hereditary evil.

Why Deaf men beget Deaft children.

Why the children of Deaf men are not always Deaf.

Aristotle's opinion that Dumbness is a privation incident to man only.

That Deafness and Dumbness may happen to other creatures also.

The causes why many in a Family, prove oftentimes Deaf and Dumb, very dark
and obscure.

Histories both Foreigne and Domestique of Deafness and Dumbness running in
a blood and many children of one man and woman proving so defective in their
senses.

A very strange History of two twin Sisters borne Deaf and Dumb, having but
two eyes between them: both living to old age.

Why those who are borne Deaf are consequently Dumb.

The chief cause supposed by some to be a sympathy between the Nerves of
Hearing and Speaking.

A twofold reason of their strict society and communion, according to
Bartholinus.

The several opinions of Physicians touching the causes of Natural Deafness,
and so consequently of Dumbness.

Both opinions of sympathy and privation of Hearing, urged by some to introduce
a consequence of Dumbnes upon Deafenes.

Varolius his Anatomicall inference of Natural Deafness from Natural
Dumbness.

That to argue Deafness from Dumbness, is no good way of inference.

The chief sign to distinguish natural Deafness from that which happens
through a disease.

The only true and undoubted cause why they who are borne Deaf, are
consequently Dumb.

That men originally Deaf, though they seem to be Dumb, yet most part of
them are able to yield some sound or inarticulate voice.

That Dumb folks, when they are angry, will make a very great gabling noise.

A reason of that extraordinary loud fury in them.

That the voice which Deaf and Dumb men utter, is very unapt in it self, to
express the conceptions of their minds unto others.

That Dumb men not naturally Deaf, insomuch as the voice is natural
understand one another, when they vent any passion of their mind thereby.

In what cases original Deafenes is incurable, and the reasons.

The sad and lamentable condition of those, who are borne Deaf and Dumb.

The sadder condition of those who are Deaf and Blind.

The yet more miserable condition of those who are Deaf, Dumb, and Blind.

A strange History out of Platerus, of an Abbot reduced to this wretched
condition, in whom the sense of Touch did officiate for all the rest.

Another pregnant Example of the officious nature of the Touch, in supplying
the defect and temporal incapacity of the other Senses.

Sennertus his well collected reasons of calling natural Deafness,
miserandum malum.

The incapacities of Deaf and Dumb men according to the Civil Law.

The pitiful condition of those who are Deaf and Dumb, and withal indocile
Fools and mad.

What the Civil and Canon Law decrees concerning such.

That they who are borne Deaf and Dumb, unless there appear pregnant signs
of a well tempered mind within, are neither capable nor worthy of the benefit
of this New Art, which teaches men born Deaf and Dumb to hear with their
E^e, and thence to learn to speak with their Tongue.

Three reasons of M^^curialis, why men's Hearing of all the senses should be
most often hurt from their Nativity.

A fourth reason given by Varolius.

That in original and Natural Deafness, both Ears are always affected,
and why?

That the chief sign of Natural Deafness in men is, To have both Ears
affected from their Nativity.

In what cases original Deafnes is incurable, and the Reasons.

Why one Ear only is commonly affected in Deafnes happening through sickness.

That there is no necessity of that common affection between the Ear and the
Tongue, but that one may be ^ome Mute through Natural Deafness, without any
hurt to the Nerves of the Tongue.

This proved by many arguments and by the example of the Spanish Lords speaking
as soon as he had got from Art, an Auditory Eye of Discipline.

That there is no reciprocal neces^^ry that they who are originally Damoc,
must be therefore Deaf.

This confirmed by one of the four cases of Deaf and Dumb men stated in the
Civil Law.

The Anatomicall reason of Dumb men's being Dumb from their Nativity, and yet
not therewithal being Deaf.

An Anatomicall Reason, why they who become Deaf through any disease, do not
sympathetically grow Mute.

An Anatomicall Reason, why they who become mute through sickness do not
sympathetically thereupon grow Deaf.

That they who are stricken Deaf by a disease, prove sometimes accidentally
Dumb.

Histories of some, who after they could speak, growing Deaf through a
Disease, have lost the use of speech.

The Reason thereof:

Histories of many deprived of their hearing by sickness, who yet have
retained their speech.

The Reason of their retention of speech.

An Aphorism of Mercurialis explained touching Deaf men's (who are Deaf
through some disease) not being by reason thereof, or in as much as they are
Deaf, Dumb.

Histories of some stricken Dumb by astonishment or indignation, who yet may
be supposed not thereupon to have grown Deaf.

Aristotle's opinion of sights conducing more to prudence and discipline, then
hearing disliked by Mercurialis, because he had observed blind men oftentimes,
to be more prudent, then they who are Deaf.

Riverus his judgment why they who are Deaf from their nativity, have the
instruments of their speech.

Vitiated.

A reply to that.

Arculanus his doubt whether the number of Dumb or Deaf men be greater.

Resolved upon the question, that there are more Dumb from their nativity then
Deaf, for, all that are borne Deaf, are Dumb.

That there are, ex tempore, more Deaf then Mute.

The Philosophical reason thereof.

Whether men Mute from their nativity, may in progress of time attain unto
speech.

An example verifying they may.

Lusitanus answer to Fontanus his question. An muti fiant loquaces? affording a
Philosophical reason of such strange events.

Histories on many borne Dumb, who by some extraordinary fright, and passion,
have received the gift of speech.

Why they who are so cured, must be frighted as well as angered.

The Philosophical reason of so strange an effect of a mixed passion.

The suffrage of the civil Law to Mute men's recovery of speech.

That they who have been Mute from their nativity, if their ears have been
open, and the impediment was only in their Tongue (that removed) they
instantly fall to speaking as if they had learned it before

This not only inferred from Histories, but reason.

An example of a Boy of four years old, thought to be Mute, who by a natural
crisis recovered, and on a sudden began to speak; as other Boys of that age
and so proceeded to a greater perfection of speech.

That it is an ancient conceit settled in all men's minds, that no effectual
relief can be given to men originally Deaf and Dumb, but by the divine Art
of miracle-working Faith.

Histories of many Deaf, and Dumb men miraculously cured.

A very strange example of a Boy Deaf and Dumb, cured by a mischief, or a
chance-medley miracle.

Reasons why Deaf men speak through the Nose.

Why smelling is often lost upon Deafness.

Another reason thence taken of Deaf men's speaking through the Nose.

That men Deaf, or blind, or otherwise defective in their senses, are apt to
use expressions as if they heard or saw.

What that property in them may seem to imply.

Painting and limbing commended as useful, and matter of contentation to Deaf
and Dumb men.

Histories of two Deaf and Dumb men eminent in that Art.

That writing to the Deaf and Dumb may serve in st^^d of speech.

That from writing first learned by Deaf and Dumb men, there lies a way (if
well followed) to the attaining unto speech, or an Articulate voice.

A strange example of a man borne Deaf and Dumb, who feels sounds.

How this Deaf and Dumb Lord who was taught to see words, had those words so
seen or heard, transferred to pronuntiatio^ and again to his Intellect.

A Reason why they who are Deaf by nature, are necessarily Mute.

How the Deaf and Dumb Spanish Lords understanding, might be framed out of
words seen or heard with his eye.

That it is a stranger thing in nature, if considered, how children learn to
imitate speech, who as is thought, take no mark at all of the motions of the
mouth of him that speaks; then that this Deaf and Dumb Lord, by observing
the motions men made, should be taught to understand others, and to speak
himself that others might understand Him.

How both these may be done.

That Deaf and Dumb men have their other Senses more sharp to supply the
want of this.

That they are heerby endowed with an ability and sagacity to hear or see with
their eye, beyond any other men that have their hearing.

That they who want their hearing, see more exactly.

A Reason thereof.

That Deaf and Dumb men having a double defect, to wit of hearing and
speaking both, have usually a double recompense.

That it is not so difficult to Deaf men as unto us to conceive and
distinguish of each motion and signification of the Lips.

That the subtleties of articular motions are with more attention (and delight)
contemplated by Deaf men.

That the apparent motions of the Lips, the Forms of Natural Letters, and so
consequently of words, seem to have been distinguished by the observation of
Deaf and Dumb Folks, who seem to have attain^d unto this knowledge, by
their own attentive observation.

That the Civil Law witnesses, how some Deaf and Dumb men, have come to
perceive the efficacy of others words, by the moving of their lips. That Deaf
and Dumb Folks are apt to be angry, if you make signs only unto them,
without using also the motion of your lips.

The supposed Reason thereof.

The admirable properties of some men accidentally Deaf, who speak and
perfectly understand what any man says, by the moving of his Lips.

That it was never seen that any Deaf and Dumb man, by his own observation
(though he might understand what others said) attained to speech without a
Teacher.

That this Spanish Lord was the first Deaf and Dumb man that was caught to
hear the sounds of words with the eyes, and thence learnt to speak with his
Tongue.

The Reason why this Deaf and Dumb Lord, by Art made to speak, became
thereby a general Linguist.

That this Deaf and Dumb Lord now taught to hear with his eye, could at the
distance of a large Chambers breadth say words after one that another standing
close by the speaker, could not hear a syllable of.

Reasons thereof.

That it is likely he could sooner perceive the motion of words at a distance,
then another could hear their audible sound near hand.

That a Deaf and Dumb man taught to hear the sound of words with his eyes,
because he hears not himself (although this way he does others) will not be
able well to moderate the ^one of his voice.

A way supposed to remedy this only defect appearing in this Art.

How this Deaf Lord might come to discern in another whether he spoke shrill
or low.

That if speech were natural to man, there is no reason but men borne Deaf
and Dumb, (their tongues being commonly free,) might come out with it without
hearing or teaching.

That the most unanswerable argument against the Naturality of any Language is,
that they who are naturally Deaf, speak not at all.

Montaigne his vain endeavor to evade the former argument, by imputing Deaf
men's continuing Dumb, not only to their incapacity of speaking, by reason of
their natural Deafness; but also to the Sympatheticall League between the
nerves of hearing and speaking.

That Dumb Nurses make Mute Children.

The Age wherein judgment may be given whether a Child is like to prove Dumb.

That words may be tasted by Deaf and Dumb men.

A Hint of a practical Demonstration of conveying Articulate and intelligible
sounds another way to the Brain of Deaf and Dumb men, then by the Ear or Eye.

Errata.
Page 3. l. 10. read (...). fol. 9. l 20. change fol. 11. l. 22. do, fol. 15.
l. 3. affirms, l. 8. ^aving fol. 16. l. 19. Verulamian, fol. 31. l. 12. (...),
fol. 53 l. 19. was, fol. 73. l. 18 there, fol. 77. l. 25 parents is thus, fol
91 l 1. ^enynx, fol. 92. l. 2. with the, fol. 119. l 22. Seiberg, fol. 122. l.
1. utter a voice, fol. 23. ^. 22. quia, fol. 124. l. 13. be ill, fol. 128. l.
18. there, fol 138. l. 1. example in one, fol. 140. l. 13. stayed and, fol. 142
l. 15. Chronicle, l. 16 Urspergensian, fol. 145. l. 4. repay, l. 6 his, l. 7.
remaining, fol. 151. l. 26. in an, fol. 154. l. 1. shutting, fol. 157. l. 11.
are, fol. 165. l. 9. hence they, fol. 171. l. 10. her, fol. 177. l. 19. who.

PHILOCOPHVS: OR THE DEAF and DUMB MAN'S FRIEND.
That the Mouth is the Adequate Organ of Speech. CHAP. I.
THat the Universal Region of the Mouth is the Adequate Organ of Speech,
appears even to our very Senses: Since no man speaks but by the Mouth, and
that obstructed, Speech perishes, and is put to a necessary silence: For we
must open our Mouth before we can speak; the Door or Window of Utterance must
be opened first you must turn the Cock of the Conduit, or pluck out the
Stople, before the Water can gush out. This being the place of birth, to which
all our conceptions are brought, and at which the laboring Mind is delivered
of all her thoughts which issue, we call Orall-Reason. Thi^ Great Hippocrates
was not ignorant of where among the seven Figures whereby Sense happens unto
man, he reckon^ the Mouth for the Figure of Speech; a^ deserving to be
accounted the Organ of another Sense: Now since the Mouth is the Adequate Organ
of Speech, it is worth the enquiry what other Instruments concur to that
Action. The Universal Region of the Mouth is constistuted of the Jaws, the
Tongue, the Palate, the Teeth, and Lips; but Speec^ is not formed unless by
the natural^ Instruments, comprehended in the^^ Verses.

Instrumenta novem sunt Guttur, Lingu^ Palatu^
Quatuor et Dentes, et duo Labra simu^
Among these, the Tongue is the Principal Organ to whom the Action is
committed: which yet is not so to be accounted the chiefest cause of Speech,
as if all Speech did flow from thence, and that the other parts of the Mouth
were only useful Asistants unto it: But the Lips bear a great stroke in the
Action, they being the most extant and remarkable Organs of Orall Utterance.
Hence with the Greeks called (...), quod Sermonem fundunt: and Labia; in the
Allegorical Philosophy of Interpretation of Dreams, signify Words; because
they are pronounced with the Lips. So that although the Tongue be the
Principal Interpreter of the Mind, yet that alone is not sufficient to frame
our Speech, but that it wants the assistance and cooperation of the Jaws, the
Palate, the Teeth, the Nostrils, and the Lips, Sense it self does teach, and
the Authority of the Hebrew Gramarians, who for this cause, that the Tongue
does dash the air formed into a voice, now against this part, now against
that, have distinguished their Letters into Labiall, Gutturall, and Dentall.
Hence it is, that when the Tongue is disappointed of the commodious and
necessary aid of the adjacent parts, whereby it comes to pass that certain
Letters which are wont to be framed by the ministry of these Members, are very
hardly or worser pronounced; Chyrurgions by a bold Art, raised from subtle
observations made upon the natural use of every implement of Speech, take upon
them to repair such defects, and to piece and patch up the broken and decayed
Harp of Speech.

But in Man these Organs of Speech are longer before they are perfect for
Action, because of the excellent variety and and differences of Letters;
whereas other creatures can express few or no Letters; and that which is
various and distinguished with many differences, that is longer in perfecting.
The voice indeed is but one, but there are many kinds of speaking. And verily
children at first, no otherwise then Brutes, do express their Appetitions,
being not able to pronounce Letters. An Infant being called Infans, quasi non
fans; because he speaks not, for an Infant is borne Dumb. So that it is
miraculous that Hali Abben Ragel reports, to wit that he saw an Infant who
began to speak when he was scarce 24. hours old, since he was borne
unhappily to foretell the loss of the Kingdom, and the destruction and
desolation of that Nation.

Vandale the Wife of Duke Baruch, having conceived by him, after she had been
pregnant two years, brought forth an Infant that presently did go and speak.

Anno 633. Nanthildis the wife of King Dagobert the second, brought him a son
which was named Sigibertus; this Infant being forty days old, when he was to
be Christened by St. Amandus the Bishop, when they all were silent, he answered
with a clear voice, Amen.

Anno 1104, a woman that had gonne with child two years, brought forth a
Man-child speaking.

Anno 1275, in Cracovia a certain Infant scarce half a year old, began
distinctly and readily to speak, and say to the great admiration of all; The
Tartars shall come and cut off our Heads: and when he was asked whither he was
not afraid himself of the Tartars, he answered, yea, in good sooth I am in
great dread of them, because they shall take away my head also: which came to
pass 12 years after.

Another certain Infant having all its Teeth was borne, and in the first day
of its birth began distinctly and readily to speak, until it was Baptized,
afterward it lost its Teeth and Speech.

Yet they that write of the Indians; report, that the children of the Guineans
do generally both go and speak when they are but a year old.

Cardan reckoning up many things whose mere rariety causes admiration, for
that they happen but seldom, says, That it is natural for an Infant
(although he be newborn) to speak; and yet it is held for a very great
wonder, as a thing coming against nature, because it is rare.

But after what manner it is natural, Aristotle teaches us, for since Speech
consists of the strength of the Tongue and Intelligence, and Intelligence comes
to the most before the strength of the Tongue, it comes to pass that it seems
a wonder for any to speak before their Understanding is absolute: And yet if
the strength of the Tongue may be first complete, since man is prepared by
nature to speak, what should hinder him but that he should, as Pyes, and
Parrots, rehearse things heard though not understood? Or that he should not
with some endeavor and concourse of Spirits to his Tongue, pronounce things
he understands? That which shows this to be so is, that this chiefly happens,
and more clearly, to them when they awake from sleep: For then things seen and
heard by sleep, move more, and there is present more plenty of spirits, and the
Tongue by so long rest becomes stronger.

Of the use and necessity of such a structure of instruments for Speech. CHAP.
II.
SPeech being the Work of Reason performed by certain instruments, man
received a power of forming certain sounds, and apt Instruments for the
production of Speech: for unless there had been some kind of means or way
found out, that he might as it were lay open the motions of his mind, it had
been debarred the freedom of communication. Therefore there was need of an
artificial structure of Instruments, whereby the mind as a quil striking upon
the parts appointed for the forming of the voice, by sounds expressed after a
certain manner, should set forth and lay abroad to the view, it self expounded
by external motions. And as a Musician that is destitute of a Voice, uses
Ascititious Voices of a Pipe or Harp; so the mind of man the Searcher out of
diverse rules and fashions, seeing she could not open the purposes of her
thoughts in the heart, or fancy, which perceives things by external Senses,
as an industrious Artifex she beats upon the animal Organs, and by sounds
produced by them, communicates and makes manifest her ^idden cogitations. In
which Instrument of speech, there is a mixed kind of Music of a Pipe and a
Lute, no otherwise than if these two instruments should sound together in a
mutual concent. The Breath passing through the Artery, imitates the sound of a
Pipe, the Palate and the two Pipes that belong to the Nostrils, the Cheeks,
the Tongue, and the structure of the Jaws, about which the chin unfolded in a
concave form, at length ends in a sharp point, all these variously and
manifoldly represent the plectrum, and the Lute, and with great variety changed
the tones of the Voice, as the matter requires. And last of all we use the
diduction and again the compression of the lips, as Musicians who by the Stops
of their Fingers moderate the Breath in Pipes, and the harmony of the Song: and
therefore in the mythologie of the ancient Ethnickes, M^e^^^syne who is said to
be the Mother of the Nine Muses, whom she bore to Jupiter, with their brother
Apollo, import nothing else but the ten Modulations of Man's Voice: therefore in
Apollos Harp represented with ten strings; so in the Scripture we read of the
Dedacord or Psaltery: others allegorize it to be the four fore-teeth, against
which the Tongue strikes, the two Lips which are the Cymbals or Instruments to
fashion the words; the the Tongue, and the string of the Tongue: the Palate
whose concavity begets a sound; the Windpipe which is the passage of the
Breath; and the Lungs which like a pair of Bellows give and take back the Air
or Spirit.

Of the conveniencie and excellent situation of the Mouth for the more visible
appearance and manifestation of Speech. CHAP. III.
SPeech being the end of the Voice, it was proper and requisite, that the Organ
of Speech the Mouth (which contains in the amplitude of its cavitie, all that
Region which lies from the Larynx, the Organ of the voice, to the border of
the Lips) should be placed after the Organ of the voice, as nearer to the
advantages of Utterance; that as the Articulation of the Bones has an evident
motion: So Speech which is a Metaphorical Articulation, that is an affection
hapening to the Voice, might be performed by a most evident motion. Therefore
the Tongue arises near the supreme part of the Larynx, and being interwoven
with all kind of Fribres, it is easily and swiftly moved any way, wherefore
according as by inhearing to the Palate or the Teeth, it opposes it self
diverse ways to the Voice, proceeding out of the Larynx, diverse Articulations
arise according to our Arbitriment, signifying the conceptions of our Minds; to
which operation the Lips does very much conduce, which are moveable after all
manner of ways, which that they might easily oppose the voice, and most
suddenly either precede, accompany, or follow the motions of the Tongue, were
to be placed as nigh the Throat as possible might be. Hence it is, that in
favor of Speech and Dearticulating the voice, among all Animals, Man only
has his Face least prominent, and his Lips least distant from his Throat. His
Mouth being commodiously placed in the Confine and passage of three great
Venters, the Head, the Thorax and Abdomen, which power out their force into it,
making it their General vent and breathing-hole: For since it was to be the
Organ of Speech and Singing, it was to be fitted to the Larynx and the Artery
both, and to the Head; for being necessarily to be moved in speech, it behoved
it should expect the force of moving from the Head, from whence it flows into
all the parts. And since sound is not but from the breath, whose conceptacle
the Artery is, it ought to draw it from thence; for things that are nigh, do
more commodiously receive force by influence than they that are a far off. Add
unto this, that the conceptions and notions of the Mind, which the Mouth brings
forth, signified by sound and the voice descend from the Head, from whence it
was better to receive them without a medium, for since they are intentional
they would easily vanish. And the situation of the Mouth, in the forepart and
middle of the Face, in that portion thereof which the Ancients called the
Temple of Goodness and Honesty, is most conspicuous, and none of the least
advantages to the appearance of Speech: For, man was ordained to converse with
man Face to Face: and therefore it is said, that God spoke with Moses, as a man
talks with his Friend, Face to Face. And no man does love to hold Discourse
long, before a Face muffled or turned away; Speech being rendered thereby
obscure, and less intelligible. And therefore Adam when he required one to
converse and discourse with, God when he intended to accommodate him with a
Talking Mate, the genuine expression of the word is, Faciam adjutorium quasi
coram, or contra eum. For since the countenances of those that confer
together are mutually turned one toward another, and Man was born to move with
his Ea^e forwards, it is apparent that the Faces of those that talk together,
are as it were the Face of those that go opposite and contrary ways, and by
consequence, they are opposite and contrary in the same line; such a helper was
not found among all the creatures, and therefore it was ill with Adam. And
indeed the Mouth lies so convenient and opportune for observation, and
discerning the local motions of words, and for inspection and exposition of
men's minds thereby, that the Hebrews, to the honor of the Visibility of
Speech, most constantly attribute Speech to the Lips; the Scriptures abounding
in such kind of expressions. It Is true, this sounding visible image of the
mind, is not the Original, but a Copy only of the Mind, for the faculty or
power of Speech consists of two Actions, the one outward, the other inward:
the inward Action of Locution which ever preceades the outer Speech, is
invisible: but the outward, which is the giving of various sounds to our
breath, as it passes through our Mouth, by diverse conjunctions of our Tongue
and Lips to themselves, or to diverse parts of the Mouth, or by their
separations from them, is so evident and apparent, that the consideration of
these premises makes me reflect upon a place of Pliny, (but by way of reverse)
for whereas he affirms that a great part of the Countenance consists in the
Voice, this with as good reason shows, that a great part of the Voice, even
when it is artiulated into speech is in the Face or Countenance no vocal or
articulate expression having any production of signification, without some
manifest and proper motion or alteration of the Countenance: No marvel then
that it always proves such a notable Interpretour to the litteral meaning of
our words. And therore the conceit of that Gentleman seems to me very
ingenious, and worth more scanning than this place will afford; who coming to
the Spetle to hear one of those Sermons which are usually Preached there upon
Easter Holy Days; when he could not by reason of the greatness of the
Congregation come near the Pulpit to hear, nor well discern the Face of the
Preacher; remembering he had a Prospective-glasse in his pocket, took it out,
and levelled it at the Preachers Face, by which instrument having drawn the
Preacher to appear nearer unto him, he not only saw, but heard him very well.
Indeed that Word which sounds outwardly, is but the sign of that which
appears inwardly, and to that rather does the name of the Word appertain:
For, that which is framed and delivered by the Mouth, is but Vox Verbi, and is
so called in respect of the other, from which it has the Derivation and
Apparencie, and there may be a Word (a Mental one) without pronunciation, but
there cannot be pronunciation or any Vocal representation of the Mind by any
utterance of Discourse, without a Word.

That Speech is a voluntary Action, and therefore performed by Motion. CHAP. IV.
WE know nothing (says the Verulanian Oracle) that can at pleasure make a
Musical or Immusicall sound by voluntary motion, but the Voice of Man and
Birds. By Speech which is an immusicall Sound, framed by the Motion of the
Tongue and Lips, Man has a prerogative of expressing his Mind: To Speak being
nothing else, but by certain Motiuncles of the Mouth to open our Cogitations
to others in Words proceeding from the Conjugations of Letters, whereof our
Speech consists. Letters the true Elements of Speech being made of Motions, nay
being nothing else but local motions of the parts of the Mouth, it being in
vain for any man, opening his Mouth, and uttering out his breath, to strive to
speak without moveing his Lips and Tongue: For, the other instruments of
Speech although they concur with the Moveable parts, yet because not moved,
are not reckoned among the chief Causes and Authors of Speech; since the very
Tongue and Lips, which were made very Moveable and Voluble to this end, are not
accounted the chief instruments of Speech, and first causes of Articulation,
but quatenus they are moved. And they are Moveable in as much as they have
obtained a Faculty of Moving, and are Muscules, which are the Adequate Organs
of voluntary Motion. For Speech is a voluntary Action and free, and may be made
or restrained according to our arbitriment, and we at pleasure can either
speak or hold our peace: And therefore it is performed by Muscules, which are
Arbitrary Organs. Hence the Tongue and Lips perform Speech, and conform
Letters by local Motion, as is most evident to Sense, and confirmed by Reason,
for being a voluntary Action, it is therefore performed by Motion, as other
voluntary Actions of the Tongue are. Indeed the Tongue as it is the sensory of
Taste, does not necessarily require moving, for the alteration and dignotion of
Sapors, is accomplished without moving; but other offices of the Tongue as
voluntary, are altogether performed by moving, most Eminently among the rest
that of Speech: So that Motion alone is able to give account of all the
voluntary expressions of Speech.

That Words are nothing else but Motion. CHAP. V.
WHat are words but motion: says the truly noble and learned Digby? which
confirming interrogation may seem strange to those who are not well acquainted
with the mysterious Essence of words, and yet to those that shall scan it well,
it will appear manifest, that Words (as has been said) are nothing else but
local motions of the parts of the mouth, and that they have no existence
without motion, nor can subsist beyond it, their sound perishing and expiring
as soon as the motion determines; for otherwise it would fall out as in some
sudden Echoes, that one word would chop upon another, and so drown each other
in the very act of delivery, which would tend to the confusion and utter
annihilation of Speech. So they who would distinguish betwixt Words and Motion,
and reduce them to several predicaments, must labor at four Works: first to
produce Words without any local motion of the mouth. 2ly, to accomplish the
literal or articulate motions of the mouth, without any audible or visible
articulation. Thirdly, to keep Words from vanishing away with the Motion, or
perishing upon the determining of the Motion of the Mouth. And fourthly, to
preserve the Motion a foot after the creation of Words. And so they may make a
Distinction, otherwise Words and Motion, as having one common life and
existence, will live and die together. He that shall attempt this, will have as
hard a task as Esdras had, when the Angel bid him show unto him the image of a
Voice, and would be forced to answer with him, Who can do this thing but he who
has not his dwelling with men? Some zealous Patriots of the Aristotelian
Philosophy, seem very unwilling to admit Words to be Motion; and therefore had
rather say, that Words are not Motion, but by Motion of the Tongue Words are
uttered, believing that we move our Tongues many times when we speak not. But
if Words were Motion, we must still speak when we move our Tongue. But I
suppose a fair distinction, implying the species of Motion may induce much to a
reconciliation, to which end we say, that Motion agrees with the Tongue
generically, and the Motions of Speech specifically. For as concerning the
Offices the Tongue performs by Motion, Motion may be spoken of the Tongue in
diverse respects, as Commanducation, Deglution, etc. and as here of articulate
speech or wording motion. He that should infer upon him, that holds Words to be
nothing else but Motion, that the Tongue must necessarily talk as often as it
walks, may as well say, Walking is Motion. But the Foot is the Organ of
progressive Motion; Ergo, A man cannot move his foot, but be must walk. This
were not to argue like a Peripatetique. And it may be if Aristotl^ himself,
whose Dictates are worthy of all honor, had lived to see the progress and
advancement of Learning, in the miraculous effect of this Art, he might have
been induced (at least by way of Problem) to ask this Question, Why Words
seem to be a species of Motion?

Of the excellent choice of Nature in the Appulsive Motions of Speech. CHAP. VI.
IT is no wonder that Nature destined the Mouth for the place and Organ of
Speech, wherein (if any where) various and manifold Appulsions are made,
wherein the Tongue and Lips being moveable, may be appelled and concur
together: yet the Motions of the Tongue and Lips which conduce to Speech and
the production of Letters, although they are manifold and various they that are
most agreeable for forming of Letters, are chiefly upward Motions, for it
behoved these Instruments to follow the nature of the Air (which is a most
light body) whereby it raises it self upwards. All Appulse being done
straight upward: for, all Appulsions are not profitable to Speech, and to
forming of Letters, since other Offices also of the Tongue, to wit,
commanducation and deglution are performed by the Appulsion of the bodies of
the Tongue, Lips, and Teeth; but with this difference, that the Appulsions
which conduce to Speech, are more facile and expeditious, and are done with
far less endeavor and strength. For whereas the tongue is appell'd to the
Palate, Teeth, and Lips, the Teeth to the Teeth, to the Lips and Tongue; and
besides Lip to Lip and to the Teeth and Tongue. Certainly those Appulsions of
the Tongue only are profitable to Speech, which are made to the Palate and
Teeth: and again, of the Lip to Lip and to Teeth, whereas other Appulsions
conduce to other Offices of the Mouth: therefore there are two efficient parts
of Appulse, the lower Lip and the Tongue; the suscipient or sustaining parts
are either the upper Lip, or the upper Teeth, if the Lip do appell, but if the
Tongue do appell, they are the Palate and the Teeth. The Quere therefore is,
Why since Appulsions are made from other parts of the Mouth, yet those two
proposed should be only profitable to Speech? And it is answered, that those
Appulsions were admitted which were both facile, swift, and elegant; and on the
contrary, those rejected, which were either unapt to forming of Letters, or
which were more difficultly or slowly effected or disfigured and deformed the
Mouth. Nature having had great regard to provide for the comeliness and
decency of pronunciation: therefore Nature avoided the Appulsion of the Tongue
to the Lips, as that which came more foully, difficultly, and slowly to the
forming of Letters; for if the Tongue should appell to the lower Lip, that
Appulse would prove unprofitable, for it would vibrate to no apt Letter; but if
to the upper Lip, it would only make L, N, T, D. but il-favouredly and
difficultly, which perchance Nature left to old men that were Edentuli; whereas
the same Letters notwithstanding are neatly, distinctly, easily and speedily
compressed by the Appulse of the Tongue to the Palate. Besides the Appulse of
the Tongue to the Lips could not be done unless the Tongue were made longer,
whereupon afterward it would not perchance be congruous for the Appulse to the
Palate for the forming of other Letters. In like manner, Nature avoided the
Appulse of Teeth to Teeth as that which can produce no consonant by reason of
(...) too fierce and cruel illision of the air, which should be pleasing soft
and gentle, it being worth our labor to be so fair spoken. Whence Galen said,
there ought to be a proportion and conveniencie between the percutient Body and
percussed: therefore from the most hard Teeth there is made too fierce a
percussion to the air, and for this cause, although to the uttering of the
voice, hard bodies ought to concur: yet to articulate the same, that is to the
production of any letters, either both, or one at least, of the concurrent
bodies must be soft, whereby the air may be pleasingly intercepted and
expressed, from whence it is collected, that nature in the producing of
Letters, has most especially substituted those appulsions which have elegancy;
facility, and expedition adjoined unto them, such as are the appulsion of Lip
to Lip, and to the Teeth; and of the Tongue to the Palate, and the Teeth. And
verily so far are the Motions requisite to Speech, from introducing any
deformity into the Face, that they are observed many times to improve the
Countenance. Wherefore the Bridegroom in the Canticles to his Spouse. Sicut
vitta coccinea labia tua, Thy Lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy talk
is comely. And it is a piece of the character of our Henry the seventh, that
his Covntenance, to the disadvantage of the Painter, was best when he spoke.
But above other considerations it appears, that Nature in the contrivance of
Speech, affected expedition, which is dispatched by most swift, and expedite
Motions: for if Speech be made by Motion, and signify the affections of the
mind, which are Motions: without doubt, the moving of the instruments must
answer to the movings of the mind; now since there is nothing swifter than the
mind which in a moment can pass unto the Heavens, and survey the whole earth;
it is requisite and deservedly fit, that the Motion both of the Lip and Tongue
should be most swift, as that which was to follow the motions of the mind.
Therefore nature would have these appulsions and motions performed, not by the
Muscules of the Tongue and Lips, but from their Body only, quatenus they are
Muscules, whereby the Motion and formation of Speech might be most swiftly
dispatched; for, both the Tongue and the Lip has Muscules, and are made
Muscules; quatenus they have Muscules, they are moved by another, and therefore
more slowly: but quatenus Muscules, they are moved of themselves, and most
swiftly and expeditiously rolled, agitated and appelled. And for this cause
chiefly, were the Tongue and Lips made Muscules, that they might strike on and
affect the air, which is indeed a most light Body, and in the mean while most
suddenly follow the most swift Motions of the mind. It sufficiently therefore
appears, the moving whereby the Tongue and Lips are moved to performance of
Speech proceeds not from any other, but from their proper Bodies, the Motion
arising thence being sufficient for such an employment; for when as Nature with
that which in moving required no great strength, requires also the celerity of
motion, she makes the parts to be moved of themselves, mingling throughout the
motory power with the part to be moved, as in the Lips and Tongue, which since
they were not to agitate bones o^ Meats, but most light air, and to afford
quick and speedy motions in speaking, by good reason we judge Speech to be
accomplished without the ministry of Muscules, by the Body only of the Tongue
and Lips; for if in speaking the Tongue should be moved by Muscules, as in
Commanducation, both its motion and Speech would have fallen out to be far
slower: but it was fit that Speech should be most speedy and expedite, that the
soul might on a sud^^^^ signify its conception of pleasure o^ distaste, to
the Conservation of the Body.

That the Motions of those parts which Create words, excel the signifying
faculty of any other member. CHAP. VII.
TO speak, is nothing else but by certain motiuncles of the Tongue and Lips,
to intimate and signify certain things, as it is agreed between those that
speak together, that is to say, as some are wont reciprocally to open their
cogitations by diverse motitations of their fingers. This only being the
difference between them, that the Tongue and Lips are the most accomodated of
all the parts of our Body, to signify what is conceived in the mind. The
Tongue by reason of its wonderful ^obility, and because it is placed in the
very passage or highway of the Breath, by its diverberation produces manifold
sounds, which occur to the hearing of man afar off, therefore this particle
is most ready, best provided and most fit and convenient, to which men should
commit the office of Communicating what they have conceived i^ their mind;
because no other part can undergo so many and so various motiuncles, and by
the assistance of the Lips and the other instruments of Speech, frame so
manifold voices: neither came it to pass by chance, that the Tongue sprung up
to be apparently accommodated for this use, but it was so provided and ordained
by Nature; for, a soft and voluble substance, endued with many Muscules at its
root, placed upon the Larynx, planted beneath the Palate, encompassed with the
Teeth, and Lips, that receiving the Air expired by the Larynx, and driving it
many ways against the Palate, and Teeth, it might produce manifold sounds, by
which according to his arbitriment, man might signify to man his otherwise
incognoscible cogitations. Therefore the Tongue and Lips are thought to be
far more accommodated to intimate our thoughts, than either the Hand or Foot,
or any other particle, because of the peculiar advantages of their expressions,
which according to the Doctrine of this Art are most visibly audible.

That Speech is an Articulate Voice formed by the Conjugation of certain
Letters. CHAP. VIII.
THe Tongue (which yet as the great Advancer of Learning says) is no very fine
instrument, in point of Articulation, makes no fewer motions, than there be
Letters in all the words we utter. Hence Speech which the Latins express by
the words Locutio, sermo, oration, or Loquela, and the Greeks by (...), as if
you should say Colloquium, may be defined an Articulation of the voice by (the
efficient Cause or instrument) the Mouth: in which Definition the voice is the
Ge^us; for, the voice is the matter of Speech, there being no way without the
voice, for any man to speak out; and the Difference which informs the voice
with Speech, is Articulation. For, the voice informed with Articles, is an
Articulate voice, which is called Speech. As for the voice, that is conformed
in the Larynx by the Cleft, and as soon as it is produced, it offers,
Subjects, and fits it self, as it were the matter of Speech: But the Articles
which come upon the voice, and inform speech, deserve a more diligent
consideration, for, this affection, happening to the voice, is a certain
interception, division, Distinction, or intercision of the voice, which being
of its own nature fuse, continued and indistinct, upon the Articles accession,
the continuation of the voice is intercepted and taken away. As when we loosly,
indistinctly and continually form the voice thus: o o o. if we to it adjoyne
the article c, n, or t, now it will be co, no, to; that is to say, we
constitute there by a divided and intercepted voice. Which thing a very Pipe
distinguished with stops does most fully declare, which without the motion of
the Fingers, sends forth only a voice, but with the motion of the Fingers and
the interchangeable apertion or occlusion of the stops, it brings forth an
intercepted and articulate voice, and after a manner speech: And although
speech is proper to man, as proceeding from his Enunciative Faculty,
notwithstanding other Animals do speak among themselves, And a Pipe or Harp
utter after a manner an Articulate voice. Therefore a voice not loosely spent,
nor continued; but intercised, distinct, and intercepted, is Speech, or an
Articulate voice; called therefore (...) by Aristotle, to wit Dearticulation,
Metaphorically as Fabricius thinks, a Denomination taken from the Articles or
joints of the Bones, for as (...) according to Galen, is an Articulation or
Composition of Bones, which has an evident motion. So Speech is performed by
evident motion. Besides, as joints are certain knots which seem after a
certain manner to intercept the continuation of the Bones: so Speech also,
which is an Articulate or joynted voice, seems to be intercepted into many
parts, not spread out in one loose tract nor continued. And as by the joints
the separated Bones are conjoined, that they proceed in a kind of continued
series: So an Articulate voice, although it be manifoldly divided, yet it
flows out so continued, that it may seem to be joined and coupled together, or
perchance we may say, Speech is called an articulate voice, as much as if we
should say, distinct and manifest: metaphorically also, by a denomination taken
from Articles added to Nounes, which not only the Grecians; but the Italians
and French also, and many other adjoyn unto their Nounes, that, as Articles
added to Nounes signify a distinct and certain thing: so the voice which of
its own nature is defuse, continued and indistinct, as being dead without
Letters; when it appears to pass into Speech, is made distinct and manifest,
and it advances into speech, if it be imformed by Articles: so that although
man had instruments requisite for the expulsion and collision of the voice, and
breath and air as the matter for the production thereof, that it might resound
as an adequate object of hearing; yet he had not had the disciplinative and
informing power of Discourse, unless those Voices were so articulated, that
they might signify and represent the conceptions of the mind: for, the
Auditors by reason of the defect of Articulation would not be edified thereby.

That Letters, the true Elements of Speech, quatenus they are pronounced, are
natural. CHAP. IX.
THose Letters which we bring forth and are uttered in pronunciation, are
natural; those which we write, artificial: for if Letters be made of Motions,
or (rather indeed) are nothing else than the Motions of the parts of the Mouth,
without doubt we affirm, that even as those Motions are natural; so the
Letters consisting of those Motions, quatenus they are pronounced, are natural:
which Martianus Capella the renowned Grammarian shows: where he divides the
Letters into natural and effected, calling those natural which we speak, but
those, effected characters which we write. And for this reason it is, that
Letters with all Nations in respect of their places or way of pronunciation are
the same, and although the contrived images of the natural Letters or character
may differ in their representations, yet quatenus they are pronounced, there is
no diversity in speaking: but that afterward so numerous and various Tongues
ensued, the Letters are not the cause, but the composition of Letters, that is
Syllables and Words. And it comes to pass also hence, that Letters are
natural, as they are created by certain designed parts, neither can they by
promiscuous parts, or by any mutual compact, be any otherwise formed: for,
certain kind of Letters are procreated from the Appulsion of Lip to Lip,
certain also from the Lip to the upper Teeth, and certain also by the Tongue
and Palate: neither is it to any purpose that one should attempt to pronounce F
with both his Lips, or M with the Tongue and Palate, or N with the Lip and
Teeth, although they endeavor it with the most exact diligence, and stretch
and distort his Lips never so much, but he shall perpetually be enforced to
make M, B, P. with his Lips: F and V consonant with his Lip and Teeth, and the
other Consonants with his Tongue and Palate: but by what means this is done,
especially since the appulsion and moving is one; let them explain who shall
have the happiness to know the causes of so great things, it is enough for us
with others to give a hint or imperfect report of this admirable contrivance of
the Builder, and divine concent of parts.

That the Motions of Instruments of speech which go to the making the Alphabet
of natural Letters, are worthy Enquiry. CHAP. X.
AMong other things pertinent to the inquisition of sounds, the motions of
speech are recommended unto us, by the great Advancer of Learning, where he
says, The motions of the tongue, lips, throat, palate, etc. which go to the
making up of the several Alphabetical Letters, are worthy enquiry. The Hebrews
have been diligent in it, and have assigned which Letters are labial, which
dental, which guttural, etc. As for the Latins and Gr^cians, they have
distinguished between semi-vowels and mutes, and in mutes between mutae tennes,
media, and aspirata, not amiss, but yet not diligently enough: for, the
special strokes and motions that create those sounds, they have little
enquired; as that the Letters B, P, F, M. are not expressed but with the
contracting or shutting of the Mouth. That the Letter N and B cannot be
pronounced, but that the Letter N will turn into M. as Hecatonba will be
Hecatomba. That M. and T. cannot be pronounced together, but P will come
between, as emtu^ is pronounced emptus: so that if you enquire to the full you
will find, that to the making of the whole Alphabet, there will be fewer
simple motions required than there are Letters. But because these were subtle
and long to describe, he referres them over, and promises to place them among
his experiments of speech: yet not having had the happiness to find him so
good as his word, having condoled the loss of such accurate Observations as
his would have proved: upon his hint of encouragement we advanced after the
scrutiny of these Alphabetical motions; wherein things have so succeeded to our
inquisition, that if we had intended a particular satisfaction, as we do only
a general intimation, we could produce such an Alphabet as should put an end to
all Doubts in this matter, by exhibiting the motions of speech in the capital
Characters or Letters of our Alphabet, which as notes and images, with the
quality and quantity of their Lines, do very aptly serve the natural Letters,
in whose pronunciation, the parts of the mouth obtain a various Figure, and
every Figure consists of certain Lines: or in the representative motions or
postures and Figure of the mouth, marshalled like the Alphabets of gesture in
our Chirologia, express the very natural Letters themselves, most apparently
proving, that Letters are nothing else but motion, a subtlety of discovery
which few will ever imagine fe^ible, until they see the secret opened among
other notions reserved for our intended Academy.

That the forms of Letters, and so consequently of Words, may be punctually
observed and took notice of. CHAP. XI.
Our Understanding indeed is very dull at the inspection of Forms, and
although (as the British Stagerit truly confesses) it be neither possible or
to purpose, to seek in gross the Forms of those sounds which make Words,
which by composition and transposition of Letters are infinite: yet to enquire
the Forms of those sounds or voices which make simple letters, is easily
comprehensible, and being known, induces and manifests the Forms of Words,
which consist and are compounded of them; this being no more a vain pursuit
than the enquiry after the Forms of sense and voluntary motion, which is a
part of Metaphysicke, though Physic does make enquiry of the material and
sufficient causes of them, but not as to their Forms. And if a man shall keep
a continual watchful and severe eye upon the motions of the mouth, he may
advise and take notice of the Forms of speech, the disclosure whereof would be
fruitful and important to this Design: hence it is that although nothing is
more variable than the differing sound of Words, yet men have found out the way
to reduce them to a few simple Letters, so that it is not the insufficiency or
incapacity of man's mind, but it is the remote standing or placing that
breeds these mazes or incomprehensions: the remedy whereof is not to quicken
or strengthen the Organ, but to go nearer the Object, and therefore there is no
doubt but if we will learn and use the approches and avenues of Nature, we may
master any difficulty that shall oppose the designs of our Intellect. But,
indeed, the Observation of the natural Letters, in respect whereof all Nations
are of one lip, as before the confusion of Tongues, and the first finding them
out, was absolutely the rarest and the most exquisite felicity of Invention as
ever succeeeded to the wit of man: and but that I think the wit of man able to
comprehend all things in the sphere of its capacity (larger than most imagine)
I should be apt to attribute this subtle notion, to the revelation of some
courteous spirits, it seems so to transcend the ordinary achievement of our
observation: and that so many Languages should result out of the transposition
of these 24. Letters, will not appear so strange a thing, if we well consider
the infinite variety of men's countenances, the Face consisting not of above ten
Lines, the least alteration whereof causes a manifest distinction.

That the Ancients took the essential difference of Letters, from the various
motions of the Month. CHAP. XII.
IT is manifest, that the Ancients chiefly distinguished the Letters out of the
variety of motions, which they observed in the very instrumental parts of
speech, seated in and about the mouth: because those which are made by the
parts of the Body, are more essential, as making different articulations, that
is, Letters altogether distinct from one another, of which kind there are not
above seven essentially distinct, besides the Vowels: whereas there are more
made from the various moving of the very air, which is altered and moved by a
greater or less impulsion, although the motion and appulsion of parts be the
same, as in B, P, C, G, D, T, F, V. For from the air variously affected by
reason of a milder or more valid motion or appulsion of the very part which is
moved (from whence there happens a more gentle or stronger elision of the air)
the difference of many Letters were taken: for if the Lip be driven upward to
the other Lip in a gentle motion, causing a milder elision of the air, M is
made: if it be more forcibly impelled B, if most strongly P results: so that
here you have three letters from one simple motion. Now although these Letters
are made with the same parts, and differ not in the variety of parts, but only
in the vehemence of the impulsed air, yet Antiquity received them
notwithstanding into the number of Letters, to prevent Equivocations, and
unprofitable Repetitions: but because those Letters differed not in an
essential difference, which is taken from the variety of parts, but only
according to the greater or lesser impulsion of air, (which for the most part
varies not pronunciation, but retain their alliance of sound and article)
therefore the Ancients by reason of this cognation or affinity which they have
among themselves, in that they are made by the same motion, they would have
them mutually to give way to one another, and one to be indifferently put for
the other; whence it comes to pass that G, G. because they are formed by the
same motion of the mouth, nor differ between themselves, unless because in C.
the breath wanders more licentiously than in the prolation of G. they give way
to one another, although perchance they said, they gave way one to another in
regard of the propinquity of the appulsion of parts in them, so that those that
are formed by the same motion and only vary with the elision of the air, in as
much as they vary by reason of the air, they drew out various letters: but in
as much as they are made with the same motion, they put one for another; which
they not only observed in the Consonants, but in the Vowells.

That the motions of the parts of the Mouth in Speech are so remarkable, that
some have (not without success) attempted to imitate them by Mathematical
motions. CHAP. XIII.
SVch Sagacious Aemulators and audacions Inquisitours of Nature there has
been, who without natural virtues, by Mathematical Magique only, having
borrowed the influences of the Heavens, produce works like to those of Nature,
as speaking Bodies, which are not endued with animal virtues; for, Mercurius
writes that the Aegyptia^s by a most inutterable art, made the Images of their
Gods (especially of Mercury) so, that they uttered an articulate voice. And we
have a hint of encouragement to such a Design, from the Grand Augmentor of
Sciences. There is found, says he, a similitude, between the sound that is
made by inanimate Bodies, or by Animate Bodies that have no voice articulate;
and diverse Letters of articulate voices: and commonly men have given such names
to those sounds, as do allude unto the articulate Letters. As trembling of
water has resemblance with the Letter L. quenching of hot metals with the
Letter Z, snarling of Dogs with the letter R, the noise of screetch-owles with
the letter sh. voice of Cats with the Dipthongue eu. voice of Cuckoes with the
Dipthongue ou; Sounds of strings with the Letters ng. So that if a man (for
curiosity or strangeness sake) would make a Puppet or other dead Body, to
pronounce a word; Let him consider on the one part, the motion of the
Instruments of the voice; and on the other part the like sounds made in
inanimate Bodies; and what conformity there is that causes the similitude of
sounds; and by that he may minister light to that effect. But to come nearer to
the point. Many of the Learned are of opinion, and persuaded in their
judgments, that the imitation of the motions of our speech may be effected by
insensible creatures; if a Dextrous man would employ his time in contriving and
making such an instrument to express those different sounds; which not having
more then seven substantial Differences; besides, the Vowells (as some who
have carefully noted them, do affirm) it would peradventure be no hard matter
to compose such an Engine, which because it will be a subtle imitation of the
work of nature, it will be necessary that our Artist have this qualification
of being more than superficially tinctured in Anatomy, the better to be
acquainted with the Muscules, and the Nerves inserted into their Heads, which
are the principles and springs of all those outward motions whereby Speech is
performed and uttered. And I believe the Model must be in fashion of a Head,
which is the Royal part unto which Speech is entrusted; for as the Tongue and
Lips articulate; the Head resounds. Friar Bacons brazen Head, and that Statue
framed by Albertus Magnus which spoke to Thomas Aquine, and which he mistaking
for a Magical Device brake, was certainly nothing else but Mathematical
Inventions framed in imitation of the motions of speech performed by the
Instruments in and about the Mouth. As for that leaden Pipe which Baptista
^orta in his Magia naturali speaks of as effectual to this purpose; or that of
Walchius, who thinks it possible entirely to preserve the voice or any words
spoken, in a hollow Trunk or Pipe, and that this Pipe being rightly opened,
the Words will come out of it in the same order wherein they were spoken, they
have not so substantial a way for such a Discovery, and therefore may be scand
at leisure with the Relation of Baldassar Castilio in his Courtier, and Dr.
Helyn in his Geography, of a cold Country, where the Peoples Discourse does
freeze in the air all Winter, and is heard the next Summer, or at a great
Thaw: yet if the conceit of Walchius have any Truth, it may serve somewhat to
extenuate the gross absurdity of that Popish ^elique concerning Joseph's [Hah]
or ^e noise that he made (as other Car^enters use, in fetching of a blow:)
which is said to be preserved yet in a ^lasse amongst other ancient Relics.

That Articulate Speech does not necessarily require the audible sound of the
voice, but may consist without it, and so consequently be seen as well as
heard. CHAP. XIV.
ONe would think indeed, that Speech without the voice, as the ^orme without
the Matter could not ^ossibly consist: yet if one should by (...) emulous
imagination abstract one ^om the other, He shall find it to be so: ^^r, the
formation of Articles is from ^peech, but the voice was contrived ^^at Speech
might be heard; for which ^^use it is loud and sounding: But ^peech of it self
alone without sound or the voice, can produce mute and in^^dible articles of
Elocution. Not that the Forms of words are quite without their matter; He
indeed, who as St. Augustine says, can understand a word, not only before it
sound, but also before any Image of the sound there be formed in the
Imagination (although our sight at best be imperfect in this kind:) yet he that
desires to attain it, must not look upon the fashion of our words either a^
they sound in the ear, or are uttered by the voice, or thought upon in silence
(for the thoughts if you try them) ca^ even feign the noise of the Tongue: He
must pass over all these, and come to that prime word of a reasonable
creature, quod nec prolativum est in sono, nec cogitativu^ in similitudine
soni; but does exceed all those signs, either external or internal whereby
it is signified, and i^ begotten of that very Science which remains in the
mind, and remains truly and properly mental, and is produced intellectually
only, without Matter or Motion. But in uttering of word^ which is the effect
of Speech, there i^ always necessarily required both matte^ and motion. And
therefore to prevent the the Form should never remain qui^ without the
Matter, Nature has made a double provision; one is that a vowell should be
always adjoined unto a consonant, for so the voice perpetually as the Matter
is adjoined: the other is that there should be a momentany interscision: for
since Speech without the voice which sustaines it, cannot subsist, it is
ordered the interscisions of vowels, which effect Consonants, should be all
momentany, for so the voice is intercepted, and taken away by the vowell, and a
Consonant is formed. And in the mean while Speech is never without some low
degree of the voice, neither is its proper matter wanting unto it. The breath
in its emission being driven and dashed against the instruments of Speech, and
tacitly formed into words: And that mute Articles of Speech may be produced
without any ^^dible alterance, appears in them that labor of the disease
Aphonia, and have altogether lost their voice: and they who are mute by Nature,
cannot speak, but only Monophones, that is one kind of sound or voice, without
any audible articulation; whereas it is very remarkable, that Speech does not
only form out of it self articles of utterance, but also by it self alone
can declare the conceptions and affections of the mind. Fabricius makes all
this good by a familiar and easy Example. For when he was a Schoole-boy, there
being many of them in one chamber, they were interdicted the use of Speech: But
we (says he) by the motion only of our Lips and Tongue, without any voice at
all, although we were distant one from another, did communicate our
conceptions, and affections of our mind one unto another. And a curiosity of
constant observation has enabled many to do as much: for Lodovicus Vive^
speaks of some Artists, who could discern what any man spoke, though no sound
of their intent approached their ear, descrying the stillest and low-voyced
words of their Lips, helped by an Art-informing and attentive Eye, only by
seeing their Lips to move and open as they do in Speech. It is likewise
related of ancient Doctor, Gabriel Neale, that he could understand any word by
the mere motion of the Lips, without any audible utterance. And Sir William
Cornwallys speaking of a Lover, attributes such a faculty unto him. His ears
(says he) not having ability to perform their office, he therefore teaches
his eyes a new occupation, measuring the wind that proceeds from his
Mistresses mouth, and spelling words by the observation of her Lips. But we
cannot wish for a more ample testimony of this thing, than the usual practice
of those friends of Mr. Crispes, who being intimate with him, in their familiar
conversation never used their voice but saved themselves the unnecessary labou^
of speaking out, exhibiting only the motions of Speech distinctly unto him,
without any other sound than that of their pure motion, which is audible enough
to him who wore his ear in his eye: Sound and the voice adding nothing of
pefection to the intelligible motions of Articulate Speech.

Since therefore the Musculous extremities of the Mouth, together with the
effect the inward motions of the other Instruments do cause without, have such
an evident stroke without any audible sound, in the articulate explanation of
the mind; He that can judge of the way of framing these tacit Symbols of the
mind, besides the use we here chiefly drive at, it might be of notable use in
discovering the secret whisperings of perfidious men, who are of the Generation
Solomon speaks of, who move their lips, to bring evil to pass: and to
discern the malicious anger of such, who (as we use to say) mutter the Devils
Pater noster. Had old Eli had this Art, when he observed Hanna's mouth, seeing
her lips going, when she spoke mollia verba praying softly, he would not have
so rashly taxed her of Drunkenness as he did, but might have understood the
intention of her prayer.

That it is neither incredible nor impossible, that a man borne Deaf and
Dumb, should be taught to hear the sounds of words with his eyes, and thence
learn to speak with his Tongue. CHAP. XV.
SO lazy and sluggish are the natural inclinations of most men, that they are
prone to limit the infinite capacity of man, and the effects of his admirable
observations, to known and common Matters: whereas considering his abilities,
and the fertility of his Brain, there is no accident of imperfection that may
befall him, but with the indulgent cooperation of Nature, he may work himself
either out of it, or invent a supply to the defect and inconveniences of it.
For a notable instance of the industrious felicity of an observing wit in this
kind, we are extraordinarily beholding to that Gallant and learned Knight, Sir
Kenelme Digby. That whereas hitherto, the understanding of words by the motions
of the Lips, has been an Art which we have heard indeed, that many have
pretended unto, yet has been thought deceitful and scarce to be credited; He
affords us an Example of an Artist, who sublimed this Art unto an almost
incredible perfection.

The History of this rare achievement of Art is thus delivered, by that
Honorable Relator.

THere was a Nobleman of great quality that I knew in Spain, the younger
brother of the Constable of Castile, who was taught to hear the sounds of
words with his eyes (if that expression may be permitted) this Spanish Lord was
borne Deaf, so Deaf, that if a Gun were shot off close by his ear he could
not hear it, and consequently he was Dumb; for not being able to hear the
sound of words, he could never imitate, nor understand them: The loveliness of
his Face, and especially the exceeding life and spiritfulnesse of his Eyes, and
the Comeliness of his person, and the whole composure of his Body throughout,
were pregnant signs of a wel-temper'd mind within. And therefore all that knew
him lamented much the want of means to cultivate it, and to embrue it with the
notions, which it seemed to be capable of, in regard of it self, had it not
been crossed by this unhappy accident, which to remedy, Physicians and
Chyrurgions had long employed their skill, but all in vain. At the last there
was a Priest, who undertook the teaching him to understand others when they
spoke, and to speak himself that others might understand him, for which
attempt at first he was laughed at, yet after some years he was looked upon as
if he had wrought a Miracle. In a word, after strange patience, constancy, and
pains, he brought the young Lord to speak as distinctly as any man whatsoever;
and to understand so perfectly what others said, that he would not loose a word
in a whole days conversation. I have often discoursed with the Priest whilst I
waited upon the Prince of Wales, (now our gracious Sovereign) in Spain, and I
doubt not but his Majesty remembers all I have said of him, and much more: for
his Majesty was very curious to observe, and enquire into the utmost of it. It
is true, one great misbecom^ingnesse he was apt to fall into, whilst he spoke:
which was an uncertainty in the Tone of his voice, for not hearing the sound he
made when he spoke, he could not steadily govern the pitch of his voice, but
it would be sometimes higher, and sometimes lower, though for the most part
what he delivered together, he ended in the same Key as he began it. But when
he had once suffered the passage of his voice to close, at the opening it
again, chance or the measure of his earnestness to speak or reply, gave him
his Tone, which he was not capable of moderating by such an artifice as is
recorded Caius Graechus used, when passion in his Orations to the People drove
out his voice with too great a vehemence or shrilnesse. He could discern in
another whether he spoke shrill or low: and he would repeat after any body any
hard word whatsoever, which the Prince tried often, not only in English, but
by making some Welchmen that served his Highness speak words of their
Language, which he so perfectly ecchoed, that I confess I wondered more at
that, than at all the rest, and his Master himself would acknowledge that the
Rules of his Art reached not to produce that effect with any certainty. And
therefore concluded this in him must spring from other Rules he had framed unto
himself out of his own attentive observation; which the advantages which
Nature had justly given him in the sharpness of Senses to supply the want of
this, endowed him with an ability and sagacity to do beyond any other man that
had his Hearing. He expressed it surely, in a high measure by his so exact
imitation of the Welsh pronunciation: for that Tongue (like the Hebrew)
employeth much the guttural Letters, and the motions of that part which frames
them, cannot be seen or judged by the eye, otherwise than by the effect they
may happily make by consent in the other parts of the mouth exposed to view.
For the knowledge he had of what they said sprung from his observing the
motions they made, so that he could converse currently in the light, though
they he talked with whispered never so softly. And I have seen him at the
distance of a large chambers breadth, say words after one, that I standing
close by the Speaker, could not hear a syllable of. But if he were in the
dark, or if one turned his face out of his sight, he was capable of nothing
one said.

A Preamble to the OBSERVATIONS upon the rare Atchivement of Art before related.
WE must confess there be infinite things in the bosom of Nature, which are
hidden and unknown to us, Nature abounding with innumerable treasures of
Sciences which can never be exhausted, and in the suppression of some as in the
manifestation of those that are discovered, the immense Wisdom does
sufficiently shine and appear. The particular Notions and Rules of this new
found Art, may perchance as that Invention of Herophilus concerning the Rythme
and metrical laws of the Pulse, appear a little too fine and subtle for the
gross fingers of our Apprehension, and a Task only fit for the grand Master
of Subtleties himself. But upon the achievement being matter of fact, a less
acute understanding may fasten a few easy Observations.

Observation. 1.
THe first thing observable that occurres in this Relation is, that this
Spanish Lord was taught to hear the sound of words with his eye, if that
expression may be permitted. Indeed the exploit and expression both, are very
new, and may seem exceeding strange to those who either know not that there is
a community among the Senses; or have not well thought upon it. It being
admirable how the objects of one Sense may be known by another; and how one
Sense will oftentimes supply the office and want of another: for light may be
felt, odours may be tasted, the relish of meats may be smelt, magnitude and
figure may be heard, and sounds may be seen, felt, or tasted. Examples and
Experiments of all which Exchanges I am able to produce upon occasion: so that
to exercise Sense is, our brain to receive an impression from the externe
object, by the operation or mediation of some one of those which we call an
externe Sense, yet there seems to be no absolute necessity that Sensation must
be made by an organical part made for that purpose, but one sense may be
exercised by the Organs of another, by changing the offices of the Senses,
which well examined would keep the most Skeptical from doubting of a community
among them, if not of degree, at least of the whole kind: for we see the touch
is the ground work of all the rest. And therefore Campanella in his ingenious
Book De sensu rerum proves, that all the Senses are but Tact: but the sensories
and manner of sensation differ, which he makes good through all the Senses,
proving that al sensation is performed by contact. By looking into the causes
whereof we shall discern these strange effects to fall within the observation
of Art, and to deserve a further enquiry. That odours should be tasted and the
relish of meats, smelt, is not strange, if we consider the conformity betwixt
the two Senses of smelling and tasting: for, Phisicians that write of these
Senses, find them very conformable: and therefore it happens that the
loosing of one of them, is the loss also of the other. And accordingly the
very names which men have imposed to express the affections of both, do many
times agree: as savor, which is common both to the smell and taste; and sweet
likewise: the strongest of which we see oftentimes do make themselves known as
well by the one as by the other Sense; and either of them in excess will turn
a man's stomach: and therefore deafness which Marcellus calls Surdiginem, the
Greeks call (...) which word as Herotianus notes (with Hippocrates) does not
only denote a privation of Hearing, but also sometimes a privation of sight;
after the same manner (almost) as we find among the Latins, that surditas
does often signify a privation or obtusion of diverse senses, but howsoever one
sense through a sympathetical league more naturally and strictly observed
between it and some other sense may be impaired or suffer damage upon the
defect of that other sense: yet there is seldom any decay in Nature, but will
be by this community someway supplied. For if all the senses should be
defective except the touch (which cannot be utterly lost without the privation
of life) the virtue of all the Senses would run into the touch, and make that
not to be deposed King of the senses so accurate, it shall be able to officiate
for all the rest. And indeed the expressions are somewhat remarkable, that men
defective in their Senses often use, which seem to acknowledge no defect, but
what they have an equivalent recompense for; it being ordinary for blind men
to use words as if they saw: which I remember Montaigne in his Essays takes
great notice of, who was once visited by a blind Gentleman, who took upon him
confidently to commend the Architecture and contrivance of his Mansion House:
What a fair lightsome room, says he, is this? What a goodly prospect this
house has? What a fair and beautiful child is this? Taking upon him to judge
of colors and all manner of beauty and proportion. And this day I followed a
blind man in Red-crosse-street, who being near a Brew House made a stand; Oh,
says he, This is a Brew House, I see it; to whom I: It is will guessed, Are
you sure you see it? I, replied he; That I do, I smell it. Two Gentlemen
passing by, smiled at the blind man's expression, Nay, I assure ye Gentlemen,
said I, He is in the right, for he does see it, so I passed on leaving them two
behind me blaming the sobriety of my justification of that, as they thought
impropriety of Speech used by the blind man, which put me in mind of a
passage in Servius in his Tractate de Unguent. A^mario, of a man that having
lost his eyes, saw notwithstanding through his nose. And I believe men
accidentally deaf, who can speak and perceive any thing by the motion of men's
lips, will be apt (to the great justification of occular Audition) now and then
to say I hear, or I have heard: and being the other day in company of one
Master Oxwyth a Spanish Merchant to whom I am much beholding for some
intelligence out of Spain, and he telling me somewhat of the rare qualities of
this Spanish deaf Lord, which his Factor had sent him intelligence of, (to
satisfy my curiosity who had formerly entreated that favor from him. He began
to tell me somewhat of the most remarkable properties of M. Crispe, who is well
known to be deaf, and among the rest he said, that a while ago he walking with
him in the company of others, one asked him how his Brother did? My Brother
(replied he presently) is very well, I heard from him but the other day: and
whether his intelligence came by word of mouth, or from the mouth of a pen; in
transitory or fixed words; He that had an Ear in his Eye, might well say, He
heard from his Brother. and that the defect of the Ear in deaf men, may be
supplied by the office of the Eye, or the defect of the Eye in blind men by
the office of the Ear; so that the Ear also may see; will not appear so
paradoxical, if we consider the consent of visibles and audibles, as it is
elegantly set forth by my Lord Bacon in his Natural History, Cent. 3. from
Exper. 255. to Exper. 267. which being long to recite, I refer to the
inquisition of the curious. And with good judgment for demonstrations sake,
did that Hero of learning use in diverse instances, the examples of the sight
and things visible, to illustrate the nature of sounds, prosecuting it to a
more full comparison, since the hearing has a great affinity with the Organ of
sight, for they have both one common faculty, and the extremity of the auditory
passage, where the Nerve dilated is conjoined with the included air, does
answer to the Chrystalline: in like manner those parts which are about the
involution of the Ear are correspondent to the sight of the Eye, and the other
parts about the Chrystalline. And I would fain know why Gordonius a learned
Phisician, as appears by his Works, in his Description of the Instruments of
Hearing, where he writes of the Diseases of the Ear, attributes a concave
optique Nerve unto the Ear. His Marginal Commentator confesses he sees not
for what reason he does it, and till some body will undertake to see farther
into his mind, we may suppose he was a secret Friend, and a well wishing
Nichodemus to auricular vision. Now whether the expression of hearing sounds
with the Eye may be permitted, will appear, if it cannot be denied but that
Hearing is nothing else but the due perception of motion, and that motion and
sound are not different entities, but in themselves one and the same thing,
although expressed by different names and compized in our understanding under
different notions, which is proved by the observation of sounds which follow
the laws of motion, for every effect of them is to be demonstrated by the
principles and proportions of motion. So that motion alone is able to effect
and give account of all things whatsoever that are attributed to sound, and
sound and motion do go hand in hand together, and whatsoever may be said of the
one is likewise true of the other. Aristotle therefore defines sound by motion,
and the Voice to be a kind of percussion, and therefore sound is the same with
motion, and no resulting quality; which may be further convinced by the
ordinary experiment of perceiving Music by mediation of a stick: for, a
deaf man is capable of that sound no otherwise than as bare motion is sound.
Now since articulate sound or motion may be perceived by the Eye, then it may
hear as well as see, and hear by seeing. It will be no great impropriety of
speech to affirm the Eye may hear, since it can perceive the adequate object
of hearing, and perform the office of an ear in judging of sound as it is
motion (all sound being motion as soon as it is perceived) and the thing which
we call sound and makes speech audible, being purely motion. Indeed sound which
is but an accident of speech, and which is as they commonly speak, the sensible
quality of Hearing, is reckoned by Philosophers to be proprium sensile, to wit,
to be perceptible but to one sense: yet as it is figure and motion, which two
always imply one another, and of the essence of speech, it may be accounted
commune sensile, and be perceived by more outward Senses than one. I but says
one, if sound be motion, Which is the mobile? Surely, in articulate sounds
which are the motions I only undertake for, the mobile may be the air or
breath, as it is moved and informed by the instruments of speech. And if that
be not liked, What think ye of the Lips for the mobile of articulate motion?
Verily, although I am not of his opinion, who held that motus and mobile were
all one: yet by a warrant of Anatomicall subtletie I may say, that movens and
mobile are; for in the lips which were to move and be moved in speech, the
motory power is mingled with the mobile. I, but no motion is performed in an
instant: but sound in an instant fills thousands of ears if they be near.
Surely, Articulate motion also is performed in an instant, and can fill
thousands of ears or eyes if they be at a convenient distance. I, but rest is
opposite to motion, but it is not opposite to sound. Surely, silence which is a
rest from speech, is opposite both to motion and the audible Articulation of
sounds. I, but again it is objected, here are many motions without any sound,
for you may move your hand, or any part of your Body without sound. It may be
not: for we have reason to suspect there may be some kind of sound in every
motion, according to that of Ausonius, Nil mutum Natura dedit. And I think and
believe there is some sound in every motion, although it may not be perceived,
being drowned by other greater sounds that are about us. And we are emboldened
by this Art to question whether the ear be the only judge of sound The
rather, since there are some nation have no ears, yet hear most exactly It Is
true, Articulat motion requires no^ always anaudible sound, but a visible i^
does at least; and therefore not to be accounted among those motions which are
supposed to pass without sound: For otherwise, Articulate sound and motion
being one and the same; you will make them like the two Socii in Plautus, mo^^
one another, as if Articulate motion should pass without sound, that is,
without it self. I but yet again, there is a sympatheticall and
antipatheticall power in sounds, to affect or disaffect the hearer, which is
not in motion: although there be not found objects so ingrate to the eye as to
the ear, yet in Articulate sounds this way perceived by the eye, there is, as
well as by the ear; for, what are the angry frowns and stormy motions of a
tempestuous countenance, which provokes the face of another to the like
impetuosities, but antipatheticall motions? and what are yawning^ and laughter,
which appears chiefly about the mouth; but sympatheticall motions which pass
from one man to another, and affect or disaffect them with the like? More
especially these sounds of motions which are audible to him that hears with
his ears, have a power to gratify or distaste his ocular ear.

But I have no design to oppose any man's fancy, or to impose any thing upon
it, if they will give me leave (at least for the decency and countenance of the
argument I handle) to say and think thus: Let them enjoy the liberty of their
judgment, for we are not necessarily engaged by our design, to make good
this expression of hearing sounds with the Eye. Therefore as for that, we say
as the great Advancer of Learning said of factitious Gold: If a metal may be
procured by Art which shall exactly answer in all things the properties of Gold,
let men dispute whether it be Gold or no: So if we may by the favor of God
have this Art so successful unto us, that a Deaf man may be brought to enjoy
the benefit of an ear in his eye; that is, the eye to officiate for the ear,
let men dispute whether he hears with his eye or no: for we are not so
magistrall in this matter, as to have any thought of deceiving others with a
vain Philosophy of swelling words.

Observation. II.
He was borne Deaf and Dumb. Great are the Nation of those (otherwise
ingenious men) who have fallen under this unhappy accident; the causes being
various and unknown: there are who suppose that this happens to some through
the propriety of their place of birth. Soranus affirms, that those who are
borne in Ships at Sea, are by a propriety of their place of birth, like
Fishes, mute. M^nt^o confidently affirms, that by a propriety of the place,
they who were borne within the walls of the Castle of Claramont, proved dumb;
as it happened to all the Barons that were borne there. Astrologers say that
Child will be deaf, that is borne when Mercury is Lord of the sixth house,
and unfortunate by evil aspects with Saturn, chiefly if he be in the sixth
house: Likewise they will have ^^at impediment in their hearing, in ^^ose
nativity Jupiter and Saturn be both impedite and unfortunate above the earth;
that is, if they be retrograde or combust in evil places. And if Mercury be
impedite of Saturn in a Childs nativity, it does hinder the tongue; but it is
worse when they be corporally conjunct together, especially, in the Ascendent,
or in the seventh house, and in the same sign with the Sun. (Mercury being
then Occidentall:) or if Mercury be above the earth corporally conjunct with
Saturn, or else in an evil aspect of Saturn, and in a dumb sign called
Signum mutum, and also is unfortunate, that is to say, in an evil place,
retrograde or combust and peregrine, that party then borne, will have great
impediment in his tongue, or else will be dumb, and cannot speak. Sometimes
the sin of the Parents are exemplarily punished in their children. Dr.
Joachim the brother of Camerarius, told him he saw in the Court of the
Lantgrave of Hesse, a Boy deaf and dumb so witty, that he could not wonder
enough at his dexterity in executing the commandments that were given him; for
by a wink of the eye, he conceived of the will of the Prince and of his
household: The Lantgrave seeing him wonder at the sight, he told him: You see
this young Boy, his use is to declare with a marvelous readiness by gestures
of his body, and by motions of his fingers, any new thing he sees done in the
Court or City. He is an example of Gods justice, for, his mother being accused
of stealing when she went with child with him, used such an imprecation, that
if that which she was charged with was true, her Child might never speak when
it came to be in the World, but remain Dumb all his life.

To some this is an hereditary evil and an imperfection ex traduce.

But why Deaf men should get deaf children? may be from that similitude which
springs from the seed, in as much as it flows from the whole economy of
the Body; that is, sometimes it flows out more from the Father, sometimes from
the Mother; from this plenty of provision proceeds the similitude, so some
part in children resembles the Mother, another part the Father; as that seed
has more copiously issued from the parts of either Parent. And commonly when a
Deaf and Dumb man has got his Wife with child, there is a solicitous
expectation in their Friends whether the child should prove Deaf and Dumb or
no: For it falls not out always, that the children of Deaf and Dumb men
inherit that imperfection of their parents, as intailed upon them: whereof the
reason above mentioned may serve, that is, the seed of the perfect parent may
be more luxuriant and predominant, whereof I have known some examples. What the
issue of a Deaf and Dumb man and woman would prove, there has been no
opportunity afforded to try, because few Philosophers have been bidden to
such a wedding. The like reason may be, why they should have deaf Children who
are deafened by some disease, or by reason of some overpotent object which has
destroyed their sense of Hearing. Upon which a Quaere might be raised, whether
the children of those who dwell near the Catarrachs of Nile (whose parents are
all deaf,) are not commonly borne deaf also, rather then afterward so made.

We do not hear indeed, that any of the brethren or family this Lord was of,
were unfortunate in the like defect, although that has been the sad condition
of many eminent Families. Fernelius writes of a Senator, whose Wife being
healthy, yet all the children he had by her were deaf and dumb; the cause he
judges to be very dark and obscure. Cardan speaks of a woman that had five
and twenty children, of two of which number she was delivered within ten
months, both deaf and dumb, which both lived, and lived in his time; the one
with three Mola's, the second with two, not only dead but putrified; who while
she went with them felt not her self as with her others, but she felt as it
were a weight of lead in the bottom of her belly. It being very likely that
the Mola's growing to by reason of their frigiditie (for they are as congealed
blood) did hurt their brains, thence the hearing, and so dulled the faculty
of speech, especially when they putrified.

Nor are examples of these sad accidents very rare among us; such therefore as
I have either known, or by credible intelligence gained notice of from others,
I shall here annex, conceiving it fit to enlarge the Foreign story of Deaf
and Dumb men, with such additionall notions. The rather that we may come a
little out of these outlandish Writers debt, and in some reasonable sort, vie
Historical observations with them.

Sir Edward Gostwick of Wellington in the County of Bedfordshire Baronet, a
Gentleman otherwise very accomplished, was borne deaf and dumb; he has
attained unto writing, which is a substitute of speech, and from whence there
lies a way if well followed, to the recovery of an Articulate voice. Hence,
writing to them that are deaf and dumb, may serve in stead of speech, who
therefore do best begin to write, and afterward learn to speak. The first
invention of Writing was to make Verba visibilia, missilia, and permanentia, to
remedy the defect of speech that vanishes away, is only audible, and cannot
be wrought into discourse but by two that are present together, whereas this
invention puts an ear, as it were into the eye, and presents our cogitations
visible and legible, writing being the later invention; speech by it self
signifies all our conceptions, and writing signifies our speech; for, writing
to words, is as words to cogitations: Yet this order is not of necessity, that
speech must be learnt first, and afterward Writing should succeed, to
signify our words; rather then words writing: there being no natural
necessity for it, so that the contrary cannot be done: But it happens rather
by reason of the facility, and because men that are deprived of no^^ of their
senses, are apt sooner to speak, then to write; the tongue being sooner fitted
by nature for that employment, then the hand for this: But the clean contrary
may be done, as appears in the achievement of this honorable Gentleman, and
others mentioned in this book. For as they who have their hearing d^^ as the
readyer and better way b^^in (...) speech; so they who are deaf do best begin
at writing; Therefore neither of them has a natural necessity, but it seems
by the nature of the thing, that the reason and account of speech and writing
is the same; but that they have a greater facility of speaking, who enjoy all
their senses; but they who want their hearing, may have writing in stead of
speech, and the notice of things accrues to them by sight, as to others by
hearing: So that speech is as it were a silent and audible writing, and writing
is a visible and permanent speech, and withal so missive, that where the ear
is absent, we can send our mind by writing to a friend; why not then when the
faculty of hearing is wanting, as in deaf men, may we not send a message of
intelligence to his eye in writing, since the ear and eye are known to
exchange objects, without any robery, in case of necessity, transferring their
sensitive rights one unto another?

The youngest brother of the said Sir Edward Gostwick is in the same condition,
being yet an excellent Limbn^r, invited to that art by his Genius, or some
signalitie of spirit observed in him. Painting and Limbning next to writing,
having been ever thought of excellent use, and to afford singular contentation
to those that are borne deaf and dumb. And therefore Q. Pedius the Nephew of
Q. Pedius a man of Consular degree, and one that had tryumphed, by Caesar
Dictator, made Coheir with Augustus, being dumb by nature: Messala the
Orator, of whose family the Grandmother of the child was descended, being
careful how the Boy should be brought up, after mature advise and deliberation
thought good that he should by signs and imitation be trained up in the Art of
Painting: And Augustus Caesar approved of his judgment and advice herein; and
in truth, the young Gentleman being apt thereto (although he dyed a youth) was
grown a great proficient in that Art.

Sir John Keys, Master of the Ordinance to King James, had two Sisters, who
were both borne Deaf and Dumb; they could write, and were very ingenious to
imitate any kind of needle work they saw.

Sir Miles Fleetwood has two handsome Gentlewomen to his daughters, both borne
deaf and dumb.

De La Bar the rich Dutch Merchant, who lived at Eeling in Middlesex, had two
daughters born deaf and dumb, they were both married: A Friend of mine who was
once in their companies at Brainford (their Husbands also being there;) told me
he did much admire at their dexterity of perception; for by the least motion of
their Husbands countenance or hand, they presently conceived of their meaning.

Master Freeman of London Skinner, had two daughters both deaf and dumb.

One Master Diet a Parson in Staffordshire, has a Brother and Sister both deaf
and dumb.

One Thomas Xing Farmer of Langley, in the County of Essex, had by one woman a
son and three daughters, all deaf and dumb.

One in Osmaston, within a mile of Darby, had four sons and all of them were
borne deaf and dumb.

One John Gardener of Thaxted in Essex, has a son and daughter both deaf
and dumb; his son Robert Gardener, is a Tradesman here in Town, and one of
the most notable examples I have discovered, for proof of the feeling of
sounds: and whom to the satisfaction and admiration of some Friends of mine, I
have showed and exposed to a philosophical view and trial.

And as I am informed by a Merchant of credit living in London, who has a
son deaf and dumb; there was in Lincolneshire, one Master Dallison a
Gentleman that used grazing, who had three sons born deaf and dumb who made
them all 3 Graziers; and they proved the craftiest in that way, that the
Country ever bred: for they were very expert at their pen, which they managed
in all their affairs, with singular readiness, using it (as it is indeed) for
a kind of supplementall speech: I am informed by an accomplished Gentleman that
knew them, a learned Friend of mine, they were so accurate at the pen, that
they could write the Creed in the compass of a farthing, which he has seen
fairly so written by them.

One Master Adams in the East of Kent had two daughters, very handsome proper
Gentlewomen, which were all the children he had, and they were both borne deaf
and dumb.

A Husbandman of Sherington, within a mile of Newport, in the County of
Buckingham, had a son and a daughter both borne deaf and dumb.

A Husbandman living at Tilstone in Cheshire, about seven mile from Chester,
had two daughters. Twins, that were borne deaf and dumb, having but two eyes
between them; one of the eyes of each of them being originally blind; they
lived both to be old women. Some Cheshire men of my acquaintance, who knew them
both, affirm, that they had a very strange and admirable nimblenesse of
perception, both to understand others, and to deliver their own minds by
signs, which happened, without doubt, unto them through the marvelous
recompense that nature affords in such cases: For, having but one eye, the
sight of that was certainly very accurate.

Aristotle is of opinion that deafness and dumbness are privations only
happening unto men. Yet there be who are of another mind for, that Horse who
never moves nor pricks up his ears at any noise or sound, and uses to cast
back his ears, is deaf: and that horse who in the company of those he has
used to travel with, never neighes, is dumb. Yet if a Horse were foaled
deaf, he would not be consequently dumb, because the speech of beasts is
natural unto them, and has no dependencie upon the ear, and so it cannot be
excluded by a privation of hearing, through any natural deafness.

Observation. III.
HE was borne deaf, and so consequently he was dumb They who from their first
conformation and birth are deaf, they likewise are (...), or at least live
(...). Hence surdus quasi seoridus. i. sine ore, and mutus quia eo sensu
minutus. The chief cause why they who are borne deaf are consequently dumb,
is supposed to be the sympathy between the instruments of hearing and
speaking, the reason of whose strict society and communion is not known to all
men; which according to Bartholinus is two fold: first a nerve of the fifth
conjugation has diverse branches shooting from it, the greater is expanded
into the Ear, and the membrane which is of exquisite sense, and carries the
species of all sounds unto the Brain: the lesser branch runs out to the
Tongue, and the Larynx, by reason of this communion of vessels (which with
Hippocrates and Galen is the only cause of a simple sympathy) the affections
of the Ear and Tongue are easily communicated. Hence when the membrane of the
Ear is touched by two deep a picking, there follows a dry Cough; and in the
inflammation or impostume of the Lungs, with a shortness of the breath, the
ears grow moist. The second cause of this sympathy is a little Cartalagineous
Canale, as it were an Aqua-duct, which from the second passage of the Ear is
carried unto the Palate, so that from the mouth into the Ear, and from the
Ear into the mouth, the air does freely pass and repasse, whence when we
would hear with more attention, we hold our breath lest by inspiration of the
thick air, the Cochlea of the ear should be filled, and the Tympanum
extended. They also that do pick their ear, do raise spettle, because by
that compression there is made an expression of excrements into the
Cartilagineous Aqueduct, and from thence into the Tongue, for, by this way
(which was made to purge out the congenit air) there lies a passage for the
excrements from the ear to the mouth, but not e contra, by reason of the
Valvula it has; whence in the affections of the ear, Masticatories are so
beneficial. And therefore when the instruments of hearing are hurt or ill
affected, the instruments of speech, that have so near an alliance unto them,
are likewise endamaged. Laurentius says, that they who from their first
conformation are deaf by reason of the obstruction, exolution, and
refrigeration of the nerve of the fifth pair, they also are mute. Campanelia
says that natural deafness proceeds either from the obstruction of the
Auditories, or the want of the Meningis, and these are all mute without a
voice, not without sound, for sound is natural, but the voice and speech is
learnt by hearing, or altogether destitute they are of speech, yet they utter a
voice, which is so far from enabling Dumb men to express their conceptions to
others, that they seem very unapt to do it, neither can any understand Dumb
men, unless those who are a long time and much exercised with their
conversation; neither could they then, unless Dumb men themselves, besides
the voice, did adhibit diverse gesticulations of the hand and whole body:
Notwithstanding, in as much as the voice is natural, it is understood of all
men, and therefore when Dumb men utter any sad voice, all men understand it,
and will perceive the affection of the mind to be sadness; and herein Dumb
men will also very well understand one another, if they be not originally Deaf.

The great noise and gabling which Deaf and Dumb folks make, especially when
they are angry, proves them to have a sufficient command of their voice the
sound whereof many times makes the house to ring again, with their
inarticulate noise of their anger: Insomuch as he who to avoyde the
inconvenience of Domesticke tempests, should marry a Dumb Mistress, may
perchance speed no better then Seigniour Moroso did with his Silent woman.

The reason may be, That Deaf and Dumb folk being deprived of hearing, they
are not so capable of a soft answer or Apology inductive to a pacification,
which might allay and calm the tempest of their anger: and then wanting a vent
of speech, whereby others usually denounce their indignation, they pay it with
the voice, which is the only weapon they have left, moving their tongue, as if
they would hammer and forge out something equivalent to an Articulate voice;
which they manage to the utterance; from which there results such a noise,
which although inarticulate, is significent enough to express their passion
and chollericke indignation.

Petraeus adjudgeth deafness to happen through an ill and unapt structure of
the ears, and imperfect occlusion of the auditory Nerve, or by obstruction
from a humor, or crasse wind, and these for the most part are mute.

Jonstonus says, deafness happens through default of the brain, which
either begets not animal spirits, or transmits them not, through some peculiar
disease. Secondly, in the auditory nerve which does not carry them, or by a
vicious conformation; whence deaf men are for the most part dumb. Some
indeed think that original deafness may happen through a dislocation or
ill disposure of the little bones of hearing. But Capivaccius says they err
and are ignorant in Anatomy, who think the hearing may be hurt through any
defect of those three little bones of the ear. It were to be wished, that
distection had been made of many Deaf and Dumb, which might have discovered
the ill conformation of the instruments of bearing, and the other causes of
these impediments.

Magirus Sennertus and others from the same sympathy infer dumbness to be a
consequence of natural deafness

Varolius on the contrary, inferres deafness from dumbness. The auditorie
Nerves, says he, arise on bo^^ sides of that part of the Ce^ebellum which he
calls Pontem, or the Bridge; and the nerves of Taste arise about the middle of
the same between both the nerves of hearing: From which my observation, you
may says he, if you please, draw out a reason, why from those that are dumb
by nature their hearing also is taken away. Since the nerves of hearing and the
Tongue are derived from the same principle: But this is not so probable a way
of arguing as the other, since the chiefest sign to distinguish natural
deafness from diseased, is, that they who are borne deaf are always dumb.
Of which the true cause is not this supposed sympathy between the ear and the
tongue, which Mercurialis a most exact and judicious Physician approvs not of;
but that which follows in the relation is the undoubted cause; for, this Lord
was deaf, and so consequently dumb; for not being able to hear the sound of
words, he could never imitate nor understand them: Therefore Alexander
answering to this Problem; Why they that are borne deaf are likewise dumb?
Says, That speech and discourse are acquired by discipline, discipline comes
by hearing. Whence hearing taken away, there is no place left for discipline to
enter in, and so consequently speech is destroyed; it being impossible to
apprehend Idioms, or to form new, without hearing: For, the mind of the deaf
not instructed by sound, cannot tell how to form those vocal words which the
wit of man has invented, for they can neither conceive in their mind, nor
produce with their tongue words which they never heard: For, speech in the
natural and ordinary way, is learnt by discourse, heard and conveyed to the
understanding by the ear, which is the sense of discipline. For, man being
borne to the knowledge of all things, it behooved him in sooth to be
disciplinable, that beside sensitive knowledge, his understanding might
perceive those things by discipline, to which the senses could not attain, but
the hability to discipline consists in the nature of our Intellect, which is
certain pure power of its own nature respective to all kind of knowledge, to
which in as much as it is disciplinable, all the senses are servicable, but
more especially the hearing, without which men attain to none or little and
unconsiderable discipline: for they who are born deaf, or become deaf in their
infancy, although they may have the parts of their voice and speech, yet they
never learn to speak, wanting the chief medium to greater disciplines. And
although deaf and dumb men may attain to some knowledge by discipl^^e, yet
they never arrive to the intimate offenses of things by apprehension whereof
our Intellect gains a proper perfection. All this happening unto them through
their defect in hearing, which as Theophrastus says, of all the senses nearest
allyde unto Reason, and thereto thought by Aristotle most to conf^^ the receite
of discipline. Montaigne^ Riverus also) would have both there sons
sympatheticall and privative, to introduce the consequence of dumbness upon
deafness, being of opinion, that the reason why they that are deaf speak not
at all is, not only because they could not receive the instruction of Words by
the Ear, but rather in as much as the sense of hearing whereof they are
deprived, has some affinity with that of speaking, both which with a natural
kind of ligament or seame hold and are fastened together: in such sort as what
we speak we must first speak it unto our selves, and before we utter and
sound the same forth to strangers, we make it inwardly to sound unto our Ears.

Observation. IV.
HIs deafness it seems was such that if a Gun had been sho^ off close by
his ear, he could not hear it; yet Physicians and Chirurgions had long
employed their skill to remedy that unhappy accident. Which method was
commendable in respect of the uncertain cause of the impediment: For although
the cure, according to the opinion of all, cannot be effected where original
deafness proceeds out of the privation (or as they speak) Ex carentia
foraminis, that is, when the Auditorie nerve is wanting, and not planted in the
stony Bone, or when the nerve it self is created solid: or when the orbicular
membrane, the Tympanum, or more properly called the membrane of the Tympanum,
which is pellucid, thin, and subtle, that sounds might be more easily
transferred to the congenit air, is thick from their birth because these
things happen through a defect of the Plastique virtue: And what nature once
takes away, the Physician by no art can repair, there being also no return
allowed from a privation to a habit: Yet since possibly some other matter might
be in cause, and nature many times in a strange extraordinary manner appears
propitiously to co^^^rate with the administrations of A^^; this conclusion was
necessary, which proceeding the attempt, was a means of advancing the reputation
of the cure which was wrought by a new way of ocular suppeditation, beyond the
reach of any common ^urists skill. But before we wind up this Observation, it
would be worth the noting, what Mercurialis conceives to be the causes why
hearing is so frequently hurt from men's nativities, which he delivers to be
chiefly three. One is that the Infant in the womb has all the instruments,
almost of the senses occluded, except the ears, for it has neither the
nostrils, nor mouth, nor eyes open: Yet for the most part it has the Ears
wide open, and therefore it easily comes to pass that somewhat out of the
womb may fall into the Ears, which indeed cannot happen to the other senses.
Another reason is, that the inward instrument of hearing is empty, and being
empty in the womb, and a most moist head, is easily replenished. A third
reason is, that the auditory nerves and the proper instrument of hearing, are
nearer to the brain then the other instruments of sense, and being nearer the
brain, are more p^ssible; and hence it comes to pass, that they are more
easily offended. To these Varolius seems to afford a fourth reason, or if you
had rather, the third very much explained and enlarged. The rising says he, of
the Auditorie nerves, from the process of the Cerebellum, as it shows the use
of the after-Braine was to be the chief principle of the sense of Hearing: So
it teaches us the cause why more are deprived of their hearing from their
nativitie, then of any other sense: For since they proceed from the
Cerebellum, and are not drawn out far, they are easily stopped with the mucous
excrements thereof.

Another thing observable is, that both the Ears are always affected in
original deafness; that being the chief sign of natural deafness, which
being caused, almost, always through the disease of the Brain, whence the
cause being internal and common to both the Auditorie nerves, it is necessary
that at the offense of a Principle both the nerves should be offended, and
consequently, both Eeares grow Deaf. Which happens otherwise in Diseases,
because deafness in a Disease, for the most part proceeds from some external
cause precedent; now an outward cause may ^^rt one Ear, the other unhurt,
because the Ears being very remote, one care may be hurt from without or
within, the other unhurt: so that the Principle of the Nerve be not offended.

Observation. V.
THe loveliness of his Face, and especially the exceeding life and
spiritfulnesse of his Eyes, and comeliness of his person, and the whole
composure of his body throughout, were pregnant signs of a well tempred mind
within. Whence we note, that it is requisite he should be an expert
Phisiognomer, who attempts this Art to judge of the capacity, fit years, and
ingenious composure of countenance, the sign of a well tempered and Docile
mind, which as they were inductive encouragements to the first Attemptor: So
no question did much conduce to the facility of the work For, Ex ^^ni ligno
non fit Mercurius, and it had been in vain to have cast away time to relieve
an Idiot, maugre the indisposition of Nature and Minerva, who had not so much
as matter to work upon.

Observation. VI.
ALl that knew him lamented much the want of means to Cultivate his mind, and
to embrue it with those notions which it seemed to be capable of, in regard of
it self, had it not been so crossed by this unhappy accident. The condition
that they are in who are borne deaf and dumb, is indeed very sad and
lamentable: for they are looked upon as misprisions in nature, and wanting
speech, are reckoned little better then Dumb Animals, that want words to
express their conceptions; and men that have lost the Magna Charta of speech
and privilege of communication, and society with men: For by this one thing
men chiefly differ from other living creatures. This is the interpretor and as
it were, the message of the mind: This does easily express and declare those
things which the understanding conceives. All which things, how much they
confer to the attaining of discipline? how much to the society of men among
themselves? And lastly, how much to their conservation and perfection? hereby
appears manifest, that they who are most able in speech, they also seem to
excel among men, and to be of a more excellent understanding: To sum up all;
Speech does so much avayle to the adorning and perfecting of man, that nothing
almost greater or better could have been given by God. And therefore Plato
said, The Effluction of words, the Minister of prudence, is of all Effluctions
the best and most beautiful. So that in Republica literaria, deaf and dumb
men never attain to any degree of honor or respect. Let us see how they are
looked upon in Foro Civili, there, there is much arguing about their Civil
capacities, and many Embargos have been made of their goods, and those
privileges which belong to a free condition, with many inconveniences and
encumbrances on their estates.

A deaf and dumb man cannot be a witness in those things which are perceived
by the sense of hearing.

A deaf and dumb man is incapable of all conventions which require words.

A man borne deaf and dumb cannot Donare; some extend it to other contracts,
but Alexander reproves that extension.

A deaf and dumb man understanding nothing is compared to an Infant.

If a dumb man understand any thing, he is compared to a Pupil.

A deaf and dumb man found a Delinquent is not punished more gently as a
Pupil.

A dumb man may enterpose his command, if he have understanding, but he cannot
interpose his authority.

A dumb and deaf man cannot alienate among the living, for he is like to a
dead man.

A man deaf and dumb by nature, cannot make his last Will and Testament.

A deaf and dumb man cannot appoint Executors of his last Will and Testament.

If a man be dumb and deaf by nature, so that he can neither write nor
speak, he cannot make his Testament; but if these defects be severed, that he
can either write or speak, he may make his Will, and it is of force. This
therefore is to be observed: A man both deaf and dumb by nature, cannot make
his Will, and although it be made for a pious cause it is not of fo^ce; among
which causes liberty is numbered: For a Testament made by a man both dumb and
deaf by nature, wherein he bequeatheth freedom, is of no value. But if he be
not mute or deaf by nature, and has learnt to Paint or Write, he may make
his Testament. Yet some say that in making a last Will, there is need of an
articulate voice, and that signs will not suffice.

Sennertus very justly therefore calls deafness, Miserandum malum a pittyfull
and miserable mischance; for since the Ears are as it were the Portall or
entry of the mind, by which those things are sent into the mind, which are
delivered by Doctrine and Institution, for the right managing and transacting
our life before God and men: that man must needs be miserable who is destitute
of the faculty of hearing, for he cannot use the aid and benefit of hearing,
either to his eternal health, or present safety. They are more miserable yet,
who are withal blind: Since they are not capable of the benefit of this Art,
or of an ocular supply to their Auricular defect. But most miserable are they,
who are blind, deaf and dumb. An example of which wretched condition we have
in Platerus of a certain Abbot, who being made blind, mute, and deaf, by the
malignity of the French Pox, could no other way understand and perceive the
minds of others, then by their drawing letters upon his naked arm with their
finger, or piece of wood; expressing some intimation unto him, out of which
singly by themselves apart perceived, he collected a word, and of may words a
sentence; which how miserable a case it was, and how horrid the punishment of
his committed sin, any one may easily understand. A pregnant example of the
officious nature of the Touch, in supplying the defect or temporal incapacity
of the other senses we have in one Master Babington of Burntwood in the County
of Essex, an ingenious Gentleman, who through some sickness becoming deaf,
does notwithstanding feel words, and as if he had an eye in his finger, sees
signs in the dark; whose Wife discourses very perfectly with him by a
strange way of Arthrologie or Alphabet contrived on the joints of his Fingers;
who taking him by the hand in the night, can so discourse with him very
exactly; for, he feeling the joints which she touches for letters, by them
collected into words, very readily conceives what she would suggest unto him.
By which examples you may see how ready upon any invitation of Art the Tact is,
to supply the defect, and to officiate for any or all of the other senses, as
being the most faithful sense to man, being both the Founder, and Vicar
general to all the rest. So that whereas among the senses bestowed upon us by
nature, some are necessary to life, others to a happy life; some to neither:
without the sense of Touch man can neither be, nor live; without sight and
hearing he may indeed live, yet no way well or happly: smelling is neither
necessary to a man's being nor well-being And that sight and hearing conduce to
a good and happy life appears in that they are most necessary for the
acquiring prudence and discipline. And although Aristotle seems to have
thought that sight did more confer to prudence then hearing: Yet Mercurialis
is of another opinion, because he observed blind men to be oftentimes wiser
and more prudent then those that were deaf. So that he who is deprived of his
hearing seems to be at the greatest loss; and therefore a good Aurist is
worthy of double honor.

But most disconsolate is their condition who are naturally deaf and withal
indocile fools or mad, of which sort I have known many: For they commonly are
deprived of the society and conversation of men and by reason of their
incapacitie and want of understanding, they are fit for no public employment,
and they are in vain and impertinently present at any conference or
consultation, their condition in many things being far worse then that of
blind men. In the Civil Law, a deaf man understanding nothing, is compared
to an Infant, and if he altogether want understanding, he must have a Guardian
appointed him, it being left to the arbitriment of the Judge to determine
whether he has understanding or no, and there are certain signs nominated by
which he must demonstrate that he is not void of understanding. And when it
is presumed that he wants understanding, he is interdicted Marriage by the
Canon Law.

Observation. VII.
AT the last there was a Priest who undertook the teaching him to understand
others when they spoke, and to speak himself that others might understand
him. It is somewhat observeable, that a Priest was the undertaker. I know not
how but they have been Inventors of many strange Arts; which yet no great
wonder if we consider their recesse, opportunity and encouragements to study,
and all their advantages to promote a contemplative life. And as they say of
them who shall be Inventor and Owner of the Philosophers stone, that he must
have many good and pious quallifications: So he that attemps such an exploite
as comes nearer to a true miracle then those of the magi did to those of Moses
(as being an artfull shadow of a supernatural and miraculous effect which
could not be done but by fasting and prayer) it will be necessary that he
should Priest-like seriously and religiously set upon the work, since a
Heathen would not have attempted such a business, without first sacrificing to
Mercury for good success.

He taught him to speak.

In teaching of Parrots and other Birds that are imitatours of ma^s speech:
That man should be the teacher is not the matter, for they will imitate the
squeaking of Cart wheels, or any noise they hear: but in learning of an
Articulate voice so complete as that of man's is, there is a necessity that man
should be the teacher. For man could not have discipline, unless from Man,
because the active power of discipline exists in man only: for as man had the
passive power of discipline granted unto him, so it was necessary he should
have the active power also, delivered unto him: And what the active power ought
to have been, we shall find in the quality of the passive power. For, men
are chiefly disciplinable, quatenus, they have hearing, therefore the active
power must consist in something that may move the hearing, and so effect it,
wherefore since sound is the adaequat object of hearing; Man received a power
for forming of certain sounds, which we call the voice, and instruments to
the Articulation thereof, whereby speech is produced. Indeed the first
exercise of this discipline seems to be committed unto Women, as being by
nature more talkative and eloquent, the flesh of whose tongue is soft and
flexible for the forming of a sweeter voice and articulation, for which very
cause, their tongue is broader, whence it appears by experience that not only
Birds that have a soft and broad tongue do sing more acute and better; but men
also (especially women) whose tongues are softer, are more talkative, and also
pronounce voices more articulate then men, by reason of the flexibility of
their tongue, proceeding from the softness thereof: Did not all of us, as many
as are men learn first to speak of our Mothers or Nurses? Hence it is that
Plato and Quintilian are so careful in their directions for the choice of a
fit Nurse for Children, that the tongue and speech may be rightly and
distinctly formed: And after the introduction of Colomes into Foreign
Countries, have not the Children borne there, retained the speech of their
Mother? Certainly Nature her self the Architectrix of things, sagaciously
foreseeing what was herein convenient for mankind, has allowed Women this
privilege, that they are seldom any where found mute. And therefore
Quintilian says, that Children will prove mute, if they be brought up by Dum^e
Nurses. Yet upon what occasion soever dumbness may happen, there is no
certain judgment to be given of a child's being mute, until he be three
years old. But that this Lord born deaf and dumb: was yet taught to
understand others when they spoke, and to speak himself, that others might
understand him, and this without a miracle, by the power only of Art; seems
to me plainly to contradict that supposed infallible sympathy of the nervs of
hearing and speech, that without control or contradiction, many Physicians
have confidently affirmed to be the only cause why a man deaf from his
nativity, is consequently dumb: for it had been impossible if that Law of
sympathy had been perpetually binding, to have recovered speech without
hearing first, for so run the Laws of occult Qualities, and the Decrees of
the Median and Persian sympath^sts; whereas this Lord having got a pair of
Eare-Spectacles before his eyes, whereby the dependencie that speech had upon
the ear was taken away: There remained no sign of a sympatheticall league of
silence contracted between the tongue and the ear: But the tongue set at
liberty, proves free, and being sui juris, leaves the unprofitable ear, and by
Art enters into an Auditory league of amity and alliance with the Eye, which
now officiously becomes a succedaneum, or Quid pro quo, for the Ear. It must
be confessed that the effects of sympathy are very strange, as appears by
rare accidents that have befallen the senses. Camerarius not without
admiration, beheld William, Prince of Orange, who upon the receiving of a wound
in his Neck, lost his Taste. And a French Soldier, who by the like wounnd
became mute: for there is a double nerve proceeding from the third Conjugation,
which is inserted into the Larynx, with one branch whereof, the tongue is made
apt for speech, with the other Sapours are perceived: That he should loose his
Taste is a less marveyle; but that he should loose his speech, who had his
hearing good and his tongue untouched, seemed says Bodin incredible to me
before, until we had found it true by experience.

The Instruments of smelling, have a known sympathy with the Ear: For we see
very often, that when the nostrils and sense of smelling is impaired through a
dull obtusenesse, that the hearing is also somewhat offended: likewise in
sneezing, when we blow our Nose, and in holding our breath in our compressed
nostrils, who does not forthwith perceive his hearing and ears really to
suffer thereupon, Of which (says Mercurialis, in his Epistle to Varolius) no
man can devise a better reason, then if he should state the instruments of
smelling to reach on both sides even to the passage of hearing, and so should
affirm, that the hearing is in some sort co-affected with them: And indeed
they who loose their smelling, do also very soon become somewhat deaf, as
you may easily perceive. But whether from this sympathy we may find any
resolution of that Problem, why those who are thick of hearing do speak
through the nose, is not yet agreed upon. Although here Mercurialis writing to
Varolius about this matter, says, He may very well boast, that he has
hereby laid open a way for the explanation of many doubtful and obscure
effects.

But that there should be such a necessity of this common affection happening
to the ear and the tongue, as it is the instrument of speech, (not yet agreed
upon to be a sense) the fair flourish of an unsatisfying sympathy can give
little assurance. And I am the less affected with this elegant evasion of a
nonplust Ignorance, because they who become deaf through any disease, though
their voice becomes hoarser; yet they do not consequently grow mute: For, that
branch only of the nerve of the fifth Conjugation, which is appointed for the
office of hearing has lost its faculty. And they who become mute by reason of
sickness, grow not thereupon deaf, because the other branch of the nerve
which is accommodated for the use of the tongue, is only affected. As we may
suppose it likewise happens to them who by some extraordinary astonishment and
indignation are stricken dumb, as the Wife of Nausimenes the Athenian was, who
coming in the interim of her Son and Daughters Incest, was so stricken with
the sight of that unlook't for, and heinous crime, that she found no words of
indignation for the present, and for ever after remained dumb.

Infero Iulio Friar Roccus having observed a Monk to rise every night to pray
before the wodden Statue of St. Dominick removed the Image from the Altar, and
appareld himself like St. Dominick with a whip in his hand; the Monck comes to
pray, Roccus shakes his whipe a little, as it were threatening: the Monck begins
to tremble, Roccus moves toward him, the Monck slies; Roccus follows, the
Monck falls down dead: Roccus having set the Image again in its place, runs
with the other Moncks unto him and raised him up, who could never speak again
and dyed speechless after few days. This Campanella afterward heard of Roccus
himself; The same happened in Pracanica, to a certain servant going out very
early to the Mill, whom one of his fellow servants putting on a strange habit,
put into a great fright, as Campan^lla relates the story. Hortenti^^ the orator
not only cracked his voice with declaming, but by an untimely fate lost it
altogether and became mute on a sudden, of whom Q. S^ren de Medic.

-- Causis confectus agendis
Obticuit, cum vox Do^ino vivexte periret,
Et nondum extincti moreretur, lingua diserti.
The Temple which was built by Iolaus the Nephew of Hercules, unto him, was of
so great estimation with the Inhabitants, that if they failed of their wonted
devotion in that place, they presently became Mute: and if again they vowed to
perfect their Sacred rites, they recovered their speech. And Zacharias, we
know was stru^en Dumb by the vision he saw in the Temple, yet neither of these,
as we may probably conjecture, were thereupon stricken Deaf likewise.

And that all who are deprived of their hearing, do not therewithal likewise
become Mute; we have an example among the Chirurgicall observations of
Fabricius Hildanus, of a Noble Virgin, the Daughter of that stout and most
noble man, the Lord Se^b^ry President of Blanctenstein, whom Hildanus
familiarly knew. This Lady being borne of a mother in a manner Deaf, about the
eight year of her age had a Cathar fell into her ears, upon which there
followed a tingling sound: who unluckily falling into the hands of an Emperick,
about the twenty fourth year of her age, utterly ^ost her hearing, and became
so deaf, that she could not hear a Gun discharged by her ear;
Notwithstanding, she retained her speech, for, not loosing her hearing
altogether in her infancy, but after she had been sufficiently confirmed, and
before instructed both in her mother tongue, and in the reading of books:
being well bred, Religious and well given, she retaynd the Elegance which she
had attained unto in her mother tongue, and many more discourses to the
edification of others. Her husband and some of her Domestique servants, by
certain signs and tokens understand her meaning, and discourse with her;
those that are strangers write their minds in a Tabl-booke, which she has
always ready for that use, to whom she returns answer by word of mouth.

And as writing is in it self a permanent speech, so it is permanent to them
that become deaf through any sickness; Platerus makes report of a deaf man
who coming to him to be cured, whilst he stayed with him, when any thing was to
be declared unto him, if a Pen or Table Book were not at hand to note such
things unto him (for being learned, he could very well read what was written)
if (in the defect of these) any one with his finger drawing it on the Table,
had expressed the figure of letters, he strait understood what it meant.

And indeed so it seldom happens that they who become deaf through any
disease grow also to be dumb, that the Records of such accidents are very rare
among the memorable Histories of Physic; among which, after much search, we
have met but with two examples. Fabricius Hildanus in his Chyrurgicall
observations, speaks of a Son of the Reverend and most excellent Man, both
for learning and pieti^, Joannis de L. Ozea, Minister of the More ^^nsian
Church; whom Hildanus remembers to have bin a Boy very well educated, lively,
and for his age strong and talkative, until the right year of his age; at
which time, being taken with a grievous (...); he was cured rather by the
benefit of (...) then of Physi^ue: For, no rational Physician was called to
administer unto him, presently after his disease, when by little and little he
grew so Deaf, that he no ^onger understood what any one spoke unto him, he
became also Mute: neither could he to this time, be restored by any remedies;
he lived when Hildanus wrote this Centurie, at Moratum: well enough Married,
where he is famous for an excellent Turner, which is the Art he exercises,
Hildanus was an eye witness of this conceited, and crafty wit, which was such,
that he understood the mind of those that were conversant with him, at the
first sight, by gesture of their body. But this Mutenesse happned not unto him
through any sympatheticall affection of the Tongue with his Ear; but by a
privation of consequence; for, being at the eight year of his age not
sufficiently confirmed and grounded in his Mother Tongue, hereupon when he
could no longer understand what m^n spoke, he easily lost that which he had
formerly learned.

Platerus has somewhat the like relation of the daughter of a certain noble
and illustrious lord, who being 7 years old, could neither hear nor speak; yet
could utter a word: being otherwise ingenious and industrious, and who
endeavored with many imperfect offers to express words, and to utter an
articulate voice; the whole cause of which evil, Platerus (indeed) imputes to
the sympatheticall league between the conjugation of Nerves, from the auditory
Nerve propagated to the Nerves of the Tongue; since the Tongue which for motion
and the sense of Taste, stood in need of many Nerves; if there happen any defect
to any one branch only, it cannot effect motion so sufficiently as is required
to the pronunciation of syllables; although the Tongue may be moved, and there
may appear no sensible defect in the motion of it. But he doubted whether this
happned unto the noble Virgin from her birth, although they made account that
she in the first year of her age, so entertained and applied her Ears to
sounds, as if she had heard them: Afterward the Headache which she suffered,
seemed to have occasioned the ensuing-losse: concerning her speech he delivers
nothing certain; since infants (otherwise) by reason of their inb^cility
cannot speak so soon: yet he thinks it ^s very likely, that she then lost her
speech, when she was deprived of her hearing, which thought of his is
undoubtedly un^o the purpose.

But as to his charging this upon the ^ld sympatheticall account, I am not of
^is mind, but rather had reckon her failing in the weak inchoation of speech,
as a necessary consequence of the privation of the sense of hearing: and her
imperfect offers at articulate pronunciation at her seventh year, to be the
faint and dying motions of an imperfect and feeble speech: and the green fruit
of the lips, ^nipt in their bud, and perishing before thorough ripe. And in
this sense would I understand that of Mercurialis in his Prelections of the
diseases of the Ear; Sur di a morbo, quantum sit ratione surditatis non sunt
muti, Dico ratione surditatis, qua fieri potest, ut morbus qui facit
surditatem, etiam auferat loquelam, that is, they who are Deaf through a
disease, by reason of their Deafness are not mute; that is simply in as much
as they are deaf: yet it may so fall out, that the disease which occasions
Deafness, may deprive them of their speech also: to wit, if there be laesio
principii, that the come on principle of both faculties all affected, or by
accident, upon the prec^ding loss of their hearing, as in these examples.

The like (as I am credibly informed) has happened unto a Gentlewoman a Niece of
Sir Robert Pyes Lady who now lives with her, who having had her hearing, and
thereby attained to some degree of speech, about the second^y are of her age
was deprived of both, by a great sickness that befell her; and remains now,
being a woman grown, so deaf and dumb, that any one unacquainted with the
occasion of her loss, would suppose her to have been originally deaf and
dumb: Deafness happening to her in the very initiation of her speech, soon
obliterating the weak impression of that imperfect language she had then
attained unto; for, hearing being the sense of memory, that affected, in all
probality, the memory must suffer some Diminution with it, which happened to them
both, without any impeachment of their intellects, they retayning the usual
capacity and understanding of Deaf and Dumb folks, and their dexterity in
expressing themselves by signs. Speech only being soon abolished by
oblivion, where discourse with others cannot be maintained; nor any recruite
allowed unto the tongue thereby; there having never been (as yet) any way
contrived by Art to enable men made Deaf by sickness, to learn de novo, to
speak, notwithstanding the impediments of the Ear This accidental dumbness
which those fell into, being of that kind wherein the voice or rather
vociferation or sound indeed remains, but yet the articulate speech is
intercepted, w^h kind of mutenes is by the Greeks called (...), which is found
an analoicaglly in infants, but properly in those who have lost their speech
through some preceding disease.

Riverus a strong sympathist in this point, would have the reason thereof to be
evident, seeing they who are deaf from their Nativitie, if they had not the
instruments of their speech vitiated, they would bring forth an articulate
voice out of a natural instinct, as other Animals do, although from their
Nativitie they should be separated from other Animals of the same species, that
they could never hear them, yet they would bring forth a voice that is
Connaturall unto, them. But they (says he) who are Deaf from their nativitie
utter no articulate voice, but only a confused sound, which argues a manifest
lesion of the parts serving to the speech: for answer whereunto, I confess it
may so fall out, that cause which deprives the ear orginally of its hearing,
may also take away the faculty of speech from the tongue; yet in most deaf and
dumb men that I have seen, I cannot perceive but that they have those few
natural expressions which proceed from the instinct of nature, which are
rather passions of the mind, then any significant sounds that properly belong
to any Tongue or language: such as is the interjection of laughter, as ha, ha,
he, of sorrow, as ha of weeping, as oh, of crying out for aid, as O, although
it may be they utter them not altogether in so plain a tone as they who enjoy
their speech.

Neither if any man be originally dumb, is there any reciprocal necessity
that he must be deaf. Hence Ioachimus Mynsingerus in the Scholiast upon the
Institutions, Stating the four cases of deaf and dumb men says, Si aures
apertae sunt, lingua vero impedita, sive ex accidenti, sive novercante natura
contraxerit, etc. Which words imply, that one may be dumb from their
Nativitie, and yet enjoy their hearing; Arculanus upon Almansor, raises a
doubt, whether the number of dumb or deaf men be greater? to which it is
replied, that there are more dumb from their Nativitie, then deaf; for, all
that are deaf are dumb; because through their defect of hearing, they cannot
learn how to form letters, syllables nor words; dumb men being dumb from
their Nativitie, by reason of some defect in the nerves moving the tongue,
which come from the seventh pair of nerves of the Brain: who yet
notwithstanding are not deaf, there being no defect existent in the fifth pair
of nerves of the Brain, and in the other Organs and instruments which serve to
hearing; whereas, ex tempore, there are more deaf then mute; for we see by the
course of Times and causes occuring to sick men, that the ear is oftener hurt
then the tongue; for nature was very careful to furnish the tongue with
greater nerves and Arteries for the Tusts sake, without which man can not long
subsist; the Tongue moreover being lodged in a saf^^ place, enclosed in an
immured den, whereas the ears are more obnoxious by their situation to be
endamaged by extraneous occurrents. Fontanus puts the question, An muti fiant
loq^aces? and he affirms by way of answer, that he saw this verified in
Zacharias his fool; about which accident he writes to Lusitanus, desiring an
explication of that wonderful example. Zacharias, says he, a fool Orphant,
who would be angry at the motion of the Moon, Lunatique and mute, theee months
before his death, fell into a Consumption; and when he was wasted so far that
he drew near death, he spoke freely, gave thanks to me and the standeres by,
for our undeserved favors to him, yea kissed my hand before I felt his Pulse.
This man in his right wits, departed godly out of this life. Io which
prodigious History Lusitanus returns in answer, that it had need of a Coon or
Pergamean Oedipus. But, says he, That men should have an impediment in their
voice, and become speechless and mute, by reason of Copious humidity
tenaciously infixed about the organs of the voice, is no new thing; since many
destitute of speech in their youth, in the progress of their age, (by the
help of Art) have been made vocal, the excrementitious moisture being wholly
spent. If this says he be true, which I take to be most certain, what should
hinder but that our sick man who remained mute so long, his body consumed, and
the superfluous moisture by the force of the torrid and feverish heat
exhausted, should speak; his vocal organs being made more fit to perform
that office?

And Valescus de Tarant^ affirms, that many children who had impediment in
their speech, have been restored by their Adolescencie. Mercurialis reports of
Maximilian the son of Frederick the third Emperor, that he was dumb, until
the ninth year of his age, and yet notwithstanding afterward he proved a most
eloquent Prince.

There are stories extant of certain dumbe-men, who by reason of some
extraordinary fright and passion, have received the gift of speech, Valerius
Maximus reports, that one Aegles Samius a dumb wrestler, when the title and
reward of a victory he had obtained, was taken from him, being kindled with
indignation, his passion unlockt his Tongue, and gave him speech.

Justin, and Herodotus report, that when the walls of Sardis were taken by an
onslaught, a certain Persian with his drawn sword set upon Croesus unknown
unto him, as if he had meant to slay him, whom when Crasus, engaged in the
slaughter of the enemy, neglected to avoyde; his dumb son Athys, deeply
apprehending the danger his father was in, is said to have broke out into these
words, (...), i. e. h^mo ne perimas Craesum, where (...) Piscator observes,
pathetically shows the affection of a troubled speech, not a little encombred
with fear; for when he should have said (...), his fear and indignation
precipitating his speech, made him say (...). And from this first time of his
speaking, he ever afterward enjoyed the benefit of speech. Pausanias reports
that one Balthus a dumb man, wandering up and down in a Desert, met with a
Lion, and was stricken with so exceeding great fear and trepidation, that
thereupon he obtained the gift of speech. And in this case they must be
frighted as well as angered: for, a mixed passion which causes a Miscellaneous
motion of the native heat, is only efficacious in this business; for, the
conflict that arises out of both these passions mixed, to wit fear and anger,
has unequal motions of the native heat, for it is revoked and drawn in by
fear, and the Animal faculty moves to its center: and again by anger it is
plentifully moved in the way of expansion to the circumference; so that the
native heat is variously mixed and exagitated, more then it could be affected
with one of them alone. The native heat becoming hereby more vigorous, and
rowzed up with these affections is so prevalent, that it is able to tame the
vicious humors of the body, and to dry up and discuss the over much
moisture, and imbecility that arises from the importencie of native heat; and
if the Nerves of speech are resolved with much moisture, or the heads of the
Nerves by which the voluntary motions of speech are performed are (...) with
thick (...) and tough humors (...) cut, digest and bre^th them out, (...)
consequently take away Sta^^^^g (...) Dumnesse. Hence you Civil Lawyers, whose
Pandects are stuffed with the subtle notions, and observations both of Natures
regular Acts, and Prevarications affirm, that some who have been mute from
their Nativity have recovered their speech; and indeed the manner of their
recovery, and assumption of speech is very strange, for if their ears have
been open, and the impediment only in the tongue, that removed, they instantly
fall to speaking, as if they had perfectly learnt it before: which inference I
make not only from these Histories, and reason, but somewhat a like case in
Ca^pa^ella, who reports, that he saw a Boy four year old, who had always
fe^^d filth, and suppurations in his ears, neither was h^ yet able to speak.
He was thought dumb, yet he heard a voice and sound, and took in hand to do
what he was commanded; but there happened unto him cho^^rique, and watery
dejections for the space of three days, and forthwith his ears were healed,
and he began to speak well as other Boys of the same age, and so proceeded to
a greater perfection of speech, being when Campanell^ writ this relation
seaven^y a^ sold; therefore says he, there are also natural Criseses without
any disease; for he was otherwise well, and had a very good stomach, and
purgation, especially if it be natural, takes away all mischievous evil of
nature.

He was taught to speak. In this case of most deaf and dumb men where the
tongue is commonly free from any impediments, as this young Lords, it seems
was; if any speech had been natural to man, why did not he speak without
teaching? or why do not all deaf men whose tongues are not restrained by
nature from voluntary motions sufficient to declare such a faculty, without
teaching come out with it? the most unanswerable argument against the
naturality of any language is this, that they who are naturally deaf speak not
at all, from whose force once alleged there is no evasion. Montaigne indeed
is very confident that if speech be not natural to man, it is not necessary;
and he would feign evade this argument by imputing deaf men's continuing mute,
not only to their incapacity of speaking from their natural deafness, but
also to the simpatheticall league between the nerves of hearing and the
tongue: but that will not bring him off; for the truth is, they speak not,
because they cannot hear to learn: He believed also that if a child bred in
some uncouth solitarines, far from haunt of people (though as he confesses it
were a hard matter to make trial of it) would no doubt have some kind of
words to express and speech to utter his conceits; for, says he it is not to
be imagined that Nature has refused us that mean, and barred us that help
which she has bestowed upon many, and diverse other creatures: for my part, I
think that Nature has dealt no more discourtiously with us in this then she
has in not arming our heads with horns, since she afforded us hands to f^ame
any kind of Armor we stand in need of; for if any speech were natural to
man, he could not be docile and apt to learn other tongues, because that which
remained within would prohibit any extraneous: as therefore God made man
altogether without Science, that he might be apt and ready to all Arts: so
there was a necessity that he should he made void of any speech, that he might
learn them all, and if without a teacher as many other things, speech should
be borne with men, in good sooth if they should learn another speech they
would be all of a double language; for if the language that a man has first
learned does not prohibit, but that he nevertheless may afterward learn
another (but there are many that can speak two, three, or four languages) far
less could that be prohibited that arises out of nature it self, by that
which is attained by study, and that which some report by divination, has no
great likelihood even in the opinion of Montaigne himself, that Hebrew should
be the innate speech of man; a persuasion only nourished by those who are
ignorant in Philosophy; since we see many men more handsome, and fit for many
other languages then for the Hebrew, which could in no wise be, for all things
are spontaneously carried to that which is natural unto them, so that speech
does not appear to be compacted, or performed by nature, but by use and
custom; otherwise as all Nations are of one and the same nature, they would
have the same speech; whereas there is no such matter, but rather it is manifold
as custom has made it current: natural indeed it is to man to speak,
because nature as we know by the very formation of the mouth, the tongue, and
other instruments has ordained them to this use; but to use this or that
speech, falls out by study and learning, and even the very Idioms proceed from
use, and a tacit consent of man: besides those 70 which arose at the lower of
Babel in the division of tongues, of whom God would be the Author and teacher;
not that they, rather then those that grew extant by use had any cognation with
nature, but that for a short and expedite distribution of Nations, it was
expedient there should be many tongues: but God made choice of those that
pleased him: therefore since nothing could be more profitable nor pleasanter to
the life of men, then reciprocally to communicate their cogitations one unto
another, neither any thing more natural then the desire of knowledge and
science, which is purchased by teaching and learning and to teach and learn
happens, no otherwise then by communicating the conceptions of the mind: by the
very impulse of Nature, man is carried unto speech, because there is no choicer
or easier way can be thought to innuate or declare his mind; therefore men
first found out speech, whereby they might in words signify the conception of
their minds.

The language this deaf and dumb Lord was taught to speak, was Spanish, it
being the language of the Country wherein he was borne, which should have been
his mother tongue, but could not so properly be called in him, who had attained
unto it, By such a new way of ocular audition, which as all other languages
has so little of Naturality in it, that by disuse it may be utterly lost: of
which the honorable Relator of this story, in his Treatise of bodies, affordes
us a notable in one John of Liege who driven by an extreme alarm of fear
from the apprehension of approaching enemies into a Forest for shelter, being
there lost, continued so long, that he had quite forgot the use of speech;
insomuch as when he was found, he was feign to be taught how to speak again;
whereas if his language had been natural, it could not have been forgotten or
lost by any disuse.

Observation. VIII.
FOr which attempt at first he was laughed at, yet after some years he was
looked upon as if he had wrought a miracle. The attempt to bring relief to men
borne deaf and dumb, is a thing so far beyond any man's conceit, that they
looked upon him as some Vtopian Montebanck, who first pretended to this Art: a
simple pride, and a shallow fate, having been ever the Nurses of Ignorance,
which is the cause of scornful laughter; many men being of that temper, that
because they cannot conceive how it can be done, therefore it cannot be done,
as if all invention were limited within the narrow sphere of their capacity.
That he was looked upon as if he had wrought a miracle, shows that the opinion
of most men is, that Original deafness and dumbness is not curable but by
miracle, it having never been done by any other then the Divine Art of
miracle-working faith.

And thus we read in the Gospel of St. Luke, of one that was possessed with a
Devil, being deaf, blind, and dumb; for St. Luke makes him dumb, St. Matthew
blind, and from his Dumbness those that comment thereupon, infer his
Deafness; Chrysostom, Tertullian, and Hierom say, That the word Cophos
signifies dumb and deaf, and some interpretours translate it in the seventh
of Mark, surdum et mutum; To Tytus Bostrensis, Lyra, and Euthimius, it seems
that he was not deaf, for that his dumbness not being Natural, the Devil
might make him dumb but not deaf, leaving him his hearing for his greater
torment. Fonseca observes that he being both blind and deaf. Saint Luke makes
mention, that he was only dumb, which he purposely did (as St. Austin has
observed) to sign out unto us the greatest ill that could befall him. The
words of St. Luke are thus rendered, Et erat Jesus ej^cieus Doemonium, et illud
erat mutum, Jesus was casting forth a Devil; this word erat implying the
difficulty of getting him out, as also the long time of his continuance there;
for Christ did not presently cast out this Devil, but stayed, paused a while
upon the matter; showing thereby, that it was not so easy a thing to be done
as some thought it to be, but rather full of difficulty. And when the Devil
was gone out, the dumb spoke, which when the multitude heard, they marvelled,
saying, it was never so seen in Israel; insomuch as some of them whispered
among themselves, that he was the Son of God; and the good old woman
Marcella, blessed the womb that bare out Savior, and the Paps that gave him
Suck When our Savior had cured this man, who upon his enquiry of them who
brought him, He found to be have been so possessed from his childhood; the
Apostles asked Jesus privately, why they could not cast him out? Who answered
them; that that kind would come forth by nothing but Fasting and Prayer. In
Ecclesiastical Histo^es we read of one Theodimindus, a young man both deaf
and dumb, who was wont to stand at St. Martins Church, moving his lips only,
who did seem so promptly to pray, that he was seen to let ^al tears so^etimes
between his tacit words, craving alms by his gesture; this youth standing with
his eyes lift up to heaven, there burst out stream of blood with rotten matter
from his mouth, and spitting it out upon the earth he began to groan
grieveously and to hank out I know not what parts of blood, insomuch as one
would have thought some body had made an incision in this throat with an
instrument; and purulent matter like bloody threads h^ng down his mouth;
whereupon the ligaments of his ears and jaws being broken, elevating
himself, and raising up his hands and eyes to Heaven with his mouth yet
bloody, he broke out into these his first words: I return great thanks unto
thee most blessed St. Martin that opening my mouth, thou have made me after so
long a time of silence deliver words in thy praise. The people admiring at this
miracle, asked him if he had also recovered his hearing, who professed openly
to them that he heard all things very well.

The like miraculous reception of speech (in all the circumstances) happened to a
dumb man in the Monastery of Schwartzachth, as appears by the Cronicle of the
Vrspergensium Abbats.

It is reported also by Ecclesiastical writers, that one Anagildus who was
both deaf and dumb and blind was restored to all his senses, whilst he prayed
unto St. Julian: The like is reported of St Bernard, who returning upon a time
to his Monastery, cured one both deaf and dumb that stood at the Gate.
Riverus in his medicinal observations affords us a strange example of a Boy
both deaf and dumb, who was cured by a mischief, or a chance-medley miracle,
who upon a time, playing at dice, was struck with a big staff, with which most
grievous blow his occipitall bone was broken into many particles, of which
dangerous wound, notwithstanding by the industry of a skillful Surgeon he
was cured. And while he grew to be well, his sense of hearing came to him, and
he began to stammer out certain little words, until at length he attained
the perfect faculties of hearing and speaking; and in that condition he lived
until the forty fifth year of his age, having been scarce two years dead
when Riverus recorded this History.

Observation. IX.
THat strange patience, Constancy, and pains was required to the effecting of
this work, any one would imagine, since great matters are not soon achieved;
it seems it was after some years, before he who for his undertaking of it was
laughed at, was looked upon as if he had wrought a miracle: which is no
disparagement to this Art (...) speech is not attained by (...) ^ut with many
difficulties, and (...), after some years; and, even wr^^^ng which is but the
image of speeck, here it can be learnt in any perfection by them who have all
their senses, usually takes up many of our youthful years.

Observation. X.
THat he should be brought to speak as distinctly as any man whatsoever, and
to understand so perfectly what others said that he would not loose a word in a
whole days conversation, shows the wonderful perfection of this Art that he
should observe the accent, and terminations of every word, not hearing himself
is very strange: But the last is most strange and difficult, even to them that
have the just perfection of all their senses; for who would undertake in a
whole days discourse not to fail in understanding, or miss one word of what
another said unto him? which manifestly shows that Nature does pay any defect,
by recompencing at least twofold. How he was brought to speak so exactly (this
natural Deasnesse remaing upon him) is worth the inquiry; for to imagine after
what manner the words seen (or as we use to speak) heard with his eye were
transferred to pronunciation, and again to the intellect; is the greatest
difficulty in this business; we will suppose this transmutation was not
performed without a necessary junction between those words seen and the habit
of moving the vocal Musculs: and it manifestly proves motion and articulate
sounds to be one and the same thing. In children, indeed, who have all their
senses, this transition is made as well by sight as hearing, when they are
instructed before they can understand; for out of the Phancie of the thing see^
they may come through into the Phancie of the sound, by joining the vision of
words seen in their Horn-books, to the representation of the sound It being
well known unto us, that boys when they learn to read, they bring forth a
voice out of a sound, and that is the reason why those who are Deaf by Nature,
are necessarily mute.

For although boys do not conceive of or comprehend the sound of words, yet
hearing they learn to know: and although words are not understood by an
Infant, yet this Cognition which consists in sight and hearing is proper to
them; for, man has understanding, as it perspicuously appears, even from his
first Infancy, because he learneth. Now how his understanding was framed out
of words thus seen or heard, might be after the same manner as out of writing,
which is also a kind of visible speech permanent as the motions of the mouth,
are a transitory speech; for, vision is made out of sense, joining out of
vision, out of many joynings a general comprehension, out of a general
comprehension; an universal proposition, out of an universal proposition;
that kind of joining which is called reason, when one thing is inferred out of
another, is the understanding made; so that as Cardan subtilizeth the matter,
there are seven orders of Senses. The Exterior, Phancie, junction, memory,
general comprehension, Universal proposition, and the universal it self
which is the property of the mind: so that what kind of motion went in by the
sensory or organ of sense, (be it Ear or Eye) such as it were from one and the
same effigies of motion, was returned and pronounced by his voice; and what he
thus seeing heard, he learnt to speak the same.

But indeed as the Verulamian Oracle of human learning notes, it is a thing
strange in nature when it is attentively considered, how children learn to
imitate speech they take no mark at all as he thinks, of the motions of the
mouth of him that speaks, for they learn in the dark as well as in the light,
the sounds of speech are very curious and exquisite, so one would think it
were a lesson hard to learn; it is true, that it is done with time and by
little and little, and manny essays and proffers: but all this discharges not
the wonder. It would, says he, make a man think (though this which we shall
say will seem exceeding strange) that there is some transmission of spirits,
and that the spirits of the teacher put in motion, should work with the
spirits of the learner a predisposition to offer to imitate, and so to perfect
the imitation by degrees; which operations by the transmission of spirits, is
one of the highest secrets in nature. But as for imitation, it is certain,
that there is in men a predisposition to imitate, for, no man (in effect) does
accompany with others, but he learneth (ere h'is aware) some gesture or voice
or fashion of the other. But labor and intention to imitate voices does
conduce much to imitation, and therefore we see there be certain Pantomimi,
that will represent the voice of Players of enterludes so to life, as if you
see them not, you would think they were these Players themselves, and so the
voices of other men that they hear; and indeed as he says in general, so in
this particular case, men are to be admonished that they do not withdraw credit
from the operation by transmission of spirits, and force of imagination, that
work such strange effect at distance, by the transmission or emission of the
spiritual species of words: we will therefore suppose this strange effect to
have been produced by the transmission of spirits.

Observation. XI.
THis learned Relator it seems had often discoursed with the Priest, whilst he
waited upon the Prince of Wales ( now our dread Soveragine in Spain) and he
doubts not but his Majesty remembers all he has said of him and much more:
for his Majesty was very curious to observe and enquire into the utmost of it.

This miraculous atchievment of Art, was not performed in a corner of the
world, but in the imperial City of Madrid, and in the face of the Spanish
Court: and so consequently there have been many honorable persons witnesses of
the strange effect of this new Art; among the rest it seems, it was honored
with the enquiry of his Majesty, when he was (being then Prince) in Spain;
and indeed the subtilty of this Art was worthy of the Curiosity of a Prince; It
being likely his Majesty (who is known to be an excellent Motist, as his
judgment in Pictures and Statues witnesses: and who was ever vigilant for the
advance and security of government) might apprehend this Art possibly to be
translated to a use of State, and to the advantage and improvement of
king-craft; thereby to discern the Traiterous motions of in-choat Treasons in
muttering and discontented subjects; and verily in this respect, it is a secret
treasure worthy of a Royal Cabinet.

Observation. XII.
ONe great misbecomingnesse (it seems he was apt to fall into, concerning the
tone of his voice, whose pitch he could not readily govern, but it would be
sometimes higher, and sometimes lower; which it seems was not, but upon his
first entrance upon his speech, where earnestness to speak, made chance
Arbiter of his voice; for otherwise, what he delivered together, he ended in
the same Key as he begun: so that I see not but this which seems to be the
only defect this Art cannot remedy, might by his observation have been
rectified; but perchance he was not come to that point of perfection; for if he
could discern the pitch of another voice, and know it to be the measure of
that motion that appeared to him: one would think, with little difficulty he
might have made that note his copy; yet were not this possibly to be remedied,
because he hears not himself; it were not so great a blemish to this Art,
since many men who have their hearing cannot moderate their voice; and Gracchus
was forced to use the pipe of a Moniter to tune his, when Earnestnes had
transposed it out of all moderation. And they that are but Surdastri, because
they hear not themselves, are guilty of speaking unproportionably loud: his
error in this point was not so great as to destroy the audible articulation of
his voice, for had his voice in other distinct kind been drawn extreme small,
or extreme great, it could not have been articulate, for, as the advancer of
Learning says, articulation requires a Mediocrity of sound: for that the
extreme small sound confounds the articulation by contracting; and the great
sound by dispersing. And although a sound articulate already created, will be
contracted into a small crannie; yet the the first articulation requires more
Dimension: we do not hear of any other misbecomingnesse, or that he spoke
through the Nose, as Deaf men usually do; which Aristotle imputes to their
vitiated lungs, which compells Deaf men to utter their voice vehemently,
whereupon their voice breaks out at their Nostrills. And so Deaf men speak
through the Nose; But it seems this affection is more peculiar to those who
are accidental deaf through some disease; and therefore I like the other
cause of Deaf men's speaking through the nose, which Cassius gives us in his
Problems; which is, that through that disease which makes them Deaf, they are
constrained to dilate their Nostrills, whence they dilated, the breath of their
voice, breaks out at their Nose.

Observation. XIII.
He could yet discern in another whether he spoke shrill or low; which property
he could not have had but by virtue of the Natural knowledge all men have at
first sight of the passions and affections of men's minds, and by the same rule
that we understand the articulate language of Beasts, whose gesture, when there
is a doubt of the sense, affords a solution of their several tones.

Now Shrillnesse being a note of the earnestness of speech, though he
understood it not by the Audiblenesse of the tone: yet he might manifestly
perceive it by the extraordinary motion required to such a pitch of the voice;
for then the Larynx is drawn upward as we may evidently perceive in our selves
when we frame our voice acute: whereas we may note, that the Larynx is drawn
downwards when we would speak in a grave and base tone. Therefore besides the
Muscules shuting and opening by degrees the rift of the Larynx, the rough
artery which they call the pipe of the lungs was made of many cartilagineous
rings, not quite round, but figured after the manner of the letter Cinterwoven
with a spherical membrane; so that the Larynx drawn upward the compass of the
membrane by reason of the distraction is co^rcted, and the extreme parts of
the Rings come in nearer together, and the whole pipe is made streighter;
whereupon the little mouth of the Throat being streined in the breath being
strongly expelled, issues forth with so great a force, that the collision there
of of produces an acute voice: but when the Larynx descends, the rings and the
pipe are dilated, whence the cleft of the throat being more widened, by a
lighter emission and collision of the breath, the voice is made more grave.
Hence it is that singing-men in rising with an acute voice, do always more
raise up their head, and come to a prohibited expiration, which declares the
Larynx to be both raised upwards and obstructed; discending in a base voice,
they incline their head, and at length come to expiration without a voice,
which demonstrates the Larynx to descend, and the clift thereof so to fly open,
that it no way resists the breath in its passage; of which if you desire to
have a sensible assurance, lay your finger on the outside of your throat, and
you will soon be satisfied in the truth hereof. Now these are not don without
motions of consent in the Face and Neck, for, the veins in shrillnesse swell,
which denotes some heat of passion, which Deaf men naturally understand
better then we; hence it is that the Aphricans who are exceeding cholerique
speak always with an angry and loud voice, and the Egyptian Moors are very
shrill Tongued; But in a calm and moderate speech there appears none of these
notes, which are not required to a natural and midlin temper of discourse.

Observation. XIV.
ANother strange acquired property was, That he could speak and repeat after
any body any hard word whatsoever what ever language it was of; for he was
hereby made a general Linguist, which necessarily implies these outward
motions of speech, to come very near to the nature of an universal character,
they being natural and universal; maintaining their Figure which springs from
the pure Naturality of the letters whereof all languages are composed; for
although the words of languages are from a mutual compact: yet the letters,
whereof those words are composed, are Natural, and the lips disposition to
the forming of them, keeps out any other. The riseing of later Tongues is from
the mixture of Tongues; but this of motion regulated by the letters which are
natural, admits of no mutation by Age, but remains uncorrupted, and so will
remain pure, as long as there are lips and a tongue to articulate; for, no man
shall be ever able to foyst in any irregular and suborned motion, any way to
alter the universal form and property of their pronunciation. I have heard
that the King at his being there among other hard words wherewith he tried the
certainty of his ocular audition, named Artaxerxes, which he easily perceived
and returned. And indeed if we consider the way he was taught, and the skill he
attained in the Forms of Letters, from whose Transposition only proceeds the
infinite variety of languages; it was not more difficult to him then to
discern the language he was taught; for, articles in the speech of man are
letters, out of which, as out of its first elements, all articulate voices or
speeches of what language soever were made, to wit syllables are made of
letters, words of syllables; and at length of words spoken oration or speech
results; whereof all perfect and consummate speeches are constituted, and
discourse and communication maintained among all Nations, though of never so
different languages. But since in those Tongues we understand not we are all
Deaf and dumb the quaere is, whether he spoke those hard words with his
understanding, or only by a bare imitation? For, I doubt he understood only
the received signification of those worded motions which are used in the
language he was taught; somewhat like them (if I may so speak by allusion) in
the Primitive time, who had the gift of strange tongues which they understood
not, so as to interpret whereof St. Paul speaking, I had rather, says he,
speak two words with my understanding, then many in a strange Tongue, yet you
may hereby see, how apt this Art is to imitate miracles.

Observation. XV.
HE could perfectly echo and express words in a high manner of exact
imitation of the genuine Pronunciation of any language; Nay even of those which
employ much the gutturall letters, as the Welsh and Hebrew do, which when the
Prince of Wales had tried often by making some Welsh-men that served his
Highness speak words of their language the Relator who was present at the
trial, confesses he more wondered at that, the^ at all the rest; because the
motions of that part which frames the gutturall letters, cannot be seen or
judged by the Eye, otherwise then by the effect they may happily make by
consent in the other parts of the mouth exposed to view.

The difference of Pronunciation with diverse nations is a subtlety worth the
inquiry; Cardan among those things that put a difference among men, and such a
diversity as sets them at a distance, reckons the tongue or language, neither
is there any other thing wherein man differs more from man; for whereas all
other animals with the same voice demonstrat the same affections: man is no
more understood of man, then a Swallow is of a Lion; man indeed has but one
voice, but there are many kinds of speaking; but what diversity of
pronunciation there is, he confesses he is scarce able to number. But there
are six simple kinds; from the mouth, and these hisle as it were; from the
tongue within the teeth; from the tongue put out: and this is twofold, as it is
in the Lips, and in the Palate: from the Throat, and from the Breast; all
which differences, almost, we may see in Italy; for, the Florentines pronounce
with the Throat; for, the Florentine Dialect of of the Italian is a little
more gutturall in the Pronunciation, then that of Sienna and that of the Court
of Rome, which occasioned the Proverb: Lingua Toscana in Boca Romana, the
Tuscan Tongue sounds best in a Romans mouth. The Venetian with the Palate, the
Neopolitans with their Teeth, and the Genuensians with their Lips: or according
to Isidors general comprehension thus: all oriental Nations knock together
their Tongue and words in their Throats, as the Hebrews and Syrians. All
Mediterranean Nations speak in the Palate, as the Greeks, and Assyrians; all
occidentall Nations break their words in their Teeth as the Italians, and
Spaniards; All which may be supposed to happen by reason of their choice and
frequent use of those letters in their language, which are gutturall,
palatiall, dentall, or labiall; Therefore the original root of the diversity
of languages, is well estimated by a modern Author, to consist in this, that
words are compounded of vowells and consonants: moreover the difference of
vowells arise from the greater or more configur'd apertion both of the Mouth
and Throat. And the consonants out of the interception of the breath going out
by the organs of Teeth, lips, tongue, by their allision to these, and the
palate, with some help of the nostrils, and occlusion of the throat, and it
is apparent that these members and instruments of the voice, are compounded of
the Elements, and which follows, by their temper to be more disposed to one
then to another motion; and this happens according to the situation of the
Regions wherein men live, to be more inclined to some vowels, or consonants
then others: whence it comes to pass without any further work, vowels and
consonants were by little and little changed, and such a diversity ensued, that
men no more understood one another: and this might happen without confusion of
tongues, of which (according to some) there is no very firm ground in the
sacred text; for whereas they were at Babell of one lip and word, it is
thought to imply no more; but that they were all of one mind, and resolved to
remain united together; so that there needed no more to confound their
tongues, then to disperse them into several Countries: and because diverse
Nations are affected after a diverse manner, and have a peculiar manner of
expressing the Air: the Germans speak with a kind of impetuosity, the cold
retruding their breath, and therefore they pronounce many letters consonants.
The Venetians many liquids and many vowels, because they dwell in a liquid
Country. The Spaniards prolix voices with vowels and hissing spirrits, out of
the heat and acumen of their Region. The Italians in a midling climate in a
mean between both: now although the natural Letters by their transpositions
are able to express any language agreed on by the inventive constitutions of
men; yet all tongues are not necessarily tied to take in all the Letters of
natures Alphabet; for the language of Cuzco wants B D F G J consonant, and
single L, and makes shift with the other natural Letters. B is not used by the
Chinoys, and the Tartars cannot pronounce it, and the Chinoys, as it is said,
cannot pronounce R. The Brasileans cannot pronounce the Letters, L. F. R. the
reason whereof one being demanded made answer, because they had amongst them
neither Law, Faith, nor Rulers; yet a more Philosophical cause might be found
out: for, that the Chinoyse nor Brasileans can pronounce the natural Leter R,
is not by reason of the altered figure of the instruments belonging to speech;
for, those parts which conspire to speech, are the same in them as in other
men, nor by reason of the substance, site, progress of vessels, or the hurt
of their original; because the same substance of the instruments appertaining
to speech is preserved in them as in others who have not this impediment; the
same progress and site of particulars, and the self same beginning of
instruments; neither does this happen to them by reason of the moist
temperature of their head or tongue, and other parts conspiring to speech; for
their hard Heads declare them to be of no such temperament: the specificall
cause of their natural indisposition to the pronuncation of this Letter is,
either their over many, or more, and different situation of pores existent in
the instruments appertaining to speech: now the instruments appertaining to
speech are the Lungs, the rough artery, the larinx, the tongue, the palate
teeth, and lips; in all which instruments there is none of the above numbered
conditions observed in them, which are not exactly, seen in those who speak
most perfectly; besides that difference which consists in passages or pores:
therefore it is certain pores that occasion this impediment, and it is in them
an affection in conformation and no way in distemper; for there are in the
middle region of the palate, that is in the fourth bone of the upper jaw, two
holes which are not found so open and obvious in those who are without this
affection: those two open passages being the imediate cause of this their
impotence to pronounce the Letter R. nor were it impossible perchance to
assign a specifique cause of the Brasilians inability to pronounce L. and F.
and the Tartarians inability to pronounce the Letter B but peradventure that
might be as prepostrous a work, as to assign a cause to the golden Tooth.

We need not all the Letters in our Language, and less of them in speaking
then in writing: many Northern Dialects have rejected some of the natural
Letters, as B. G. D. V. consonant which is thought to have happened through the
nature of the Region, propriety of the Idiom, and strength of men, together
also with custom, which is that they might perpetually speak with vehemence
adhibiting every where a kind of impetuous force in speaking, which cannot be
done without a vehemnet exsufflation; hence necessarily usurp P. for B. F for
V. consonant. T. for D. C. for G. the cause of which vehement exsufflation is
no other then that which is aledged by Gallen in these words: the Celts, and
all kind of Thracians and Scythians have a soft white skin without hair,
therefore their natural heat together with their blood, flies back into the
inner parts; where while it is agitated, pressed, and grows hot, they become
courageous, bold, and of a precipitate judgment, therefore the internal heat
boiling, excites a valid respiration, and this causes a valid exsufflation,
and this powers out a vehement voice: hence comes rushing forth letters which
are formed with a vehement force of the breath, that for B. it thereby becomes
P. for G. C. for D. T. for V. consonant F. for Northern men who are strong and
have a strong Tongue, they choose and utter more stronger letters, that is
those to whose prolation both a stronger tongue, and sufflation is required
whence their speech semes to be more rough and ^g^d: for they that inhabit cold
Countries, have a tongue corespondent to the rest of their actions: therefore
they are vehement; rigid, severe, and courageous; whence Charles the fifth
Emperor was wont to say, that the German tongue was military: and therefore if
he were to threaten, or speak more roughly to any, he would use the German
tongue, because that tongue is minatory, harsh, and vehement: whence a Modern
says of the Germans, that they have a full mouthed language, and that they
speak as if they had Bones in their Tongue instead of Nerves. Note that in all
these varieties of Pronuntiation, the Letters which constitute words, are made
by the same motions, but that they admitted more of some Letters then other
into their Idioms, has happened through their Different Exsufflations. There are
also some strange kind of pronuntiations, with diverse Nations, which I take to
be rather affectations, then ensuing upon the former recited causes. The people
in the Bay of Soldania have a chattering rather then a language, their words
for the most part, are inarticulate, and in speaking they clock with the
Tongue, like a ^^ood Hen, which clooking and the w^^d, are both pronounced
together very strangely. In Mexico their language, especially used by Thieves
and Lovers, is a kind of whistling, whereby they understand one another.

They of Guinea when they speak, they put out their necks like Turkey Cocks,
and speak very fast. The general language of Peru, has three manner of
pronunciations of some sillables, in which variety of Pronuntiation, lies the
different signification of the same word One way in the Lips, another in the
Palate, and the third in the Throat. The Catayans speak much through the Nose.
That which was wondered at most of all was, his discerning the Gutturall
motions of the Welsh Pronuntiation, because the motions of that part could not
be seen^ or judged by this New-taught-Hearing Eye, otherwise then by the Effect
those Motions might happily make by a Motion of Consent, in the other parts of
the Mouth exposed to view. Certainly, it must be confessed, that those
languages that use most the Labiall Letters, must necessarily be the most
remarkable and easy to discern, and they that much use the Gutturall, to be
somewhat more difficult to apprehend: and it seems his Master confessed, that
the Rules of his Art reached not to produce that effect with any certainty, and
therefore concludes this in Him, must spring from other Rules He had framed
unto himself, out of his own attentive Observation.

Observation. XVI.
THe exquisite and admirable perfection of his judicious hearing eye, which he
attained unto by Art, is well imputed to the advantage that nature had justly
given him in the sharpness of senses to supply he want of this; endowing him
with an ability, and sagacity, to do beyond any other man that had his Hearing.
Zu^nger speaking of this mutual suppeditation of the senses, says, that if
one sense as the Ear) prove defective, more spirits are carried unto the rest,
which makes their Actions though diverse, more powerful; for, multitude of
spirits makes much to exquisite hearing: an argument whereof we have in Blind
men and Moles: for you may see that Blind men allways most exquisitly hear;
and the Mole also which is Blind by Nature, is thought to have the se^^^ of
hearing most exquisite, because thos^ spirit which should have served the
visory virtue, they all are turned over to the Ear, and thereby make the
hearing most exact. Examples of these advantages in Blind men, and the notable
qualification of their observant Ear: Camerarius can afford you many, and the
learned Relator in his Treatise of Bodies, one most remarkable of a blind
Schoolmasters. So likewise they who want their hearing, see more exactly, and
their observations are more pregnant, because the sense of hearing does not
distract them other where, and being they can hear nothing, they look always
more attentively, being Nature recompenseth in one sense the loss of another;
and therefore we use when we would view a thing more exactly, to shut one Eye,
and thereby the sight becomes more accurate. And if a man would hear more
attentively, and with less distraction, let him shut his Eyes, and if he would
see with less distraction, it were good for him to stop his Ears: for any one
sense is more vigorous in sensation, when the other sensories are suspended
from action.

Hence, as my Lord Bacon observes, sounds are meliorated by the intention of
the sense, where the common sense is collected most to the particular sense of
hearing, and the sight suspended; wherefore he supposes sounds to be sweeter to
Blind men then to others. The like perchance may be said of visible objects to
deaf men, and that the subtleties of articulate sounds, or motions, are with
more inquisitive delight and attention, contemplated by them.

As for the other senses, they do diverse things beyond their ordinary function;
so as one might say that perfection consists not in the distinction of the
Organs of the sense; but in the continual use of them: so careful is Nature
like a good mother, to make amends for a fault, that none should accuse her to
be a stepmother: for what she takes away in some of the senses, she allows,
and recompenseth in the rest: insomuch as deaf and dumb men, having a double
defect, to wit of speaking and hearing, they usually have double recompense:
this makes them good natural Phisiognomers. For as concerning the notes of the
affections which appear in men's Faces, by instinct they know and discern them
readier then we can; and as we know we are often beholding to the countenances
of Men for the explanation of their Minds; so they know by the motions of
affections and passions that accompany the motions of speech, the passions that
are vented in those local motions o^ Articulation, made in the parts about the
Mouth. And it may not be so difficult to them as unto us, to conceive and
distinguish of each motion and signification of the lips: for wanting the sense
of Hearing, their Eye is more accurate, and apt to observation; so that
wondering what those motions of men's mouths mean, and heedfully observing at
several times, noting both the occasion and the return of that occasion, they
ingeniously f^ame out of their own observation, many things Art could not with
any certainty instruct them in: so that the apparent motions of the lips, the
forms of words seem to have been distinguished by the observation of some
deaf and dumb men, without the help of a Teacher. Nature (the Patriarch of
physic says) being many times skillful without a Teacher: for it seems by
some stories of deaf and dumb men as they are recited by certain Authors,
that some, even of themselves without teaching, have fallen upon observing the
motions made in speaking, and so have come to the understanding of the received
significations of those motions.

We have, says Camerarius, in Nuremberge a young man and a young maid, borne
of one Father and Mother, of a good House, and well known, that are endued
with a singular quick conceit; for although they be Deaf and Dumb by Nature,
yet can both of them read very well, write, cipher, cast account: The young
man conceives at first by signs that are made him, what he is required to
do, if his pen be wanting, by his countenance he shows his thoughts, being
the quickest and cunningest at all Games, both at Cards and Dice, that one can
find among the Germans, although they there use great advisement and be
mavelous ready and quick. His Sister passes all other Maids for working
with her needle all kind of Sempstry, Tapestry, Embrodery, etc. But above all
the wonderful recompenses of Nature, this is remarkable in them; that most
commonly as soon as they see ones lips stir, they understand his meaning: They
are oftentimes at Sermons, and a man would say that they draw and conceive with
their Eyes the words of the Preachers, as others use to do with their Ears;
for they will oftentimes, no body ever teaching them or setting them any
Letters or Copies, write the Lords prayer, and other godly Prayers: Know by
heart the Texts of the Gospels that are read upon Holy Days, and write them
readily, when in the Sermons the Preacher makes mention of the name of Jesus,
the young man is ready before any of the Hearers to take off his hat, and to bow
his knee with all reverence.

Platerus makes mention of one borne Deaf and Dumb, who nevertheless could
describe his mind in a Table book which he always carried about him, and
could understand what others also wrote therein. Platerus his Father reported
of him, that when he with great zeal heard Oecolampadius preaching by the
motion of his lips, and his gesture, he understood many things, as he also
could by any others lips that labored before him. Zuinger speaking of this
Deaf and Dumb man (who was according to his relation) a Poyntmaker, says,
that he heard Oecolampadius preaching, seeming to hear with his very eyes.

The like ability of preception gained from his own attentive observation (as
I am informed by a Philosophical Friend) had one Gennet Lowes a woman dwelling
in Edenburge in Stotland, who being Deaf and Dumb by Nature, could understand
any one in her House, merely by the moving of their lips. So that by their
motions alone without a voice, or speaking aloud to her, she could exactly
perceive their meaning.

The Civil Law seems also to have took notice that men that are Deaf and
Dumb may come to hear others speak, by observing the moving of their Lips:
For among their extraordinary Law Cases, they have inserted this recondit, and
very seldom heard of notion touching Deaf and Dumb men's perceiving the
efficacy of others words, by the moving of their lips, concerning whom their
Institutions run thus:

A Deaf and Dumb man cannot be appointed a Tutor, although he may hear by
the moving of lips. Etiams. audiat ad motum Labiorum.

A Deaf and Dumb man although he understand another by the moving of his
Lips, yet he cannot stipulari, that is, interrogatus spondere stipem: For it is
verbum interrogandi and ad promittendum inducendi; yet they may contract,
although not by stipulation, for if they understand others by the motion of
their lips, they may contract in those things which are performed by consent,
which is the opinion of Bartolus, and others who have commented upon the Body
of the Civil Law.

The word of the Text of the Civil Law is Surdus, which I confess is somewhat
ambiguous, as the Civil Lawyers use it: Yet here as I conceive, it is meant of
men originally Deaf, and so consequently Dumb, which in the Case of
stipulation is plain, a Deaf man being excluded from that Act, for his defect
of speech, and therefore I have enlarged the Text, by making it speak out
plain.

Yet if there be two men borne Deaf and Dumb, alike qualified by Art as the
Spanish Lord is, they might stipulari, because they could both speak, for the
Rule that excluds mutes is, stipulatio nulla nisi uterque loquatur, and this
would prove a new Case. And this Spanish Lord, who is yet living, may without
breaking the Rule, do as much with any man, which is another new case too.

And so may any one accidentally Deaf who retains his speech, and can audire
ad motu^ labiorum, which is the case of Mr. Crispe the Brother of Sir Nicholas
Crispe, whose dexterity in perceiving the meaning of men by the motion of their
lips, is very well known to Merchants upon the Exchange * whom by this Art,
which he has gained by his own attentive observation, he has driven many a
bargain: And it is very probable that sometimes this faculty was of great
advantage unto him, for he might chance to overheare with his eye news of the
arrival of some ship and of some good bargain; when others who would
perhaps keep the intelligence to themselves were not aware of it, and amid the
buzzing noise of the Royal Bee-hive of our Emporium, where many speaking
together, one articulate voice confounds another, his eyes being vigilant upon
the motions of men's mouths, and no way distracted with that bartering noise is
there made, he might perceive a motion, which being a Merchant, he might easily
turn to his own profit; this and many other advantages might be much
furthered by the nimblenesse of his hearing eye, it being conceived by some
that ordinarily conversed with him, that by his eye, he many times apprehended
a conceit of just uttered by the Mouth, and was thereupon advanced to laughter,
before they who had their hearing had any intelligence of it, who are feign to
expect the slow information of a duller Organ of Sense; and there is good
reason he should have the ods of them, since he has two Senses united in one,
and a double proportion of spirits to enable one Organ. Among other very
strange things I have heard related of him touching this the faculty; I was
told by Mr. Hurst, w^^ keeps the Swan behind St. Nicholas Shambles (upon
occasion of some discourse with him about a son he has, who is Deaf and
Dumb) that he being an Officer of the Train Bands, and appointed to keep the
Scaffold clear upon Tower Hill at the execution of Sir Alexander Carey,
perceiving Mr. Crispe to press on for a convenient place of Audience, he spoke
to him to forbear; who not hearing him, because his eyes were not upon him to
mind him, continued to endeavor for a place of accommodation, until Mr.
Hurst being told by some who he was, and what defect he had in his hearing, he
converted his resistance into observation, and suffered him to plant himself
right against the front of the Scaffold; And he told me that when Sir Alexander
Carey stood up to speak to the people, Mr. Crispe settled himself steadfastly
to observe the motions he made, and kept his eyes riveted upon Sir Alexanders
face during the time of his last speech, which he so perfectly understood and
carried away with him, that he was able to relate it again to others, who much
wondered at the way of his perception; therefore if any man doubt of the
certainety of (...) Audition, one hours acquaintance with Mr. Crisp would have
resolved (...) the truth of this business, for it was a plenary satisfaction
ipso facto, but to have once been in his company.

But between the writing and printing of this Tractate, this vow (...) of
Labiall interpretation by a sad (...) is withdrawn from us, with the fatal
fall of an overburdened feeling, whose danger-threatning crack (he being
unfortunately deaf, and wanting the common Sentinells which were ordained by
Nature to watch against the motion of all approaching dangers) could not so
well evade, as otherwise he might have done: And however we have been
thereupon enforced to alter the Tenses of the Relations concerning him with a
(vixit) he has left behind him many living witnesses of his ability in
understanding the efficacy of Labiall motion.

The same ocular faculty of Audition (as I am informed by a Philosophical
Friend) had one Dr. Stapl^ a Physician, who being incidently Deaf through some
Disease yet retaining his speech, could tell any ones meaning by the motion of
their lips.

And it may be the capacity that Deaf men have of supplying their defect of
hearing by observing the motions of men's mouths, may be the (...) of that
which I have partly observed in Deaf and Dumb m^n, and (...) heard others
relate more fully, that they will seem discontented and be angry, if in your
relations to them, among other motions and signs you make unto them, you do
not therewithal use the motions of speech which are made with the mouth; as if
you defrauded them of the means of understanding you, and out of a slight
regard held back from them the Key of your best intelligence.

Observation. XVII.
HE could at the distance of a large chambers breadth, say words after one,
that another standing close to the speaker, could not hear a syllable of. This
argues, that distance of place hinders not, if it be within the discernable
reach of the eye: and that the Low pitch of an unaudible voice of speech, was
no impediment unto him, being equally easy unto him who used his eye for an
ear, to perceive and discern a silent, or an audible Articulation of speech;
so he he had in view the motion of the lips, with which speech is as perfect
and absolute in its articulations, as it is by any audible enunciation, the Eye
being capable of the sounds those motions make, as they are bare motions; and I
believe his information was more certain then the Auricular usually is, which
puts the tongue to so many what say you's: the Ear being duller and
deceitful, sed verba oculis commissa fidelibus, must needs afforde better
intelligence: and I doubt not but he had one quality more then is here spoken
of him; for, his improved Eye must needs be very quick in conceiving the
visible sound of speech: and therefore I think, that if he that spoke to him
had spoke loud that the Relator might have heard him, this instructed hearing
Oculist, or Ocular aurist, would have understood the speakers mind by his Eye,
sooner then the Relator could possibly have done with his Ears.

Observation. XVIII.
IN that the knowledge he had of what men said, sprung from his observing the
motions they made with their mouths. This shows he was instructed in the Art
of Labiall Augurie, which we have proved to be a rational and useful Art,
well grounded upon the principles of Humane Philosophy; and not only full of
notions to delight speculation, but useful and possible to be put in practice.
Hence there was a necessity (as it follows in the History) that if he would
concurrently converse with any, there was light required as the medium; for if
he were in the dark, the objects of his attentive Eye were strait lost: or if
he turned away his face out of his sight that spoke unto him, for then he was
rendered incapable of what was said: so that this Art enabled him not to
tenebrize, or to perform any audible Act in the night, and Nocturnall
Lucubrations of speech, or candle light discourse, might perchance prove
deceitful unto him: for it being a manifest, and apparent motion, which guided
him to the knowledge of their words, the time proper for his observation, must
be the all-revealing day: and it must be day in his body too, for if he should
be stricken blind, goodnight to all the Notions of this Art. A double care
therefore had this Lord need have of preserving his sight, since that lost, he
would loose two senses in one; Natural sight, and an acquired hearing, which
would prove a double damage unto him. We suppose also that some difficulties
may encounter him in perceiving the natural affections of the voice, and
distinguishing the literal motions of their mouths, who have any impediment in
their speech, by reason of the ill conformation, or constitution of the
instruments of speech, by Nature, or any unhappy accident: for as in such case
the judgment of the Ear will be uncertain: so likewise would the hearing Eye
of this Lord, be somewhat put to it, to judge upon so imperfect an evidence: as
for example, if he were to converse with one borne with his upper lip too
short, that it suffices not afterward to cover his upper teeth, not without
some deformity of aspect, as, Schenckius knew an honest Matron of Patrician
stock, was, whom he had long conversed with, in the Hague, who, although
conscious of the defect, when she spoke with any by a wonderful industry, and
civility which she used to those that stood, or sat by her, by extending down
her lip, and drawing it over her teeth, she covered that deformity of Nature,
with so great and fair an Art, that unless one had studiously observed her,
it was not perceived: yet no question it caused some alteration in the forming
of her words, and consequently might somewhat impede our Artist in discerning
the exact sense of the moving of her lips. They also who are borne with hair
lips, that is not whole, but rather cloven, must necessarily falter in speech,
and consequently exhibit but an uncertain motion of their lips, from which,
nothing can be exactly collected to infer the verbal meaning of the
endeavored motions of the lips. Trincavellus affirms. He had seen some with
such lips, who faultred not a little in their speech. Great Blabber-lips may
cause a little alteration to puzzle the ocular construction, that is to be made
upon the lip-labor of the speaker. They also who are troubled with the disease
Diarrhaea, or a Humerall lask of the belly, and with a Catarrh which makes them
wrest and writh their lips in speaking, their lips will not precisely answer
the Rules of this observation. The like would a Plaice-mouth in the Cynick
Spasme. Old men in the defect of their Teeth, which are one of the destinated
implements of speech, their breath flows not out repercussed, wherefore it
sounds the less; therefore to remedy this evil, they press their lips
together inward, as it were to shut up the void spaces of their Teeth, which
must necessarily cause some alteration from the natural and perfect garb of
verbal motion And those who are edentuli by age, so those Nations who pay
little homage to the Gods Dentilla, as they of Gagas, and the subjects of
Huacchacaviac in India, who have a Tooth-Right of beating out their fore teeth,
were likely to put our Artist to it in discerning the pure naturality of their
pronounced Letters. Those Nations that have any notable defect or excess in
the extant parts of their mouth, must needs prefer exceptions against the
general Rules of this Art.

They of Gambra not far from Jay, are deformed, their neather-lip, hanging
down toward the breast, and is apt to putrify, of which deformity being
conscious they trade with their Neighbors the Arabicks, without sight or
conference, leaving their commodities in a certain place, for which they have
gold in exchange: their upper lip little as ours.

They report of Nations in the Inland part of the East that want their
upper-lip. They in the Isle called Dodyn in the Indies, and the adjacent Isles
(if we will believe Sir John Mandevil, who has not so much interest in the
whetstone as some imagine) have flat mouths without lips. And others, their
lips so great, about their mouth that when they sleep in the sun, they cover
all their faces with them. And Dwarfes that have no mouth, but a round little
hole, have no tongue, nor speak, but they blow and whistle, and so make signs
one unto another. But above al, the language of Jamuli Island if it be as true,
as strange, which is reported of them, would cause a great impediment and
distraction in the perceiving the Litterall and Verbal meaning of their
minds, whose Tongues have somewhat peculiar by Nature or Art; for they have a
cloven Tongue which is divided in the bottom; so that it seems double from
the Root, so they use diverse speeches, and do not only speak with the voice
of men, but imitate the singing of Birds: But that indeed which seems most no
able, and indeed would puzle our Artist most, They speak at one time
perfectly to two men, both answering and discoursing, for with one part of
their Tongue they speak to one, and with the other to another: But these
Historical exceptions or likely impediments of this Art, I have admitted and
inserted rather for their strangeness then any weight of argument they have
against the certainety of our Art, since all men know exceptio firmat Regulam.

To conclude these observations, the Priest who by his Art wrought this Miracle
on this Spanish Lord, as is reported, was since in the service of the Prince of
Carignan, where he continued with some that have need of his pains, the same
employment as he did with the Constable of Castiles brother, who as I hear is
yet alive, as his Tutor also is; the steps whereby he proceeded in teaching
friendship, and three hundred Ryals may ere long inform me in, which produced
in ou^ intended Academy, will soon abolish all apprehensions of impossibility
in this matter, by virtue of the countenance and justification of the event.

The first principles indeed are but simple and naked; but it is a wonderful
thing to consider the great distance between them, and the strange readiness
and vast extent of speech resulting in process of time out of them: Whereof it
is enough for us to find a ground for the possibility of the operation, and
then the perfecting of it and reducing of it to such a height, as at the first
might seem impossible and incredible, we may leave to the energeticall power
of Art. He that learneth to read, write, or to play on the Lute, is in the
beginning ready to lose heart at every step, when he considers with what
difficulty and flownes he joyneth the Letters, spelleth syllables, forms
Characters, fitteth and breaks his Fingers (as though they were upon the
Rack) to stop the right frets, and to touch the right strings; And yet you see
how strange a Dexterity is gained in all these by industry and practice; and a
readiness beyond what we could imagine possible, if we saw not daily the
effects.

Since therefore we have arrived to decypher the Characters of Natures
Alphabet, and can spellingly read the first syllables of it, we need not
doubt that Art with excellent cunning can dispose all circumstances so ap^ly,
as to speak readily a complete Language rising from those Elements; and that
should have as large an extent in practice and expression, beyond those first
principles, which we like children only lispe out, as the vast discourses of
wisest and most learned men are beyond the spellings of infants: and yet those
discourses spring from the same root, as the others spellings do, and are but a
raising them to a greater height: as the admired Music of the best player of
a Lute or Harp that ever was, is derived from the harsh twangs of course
bowe-strings, which are composed together and refined, till at length they
arrive to that wonderful perfection And so without scruple, we may in this
business conclude, that the admirable and almost miraculous effect we hear of
in this Relation, are but the elevating to a wonderful height, those very
actions and motions which we have here produced as causes and principles of
them.

FINIS.

