A DISCOURSE OF THE Building, Nature, Excellency, and Government Of the HOUSE
of GOD. WITH Counsels and Directions To the Inhabitants thereof.

By JOHN BVNYAN of Bedford.

Psalm. 26.8. Lord, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, the place where
thine Honor dwells. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by George Larkin, at
the Two Swans without Bishopsgate, 1688.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Building, Nature, Excellency, and Government. Of the HOUSE
of GOD.
I. By whom this HOUSE is Built.
THe Builder's God, Materials his Elect;
His Son's the Rock, on which it is Erect;
The Scripture is his Rule, Plummet or Line,
Which gives proportion to this House divine;
^is Working-Tools his Ordinances are,
By them he does his Stones and Timber square,
Affections knit in Love, the Couplings are;
^ood Doctrine like to Mortar does cement
The whole together, Schism to prevent:
His Compass, his Decree; his Hand's the Spirit
By which he Frames (what he means to inherit)
A Holy Temple, which shall far excel
That very place, where now the Angels dwell. 1 Cor. 3.9. Isa. 8.14. Romans
16.25. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 16. Colos. 2*2.19. Levit. 14.42. Acts ^3.48. Ephesians
2.19, 20, 21, 22.

Call this a Temple or a House of Prayer,
A Palace, Oracle, or Spouse most fair,
Or what you will: God's Love is here displayed,
And here his Treasure safely up is laid;
For his own Darling none can find a place,
Where he, as here, is wont to show his Face. Mat. 21.13. Psalm 27 4.

What tho some slight it, it a Cottage call,
Give't the reproachful name of Beggars-Hall;
Yea, what tho to some it an Eyesore is,
What tho they count it base, and at it hiss,
Call it an Almshouse, Builded for the Poor;
Yet Kings of Old have begged at the door.
II. Of the Beauty of the Church.
LO her Foundations laid with Saphirs are;
Her goodly Windows made of Agats fair,
Her Gates are Carbuncles, or Pearls; nor one
Of all her borders but's a precious stone,
None Common nor of the baser sort are here,
Nor rough, but squared and polisht every where:
Her Beams are Caedars, Firr her Rafters be,
Her Tarrases are of the Algum-Tree;
The Thorn, or Crab-Tree, here are not of use;
Who thinks them here Utensils, puts abuse
Upon the place, yea, on the Builder too;
Would they be thus controlled in what they do? Isa. 54.11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 11.

With Carved-work of Lilly, and Palm Tree,
With Cherubims and Chains adorned be
The Doors, the Walls, and Pillars of this Place,
Forbidden Beasts here must not show their face.
With Grace like Gold, as with fine Painting, he
Will have this House within enriched be;
Fig Leaves nor Rags, must here keep out no cold,
This Builder covers all with Cloth of Gold,
Of Needle Work, pricked more then once or twice
(The oftener pricked, still of the higher price)
Wrought by his Son, put on her by his merit,
Applied by Faith, revealed by the Spirit. 1 King 6.35. Psalm 45.13, 14: Romans
1.17.

III. Of the Conveniences of this House.
WIthin these Walls the Builder did devise
That there the Householders might Sacrifice;
Here is an Altar, and a Laver too,
And Priests abundance, Temple-Work to do;
Nor want they Living Offerings nor yet Fire,
Nor holy Garments; what Divine Desire
Commands, it has bestowed on this place;
Here be the Censers, here is the Throne of Grace;
None of the Householders need go else where,
To Offer Incense, or Good-News to hear. Heb. 13.10, 15. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 2.9.

A Throne for Judgment he did here Erect,
Virtue to cherish, Folly to detect;
Statutes and Laws, unto this House he gave,
To teach who to Condemn, and who to Save:
By things thus wholesome taught is every Brother
To fear his God, and to love one another. 1 Cor. 6.4. Rev. 16.17.

And now for Pleasure, Solace, Recreation,
Here Is such as helps forward Man's Salvation.
Equal to these none can be found else where,
All else turn to Profuseness, Sin and Care.
So situate it is, so roomthy fair,
So Warm, so Blessed, with such wholesome Air;
That it is enticing: who so wishes well
To his Souls health, should covet here to dwell,
Here Is necessaries, and what will delight,
The godly Ear, the Palate with the Sight,
Of each degree and Sex; here is every thing
To please a Beggar, and delight a King.
Chambers and Galleries, he did invent,
Both for a Prospect and a Retirement.
For such as unto Music do incline,
Here are both Harps and Psalteries divine;
Her Cellars and Banqueting House have been
In former days, a Palace for a Queen;
O House what Title to thee can be given,
So fit as that, which Men do give to Heaven! Cant. 1.4. Chap. 7.5. 2 Chronicles.
9.11. Cant. 2.4.

IV. Of the Strength and Defense of this House.
THis House you may be sure will always stand
She Is builded on a Rock, not on the Sand;
Storms, Rain, yea Floods have often upon her beat;
Yet stands She, here is a proof She is no cheat;
^ear not therefore in her for to abide,
She keeps her ground, come Weather, Wind or Tide:
Her Cornerstone has many times been tried,
But never could the Scorn, or Rage, or Pride,
Of all her Foes, by what force they could make,
Destroy her Battlements, or Groundwork shake.
Here Is God the Lord encamping round about
His dwelling place; nor ought we once to doubt
But that he as a Watchman succor will
Those that do dwell upon his Holy Hill.
A Wall of Fire about her I will be
And Glory in the midst of her, and she
Shall be the place where I my name record;
Here I will come and bless you, says the Lord. Mat. 16.18. Luke 6.48. Isa.
28.16. Zech. 2.5. Chap. 9.8. Exodus 20.24.

The holy Watchers at her Gates do stand,
With their destroying Weapons in their hand,
Those to defend that in this House do dwell
From all her Enemies in Earth and Hell;
Safety! Where is it, If it is not here?
God dwells in her, does for her appear,
To help her early, and her Foes confound,
And unto her will make his Grace abound;
Safety is here, and also that advance,
Will make a Beggar sing, a Cripple dance. Rev. 21.12. Psalm 46.1.5. Psalm
48.3. Psalm 113*7.

V. The Delicateness of the Situation of this House.
AS her Foundation and her Beauty's much;
Conveniences, and her Defenses such
As none can parallel, so does the Field
About her, richest, rarest Dainties yi^ld.
Moriah where Isaac was Offered,
Where David from his Sin was ransomed;
Where Solomon the Temple did erect,
Compared with this, is worthy no respect;
Under the very Threshold of this place
Arise those goodly springs of lasting grace,
Whose Crystal Streams minister Life to those
That here of Love to her, make their repose;
Sweet is her Air, (as one may well infer,)
Cause it is the breathings of the Comforter.
The Pomgranates at all her gates do grow,
Mandrakes and Vines, with other dainties mo;
Her Gardens yield the Chief, the richest Spice,
Surpassing them of Adam's Paradise:
Here be sweet Ointments and the best of Gums;
Here runs the Milk, here drops the Honey-Combs.
Here are Perfumes most pleasant to the sense,
Here grows the goodly Trees of Frankincense;
Her Arbors, Walks, Fountains and pleasant Springs,
Delightful formerly have been to Kings. Ezekiel. 47.1. Solom. 1.7.12.13. Song
4.12.13.14.15.16.

Such Mountains round about this House do stand
As one from thence may see the Holy Land;
Her Fields are fertile, do abound with Corn;
The Lillies fair, her Valleys do adorn.
The Birds that do come hither every spring,
For Birds, they are the very best that Sing.
Her Friends, her Neighbors too, do call he^ blest^
Angels do here go by, turn in and rest.
The road to Paradise lies by her Gate,
Here Pilgrims do themselves accommodate
With Bed and Board, and do such Stories tell
As do for Truth and Profit, all excel.
Nor does the Porter here say any nay,
That hither would turn in; that here would stay
This House is Rent-free; here the man may dwel^
That Loves his Landlord, Rules his Passions well. Psalm 125.2. Song 2.1. Verse.
11, 12. Psalm 48.2. Heb. 13.2. Genesis 28.17.

VI. The way of Receiving those that would here Inhabit.
ANd would thou know the customs of this place,
How Men are here admitted to this Grace;
And consequently whether thou may be
Made one of this most blessed Fraternity?
Come hither then, unto me lend an ear;
And what is doubtful, to thee I will clear.
1. This place, as Mercies Arms, stands open to those
That their own happiness used to oppose;
Those under Hedges, Highway Men, or they
That would not God nor yet good Men Obey;
Those that among the bushe^ ^^^'d to brouze,
Or under Hedges used themselves to louze.
The vilest men, of Sinners who are chief,
A Fornicator, Liar, or a Thief,
May turn in hither, here take up and dwell
With those who ransomed are from Death and Hell Luke 14.23. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.

2. This place, as Hospitals, will entertain,
Those which the lofty of this World disdain:
The Poor, the Lame, the Maimed, Halt and Blind,
The Leprous, and Possessed too, may find
Free welcome here, as also such relief
As ease them will of Trouble, Pain and Grief. Ezekiel. 34.16. Luke 14.21. Mark
16.9.

3. This place, as David's Heart, with free-consent
Opes to the Distressed, and the Discontent;
Who is in Debt, that has not wherewithal
To quit his Scores, may here be free from thrall;
That Man that fears the Bailiff or the Jail,
May find one here that will become his Bail.
4. Art thou bound over to the great Assize,
For harkning to the Devil and his Lies;
Art thou afraid thereat to show thy head,
For fear thou then be sent unto the dead?
Thou may come hither here is room and place
For such as willingly would live by Grace. 1 Samuel 22.2. Luke 7.41, 42. Acts
16.30, 31, 32.

5. This place, as Fathers House, in former Days
Is a Receptacle for Run-a-ways;
He that like to the Ox backsliden is,
Forfeited has for Sin his share of bliss;
May yet come hither, here is room and rest;
Of old such have come hither and been blessed.
Had this been false, O woe had been to David!
Nor Peter, had nor Magdalen been saved,
Nor Jonah, nor Mannasses, nor the rest;
No Run-a-way from God, could a been blessed
With kind reception at his hands; Return,
Would here a come to late, if naught but burn
Had been the lot of the Blacksliding man:
But we are told there is no rebellion can
Prevent, or hinder him from being saved,
That Mercy heartily of God has craved;
She that went from her God to play the Whore,
Returning may be as she was before;
He that refuses to his God to turn,
That is resolved in Hellfire to burn;
If he bethinks himself and turns again,
May find them here that will him entertain. Luke 15. 1 Samuel 12 and 13 Chapters
Luke 22.61. Jonah 1. 2 Chronicles. 33. Jer. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, Romans 10.21.

6. But bring thou with thee a Certificate,
To show thou see thy self most desolate;
Writ by the Master, with Repentance sealed,
To show also that here thou would be healed,
By those fair leaves of that most blessed Tree,
By which alone poor Sinners healed be;
And that thou do abhor thee for thy ways,
And would in Holiness spend all thy days;
And here be entertained; or thou will find
To entertain thee here are none inclined. Acts 9.26, 27. Revel. 21.27. Chap.
22.14, 15.

VII. Of the Governors of this House.
THe Governors that here in Office are,
Such be as Service do with Love and Care;
Not Swerving from the Rule, nor yet intrude
Upon each others Work, nor are they rude
In managing their own: But to their trust
They labor to be Honest, Faithful, Just.
1. The Chief is he, who is the Lord of all,
The Savior; some him Physician call.
He Is clothed in shining raiment to the ground,
A Golden Girdle does begirt him round;
His Head and Hairs are white as any Snow,
His Eyes are like a flame of Fire also;
His Feet are like fine Brass as if they burned
Within a Furnace, or to Fire was turned;
His Voice does like to many Waters sound,
In his Right Hand, Seven glittering Stars are found,
Out of his Mouth goes a Two Edged Sword,
Sharper then any ( it is his holy Word)
And for his Countenance, it is as the Sun
Which shines in its strenghth, till day is done.
His name is called Holy, The Word of God;
The Wine Press of his Fathers wrath he trod;
At all the power of Sin he does deride,
The Keys of Hell and Death hang at his side.
This is our Governor, this is the chief,
From this Physician comes our Souls relief.
He is the Tree of Life and hidden Manna;
It Is he to whom the Children sing Hosannae.
The whice stone he does give with a new name,
In Heaven and Earth he is of worthy fame.
This man has Death destroyed, and slain the Devil,
And does secure all his from damning evil;
He is the Prince of Life, the Prince of Peace;
He does us from the bonds of Death release.
His Work is properly his own; nor may,
In what he does, another say him nay. Heb. 3.6. Rev. 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
Rev. 19.13. Chap. 1.18.

It Is he who pays our Hospitalian scores,
He Is here to search, supple, and bind up Sores;
He is our Plaister-maker, he applies
Them to our Wounds, He wipes our wetted Eyes.
It Is he that gives us cups of Consolation,
It Is he renews the hopes of our Salvation.
He Will take our parts, often times to us unknown,
And make as if our failings were his own;
He Will plead with God, his Name and doings too,
Anp save us will, from those would us undo. Luke 10.33.34.35. Mat. 8 17. Luke
22.31.32.

His Name is as an Ointment poured forth;
It Is sweet from East to West, from South to North.
He Is White and Ruddy; yea of all the chief;
His golden Head is rich beyond belief.
His Eyes are like the Doves which Waters wet,
Well washed with Milk, and also fitly set,
His Cheeks as beds of Spices, and sweet flowers
He used to water with those crystal showers,
Which often flowed from his cloudy Eyes
Better by far then what comes from the Skies.
His Lips like Lilies, drop sweet-smelling-Mirrh,
Scenting as do those of the Comforter.
His Hands are as Gold Rings set with the Beryls;
By them we are delivered out of Perils;
His Legs like Marble, stand in Boots of Gold,
His Countenance is ex'lent to behold.
His Mouth it is of all a Mouth most sweet,
O Kiss me then, Lord, every time we meet!
Thy sugard Lips, Lord, let them sweeten mine,
With the most blessed scent of things divine. Song. 1.1, 2, 3. Chap 5.10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

2. This is one Governor; and next in place,
One called the Ghost, in Honor and in Grace
No whit inferior to Him; and He
Will also in this House our helper be.
He *it was who did at first brood the Creation;
And he is the cause of Man's Regeneration:
It Is he by whom the Heavens were garnished,
With all their host they then abroad did spread
(Like Spangles, Pearls, Diamonds or richest Gems)
Far Richer then the fairest Diadems.
'Twas he who with his Cloven Tongues of fire
Made all those wise ones of the World admire,
Who heard his Breathing in unlearned men,
O Blessed Ruler! now the same as then!
His work our mind is to illuminate
With things divine, and to accommodate
Us with those Graces, which will us adorn,
And make us look like men indeed Newborn.
For our Inheritance he makes us meet;
He makes us also in this World discreet.
Prudent and Wise in what we take in hand,
To do and suffer at our Lords command.
It Is he that leads us to the Tomb and Cross,
When Jesus Crucified and Buried was;
He shows us also, that he did revive,
And does assure us that he is alive;
And does improve the merit of his Blood,
At Graces Throne, for our Eternal Good.
Dark Riddles he does here to us unfold,
Yea makes us things Invisible behold.
He sheds abroad God's Love in every Heart,
Where he does dwell, yea to them does impart
Such tokens of a future Happiness,
That Is past the Tongue of Angels to express.
It Is he which helps us, that to perform,
Whether Becalmed, or whether in a Storm,
Which God commands: without him we do naught.
That Is Good, either in Deed, or Word, or Thought. Genesis 1.1, 2, 3. Job 26.13.
Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 1.18, 19, 20. Mark 13.11. John 16.13. 1 Cor. 14.2.
Romans 5.5. Chap. 8.26, 27.2 Cor. 3.4.

It Is he that does with Jewels us bedeck,
It Is he puts chains of Gold about our Neck;
It Is he that does us with fine Linen gird,
That makes us often times live as a Bird.
That cures us of all our doubts and fears,
Puts Bracelets on our Hands, Rings on our Ears;
He Sanctifies our Persons, he perfumes
Our Spirits also, he our Lust consumes;
Our Stinking Breath he sweetens, so that we
To God and all good Men sweet-scented be;
He sets Gods mark upon us, and does seal
Us unto Life, and Life to us reveal. Ezekiel. 16.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Romans 15.13.
1 Cor. 6.11. Isa. 4.4. Colos. 4.6.

3. Another sort of Officers; here are,
But such as must not with these first compare;
They Are Underofficers, but serviceable,
Not only here to Rule, but wait at Table.
Those clothed are with Linen, fine and white,
They glitter as the Stars of darksome Night.
They have Saint Peter's Keys, and Aarons Rod;
They open and shut, they bind and loose for God.
The chief of these are Watchmen, they have power
To mount on high and to ascend the Tower
Of this brave Fabric, and from thence to see
Who keeps their ground, and who the straglers be.
These have their Trumpet, when they do it sound
The Mountains Echo, yea it shakes the ground.
With it they also sound out an Alarm,
When they perceive the least mischief or harm
Is coming, so they do this House secure
There from, or else prepare it to endure
Most manfully the Cross, and so attain
The Crown which for the Victor does remain. Revel. 1.20. Mat. 16.19. Ezekiel.
33.3, 4, 5, 6.

This Officer is called a Steward too,
'Cause with his Masters Cash he has to do,
And has Authority it to disburst
To those that want, or for that Treasure thirst.
The Distributor of the word of Grace
He is, and at his Mouth, when he is in place,
They seek the Law, he also bids them do it;
He shows them Sin, and learns them to eschew it*
By this example too he shows them how
To keep their Garments clean, their knees to bow^
Before the King, when he comes into place;
And when they do him supplicate for Grace. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.10. Luke
12.42. Tit. 1.7

Another Badge this Officer does wear,
Is that of Overseer; because the care
Of the Whole House is with him, he is to see
They nothing want, nor yet abused be
^y false Intruders, Doctrines, or (perchance)
^y the misplacing of an Ordinance.
^hese also are to see they wander not
from Place or Duty, least they get a blot
^o their Profession, or bring some Disease,
upon the whole, or get a trick to lease,
Or Lie unto their God, by doing what
^y Sacred Statutes he commanded not. Acts 20.28.

Call them your Cooks, they are skilled in dressing Food,
To nourish Weak, and Strong, and cleanse the Blood:
They Have Milk for Babes, strong Meat for Men of Age;
Food fit for who are Simple, who are Sage.
When the great Pot goes on, as often it does,
They put not Coloquintida in Broth,
As do those Younglings, Fondlings of their skill,
Who make not what is so apt to cure as kill. Luke 12.42. 2 King 4.38, 39, 40.

They are your Sub-Physicians, and know
What sickness you are incident unto;
Let them but feel your Pulse, and they will tell
You quickly whether you are Sick or Well.
Have you the Staggers? They can help you there
Or if the Falling Sickness, or do fear
A Lethergy, a Fever, or the Gout,
God blessing of their skill, you need not doub^
A cure, for long Experience has made
These Officers the Masters of their Trade.
Their Physic works by Purge and Vomit too,
Fear not, nor full nor fasting but it will do,
Have but a care and see you catch no Cold,
And with their Physic then you may be bold. Mat. 10.8. Heb. 9.14. 2 Pet. 2.22.

You may them Prophets call, for they can tel^
Of things to come, yea, here they do excel.
They Prophecy of Man's future event,
Whether to Weal or Woe his mind is bent,
Yea, so expert are they in their Predictions,
Their Arguments so full are of Convictions,
That none who hear them, but are forced (...) say*
Woe unto them who wander from the way
Art bound for Hell against all wind and weather
Or art thou one a going backward thither?
Or do thou wink because thou would not see
Or do thou sideling go, and would not be
Suspected? Yet these Prophets can the tell,
Which way thou art a going down to Hell.
For him that would Eternal Life attain,
Yet will not part with all, that Life to gain,
But keeps some thing close, he should forsake,
Or slips the time, in which he should awake;
Or says he lets go all, yet keeps some
Of what will make him lose the world to come.
These Prophets can tell such a man his state,
And what at last will surely be his fate.
If thou art one who tradeth in both ways,
God's now, the Devil's then; or if delays
Thou make of coming to thy God for Life;
Or if thy Light, and Lusts are at a strife
About who should be master of thy Soul,
And love one, the other do control;
These Prophets tell thee can, which way thou bendest,
On which thou frown'st, to which a hand thou lendest.
Art one of those whose fears do go beyond
Their faith? when thou should hope, do thou dispond?
Do keep thine Eye upon what thou have done,
And yet have License to look on the Sun?
Do thou so covet more, as not to be
Affected with the Grace bestowed on thee?
Art like to him, that needs must step a Mile
At every stride, or think it not worth while
To follow Christ? These Prophets they can tell
To cure this thy Disease, and make thee well. Acts 15.32. 1 Cor. 14.31. Acts
8.20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 3.6. Tit. 1.16. Luke 22.32. Song. 1.4.

This Officer is also called a Guide,
Nor should the People but keep by his side;
Or tread his Steps in all the paths they walk,
By his Example they should Do and Talk.
He is to be to them instead of Eyes,
He must before them go in any wise;
And he must lead them by the Waterside,
This is the work of this our Faithful Guide.
Since Snares and Traps, and Grins are for us set
Since here is a Hole, and there is spread a Net*
O let no body at my Muse deride,
No man can Travel here without a Guide.
Here Is Tempting Apples, here are Baited Hooks
With Turning, Twisting, Cramping, Tangling Crooks
Close by the way; woe then to them betide,
That dares to venture here without a Guide.
Here haunt the Fairies with their chanting Voices
Fiends like to Angels, to bewitch our choices;
Baits for the Flesh lie here on every side:
Who dares set here one foot without a Guide?
Master Delusion dwells by our walks,
Who with Confusion, Sings and Prays and talks
He says the straight Path's his, and ours th^^ wide
What then can we do here without a Guide?
Let God then give our Leaders always Eyes
Yea let him make them Holy, Bold, and Wise
And help us fast by them for to abide,
And suffer not the Blind to be our Guide. Luke 1.79. Psalm. 78.72. Mat. 23.16,
24.

4. Here are of Rulers, yet another sort,
Such as direct our manners to comport
With our Professed Faith, that we to view,
May let Beholders know that we are new.
These are our Conversations to inspect,
And us in our employments to direct,
That we in Faith and Love do every thing,
That reaches from the Peasant to the King.
That there may be no scandal in our ways,
Nor yet in our Profession all our days.
These should after our Busybodies look,
Tale bearers also they have undertook
To keep in order, also they must see
None that can work among us Idle be,
Jarrs Disords, Frauds, with Grievances and wrongs,
These they are to regulate; to them belongs
The Judgment of all matters of this kind,
And happy is the House thus Disciplined. Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12, 28. 1 Timothy
5.17. 1 These. 5.12, 13.14. 1 Cor 6.4.

5. Another sort of Officers we have
Deacons we call them, 'cause their work's to save
And distribute those Crumbs of Charity
Unto the Poor, for their Subsistency,
That contributed is for their relief,
Which of their business is indeed the chief.
These must be Grave, not of a double Tongue,
Not given to Wine, not apt to do a Wrong Jus^
Unto the Poor, through love to Lucre.
In this their Office, Faithful to their Trust
The Wife must answer here as Face does Face;
The Husband, fitness to his work and place,
That ground of Scandal or of Jealousy
Obstructs not proof that he most zealously
Performs his Office well, for then shall he
Be bold in Faith, and get a good degree
Of Credit with the Church; yea what is more
He shall possess the Blessings of the Poor.
His Wisdom teach him will, to find out wh^
Is poor of Idleness, and who comes to
A low Estate by Sickness, Age, or 'cause
The want of Limbs, or Sight, or work it was,
That brought them to it; or such destiny
As sometimes makes low, who once were high*
They must remember too that some there ar^
Who Halt before they are Lame, while others car^
Not to make known their wants, they will rather dye*
Then charge the Churches with their Poverty.
This done, they must bestow as they see cause*
Making the Word, the Rule; and Want the Law*
By which they Act, and then they need not paus^
The Table of the Lord he also must
Provide for, it is his Duty and his Trust.
The Teacher too should have his Table spread
By him, thus should his House be clad and fed;
Thus he serves Tables with the Churches stock,
And so becomes a blessing to the flock. Acts 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Timothy 3.8.
Acts 6.1; ^, 3.

6. I read of Widows also that should be
Employed here for further decency;
I dare not say they are in Office, tho
A Service here they are appointed to;
They must be very Aged, Trusty, Meek,
Such who have done much good, that do not seek
Themselves; they must be Humble, Pitiful,
Or they will make their Service void and null.
These are to Teach the Younger Women what
Is proper to their Sex and State, what not;
To be discreet, keepers at Home, and Chaste;
To love their Husbands, to be Good, shame-Fac'd;
Children to bear, to Love them, and to fly
What to the Gospel would be Infamy.
I think these to the Sick should look also,
A Work unfit for younger Ones to do.
Wherefore he says, The younger Ones refuse;
Perhaps because their weakness would abuse
Them, and subject them unto great disgrace,
When such a one as Amnon is in place.
And since the good Old Woman this must do
It Is fit she should be Fed and Clothed too,
Out of the Deacons Purse, let it so be;
And let this be her Service constantly. 1 Timothy 5.9. Tit. 2.3.4.5. 1 Timothy 5.11.
2 Samuel 13.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5.16.

IX. The Order and manner of the Government here.
AS I have showed you who in Office are,
So I will tell you how and with what care
Those here entrusted with the Government,
Keep to the Statutes made to that intent.
By Rules Divine this House is Governed;
Not Sanguinary ones, nor taught nor fed
By Humane Precepts: for the Scripture says,
The Word's our ghostly Food; Food for our Faith.
Nor are all forced to the same degree
In things Divine, tho all exhorted be
To the most absolute proficiency
That Law or Duty can to them discry. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Luke 10.54, 55, 56.
Colos. 2.20, 21, 22. Philip. 3.17.

Alas here is Children, here are great with Young;
Here are the Sick and Weak, as well as Strong.
Here are the Cedar, Shrub, and bruised Reed;
Yea, here are such who wounded are, and bleed.
As here are some who in their Grammar be,
So here are others in their A B C.
Some apt to Teach, and others hard to Learn;
Some far off, others can scarce discern
That which is set before them in the Glass;
Others forgetful are, and so let pass,
Or slip out of their mind what they did hear
But now, 1 John 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 3.18. Heb. 5.12, 13.
so great our differences appear
Wherefore our Jacobs must have special care
They drive their Flocks, but as their Flocks can bare;
For if they be over driven, presently
They will be Sick, or cast their Young, or dye.
The Laws therefore are more and less of force,
According as they bring us to the Source,
Or Head, or Fountain; or are more remote
To what at first we should our selves devote.
Be we then wise in handling of the Laws,
Not making a confused noise like Daws
In Chambers, yea let us seek to excel,
To each man's profit; this is ruling well.
With Fundamentals then let us begin,
For they strike at the very root of Sin:
So the Foundation being strongly laid,
Let us go on, as the wise Builder said.
For I don't mean, we should at all disdain
Those that are less, we always should maintain
That due respect to either which is meet;
This is the way to fit at Jesus Feet. Isa. 40.11. Genesis 33 13. 1 Cor. 14.12.
26. Heb. 6.1, 2, 3. Mat. 28.19, 20.

Repent I must, or I am cast away;
Believe I must; or nothing I Obey:
Love God I must, or nothing I can do,
That Is worth so much as loosing of my Shoo^
If I do not bear after Christ, my Cross;
If Love to Holiness is at a loss;
If I my Lusts seek not to mortify;
If to my self, my Flesh, I do not dye;
What Law, should I observ't, can do me good?
In little Duties Life has never stood. Luke 13.1.2, 3. Mar. 16.16. Luke 14.
27 Heb. 12.14.

One Reads, he Prays, he Catechises too;
But does he nothing else, what does he do?
I Read to know my Duty, I do pray
To God to help me do it day by day;
If this be not my end in what I do,
I am a Sot, an Hypocrite also.
I am Baptized, what then? unless I dye
To Sin, I cover Folly with a Lie.
At the Lords Table, I do eat; what tho?
There some have eat their own Damnation too.
I will suppose, I Hear, I Sing, I Pray,
And that I am Baptized without delay,
I will suppose I do much knowledge get,
And will also suppose that I am fit
To be a Preacher, yet naught profits me
If to the first, poor I a stranger be:
They are more weighty therefore; in compare,
These unto them, but Mint and Annis are. John. 5.39. Luke 20.47. Mat. 6.5.
Acts 8.13.23. 1 Cor. 11.29. Chap. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 23.23

Not that I would the least of Duty slight,
Because the least Command of Divine Right
Requires that I my self subject thereto,
Wilful Resisters do them selves undo.
But let us keep order, let the first be first;
Repent, Believe and Love; and then, I trust
I have that Right which is Divine, to all
That is enjoined, be they great or small.
Only I must as cautionary speak,
In one word more, a little to the Weak;
Thou must not suffer men so to enclose
Thee in their Judgments, as to discompose
Thee in that Faith and Peace thou have with him;
This would be like the losing of a Limb;
Or like to him who thinks he does not well,
Unless he lose the Kernel for the Shell.
Thou art no Captive, but a Child and Free;
Thou wast not made for Laws, but Laws for thee;
And thou must use them as thy light will bear it
They that say otherwise, do rend and tear it;
More like to wicked Tyrants, who are cruel,
And add unto a little Fire, more Fuel*
But those who are True Shepherds of the Sheep,
To quench such burnings would most gladly Weep.
But I am yet but upon Generals;
Particulars our Legislator calls
For at our Hands, and that in order too
Consummate what we have begun to do.
1. My Brother I must Love, in very deed.
I Am taught of God to do it: let me heed
This Divine Duty, and perform it well,
Who loves his Brother, God in him does dwell;
The argument which on me this imposes,
^mells like to Ointment, or the Sweetest Roses. ^ohn 15.17. 1 These. 4.9. 1
John 4.16. Psalm. 4.33.

shall God Love, shall he keep his Faith to me?
And shall not I? shall I unfaithful be?
Shall God love me a Sinner? and shall I
Not love a Saint? Yea shall my JESUS dye
To reconcile me to my God? and shall
^ hate his Child, nor hear his wants that call
For my little Assisting of him? sie
On such a spirit, on such cruelty;
Fie on the thought that would me alienate,
Or tempt me my worst Enemy to hate. John 15.17. 1 These. 4.9. 1 John 4.16. ^
Psalm. 133. 1 John 4.20.21. Mat. 5.43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.

2. He that dwells here, must also be a sharer
In others griefs; must be a burden-bearer
Among his Brethren, or he cannot do
That which the blessed Gospel calls him to.
In order hereunto, Humility
Must be put on (it is our Livery)
We must be clothed with it, if we will
The Law Obey, our Masters mind fulfill.
If this be so, then what should they do here,
Who in their Antic pranks of Pride appear.
Let lofty Men among you bear no sway,
The Lord beholds the Proud Man far away.
It is not fit that he inhabits there,
Where humbleness of mind should have the chair.
Can Pride be where a Soul for Mercy craves?
Shall Pride be found among Redeemed Slaves?
Shall he who Mercy from the Gallows brought,
Look High or Strut, or entertain a thought
That tends to tempt him to forget that fate,
To which for Sin he destined was of late,
And could not then at all delivered be,
But by another Death and Misery?
Pride is the unbecoming'st thing of all:
Besides, it is the fore runner of a fall.
He that is Proud, soon in the dirt will lie,
But Honor follows Humility.
Let each then count his Brother as his bettter,
Let each esteem himself another Debtor,
Christ bids us learn of him humble to be,
Profession's Beauty is Humility. Romans 12.15. Gal. 6.2. Pet. 5.5. Psalm. 138.6.
Luke 18 13, Isa 45.14. Isa 53.5. Prove. 16.18. Mat. 11.29.

3. Forgive is here another Statute Law;
To be revenged, is not worth a Straw;
He that forgives shall also be forgiven,
Who does not so, must lose his part in Heaven;
^or must thou weary of this Duty be,
Cause God's not weary of Forgiving thee. Ephesians. 4 32. Mat. 18.34, 35. Chap.
6.15. Chap. 18.22.

Thou live by Forgiveness, should a stop
Be put thereto one moment, thou would drop
unto the Mouth of Hell. Then let this move
Thee thy dear Brother to forgive in Love. Ephesians. 4.32. Mat. 18.34, 35. Chap.
6.15. Chap. 18.

And we are bid in our forgivenesses
To do as God does in forgiving his.
If any has a quarrel against any,
(As quarrels we have often against a many)
Why then, as God, for Christ's sake pardons you,
For Christ's sake, pardon thou thy Brother too.
We say, What freely comes, does freely go;
Then let all our forgivenesses be so.
^'m sure God heartily forgiveth thee,
My loving Brother, prithee forgive me;
But then in thy forgiveness be upright;
Do It with thy Heart, or you are an Hypocrite. Mat. 18.32, 33. 2 Cor. 2.10.
Jer. 32.41. Matt. 18.35.

4. As we forgive, so we must watch and pray
For Enemies we have, that night and day,
Should we not watch, would soon our Grace^ spoile^
Should we not pray, would our poor Souls defile^
Without a watch, resist a Foe who can?
Who prays not, is not like to play the man;
Complain that he is overcome, he may;
But who would win the Field, must Watch and Pray*
Who watches, should know who and who is together
Know we not Friends from Foes, how know we whether*
Of them to Fight, or which to entertain?
Some have instead of Foes, Familiars slain:
Sometimes a Lust will get into the place,
Or Work, or Office, of some worthy grace;
Till it has brought our Souls to great decay.
Unless we diligently Watch and Pray,
Our Pride will our Humility precede;
By the Nose, our Unbelief our Faith will lead.
Self-love will be where Self-denial should;
And Passion heat, what Patience sometime coold:
And thus it will be with us Night and Day
Unless we diligently Watch and Pray. Mat. 26.41. 1 Cor. 16.13. Ephesians. 6.13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Heb. 12.15. Luke 21.34, 35. Heb. 3.12, 13.
Acts 20.30, 31. 1 These. 5.6. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet. 4.7.

Besides what these Domestics do, there are
Abroad such Foes as wait us to ensnare;
Yea, they against us stand in Battle-'ray,
And will us spoil, unless we Watch and Pray.
There is the World with all its Vanities,
There is the Devil with a thousand Lies;
There are False Brethren with their fair Colusions
Also False Doctrines with their strong delusions;
These will us take, yea carry us away,
From what is Good, unless we Watch and Pray.
Long Life to many, is a fearful Snare;
Of Sudden Death we also need beware;
The Smiles and Frowns of men, Temptations be;
And there is a Bait in all we hear or see:
Let them who can to any show a way,
How they should live, that cannot Watch and Pray. Luke 8.14. 1 Pet. 5.8. Acts
20.30, 31.

Nor is it enough to keep all well within,
Nor yet to keep all out that would be Sin,
If entertained; I must my self concern
With my dear Brother, as I do discern
Him tempted, or a wandering from the way;
Else as I should, I do not Watch and Pray.
Pray then and watch, be thou no drowzy sleeper,
Grudge, nor refuse to be thy Brothers keeper.
See thou thy Brothers Graces at an Ebb?
Is his heel taken in the Spiders Web?
Pray for thy Brother, if that will not do,
To him, and warn him of the present Woe
That is upon him, if he shall thee hear,
Thou will a Savior to him appear. Heb. 12.15. Genesis 4.9. 1 These. 5.14. Jam.
5.20.

5. Sincerity, to that we are enjoined;
For I do in our blessed Law-book find,
That Duties, how well done so ever they seem,
With our great God, are but of small esteem,
If not sincerely done; then have a care,
For Hypocrites are hateful every where.
Things we may do, yea, and may let men see
Us do them too, design but honestly;
Vain-gloriously let us not seek for praise,
Vain-glory's nothing worth in Gospel days.
Sincerity seeks not an open place
To do, tho it does all with open face;
It loves no guises, nor disfigurations,
It Is plain, it is simple, hates Equivocations.
Sincerity's that Grace by which we poyse,
And keep our Duties even: nor but toys
Are all we do, if no Sincerity
Attend our works, lift it up never so high.
Sincerity makes Heaven upon us smile,
Lo, here is a man in whom there is no guile!
Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed!
With Duties he sincerely does proceed;
Under the Fig Tree Heaven saw him at Prayer,
There is but few do their Devotions there.
Sincerity! Grace is thereto entailed,
The man that was sincere, God never failed;
One Tear that falls from Sincerity,
Is worth ten thousand from Hypocrisy. Jos. 24.14. Matt. 23. 2 Cor. 1.12. Chap.
2.17. Chap. 8.8. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Phil. 1.10. John. 1.47, 48, 49. Ephesians. 6.24.

6. Meekness is also here imposed by Law,
A Froward Spririt is not worth a straw.
A froward Spirit is a bane to rest,
They find it so, who lodge it in their Breast.
A froward Spirit suits with Self-denial,
With taking up the Cross, and every Trial,
As Cats and Dogs, together by the Ears;
As scornful men do suit with Frumps and Jears.
Meek as a Lamb, mute as a Fish, is brave;
When Anger boyls, and Passions vent do crave.
The meek God will in Paths of Judgment guide,
Good shall the meek eat, and be satisfied;
The Lord will lift the meek to highest Station,
Will Beautify the meek with his Salvation:
The meek are blessed, the Earth they shall inheri^
The meek is better than the proud in Spirit.
Meekness will make you quiet, hardy, stron^
To bear a Burden, and to put up Wrong.
Meekness, tho diverse troubles you are in,
Will bridle Passion, be a curb to Sin.
Thus God sets forth the meek before our eyes
A meek and quiet Spirit God does prize. Job 5.13. Prove. 2.12. Chap. 16.28.
Chap. 1^ 20. Chap. 22. 5. Col. 3.12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Timothy 6.11. Tit. 3.2. Psalm.
25.9. Psa^ 22.26. Psalm. 147.6. Psalm. 149.4. Psalm. 3^ 11. Isa. 29.19. 1 Pet. 3.4.

7. Temperance also is on this House impose^
And whosoever has it not, is greatly nosed
By standers by, for greedy lustful men;
Nor can all we can say, excuse us; when
Intemp'rance any where to them shall be
Apparent; tho we other Vices flee.
Temperance, the Mother is, of Moderation,
The Beauty also of our Conversation.
Temperance will our affections moderate,
And keep us from being inordinate
In our Embraces, or in our Salutes
Of what we have, also in our pursuites
Of more, and in a Sedate settlement
Of mind, will make's in all states be content;
Nor want we here an argument to prove,
That who inordinate is, in his love
Of Worldly things, does better things defy,
and slight Salvation for the Butter-fly. ^ Pet. 1.6. Phil. 3.18, 19. 1 Cor.
9.25. Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. Prove. 23.5.

What argument can any man produce,
Why we should be intemperate in the use
^f any Worldly good? Do we not see
That all these things from us a fleeting be?
What can we hold? What can we keep from flying
from us? Is not each thing we have a dying?
My House, my Wife, my Child, they all grow old,
^or am I ever the younger for my Gold;
^ere's none ahiding, all things fade away,
^oor I at best, am but a Clod of Clay. ^a. 28.1, 4. Jam. 1.11. 1 John. 2.17.
Genesis 18.17.

If that be true, Man does not live by Bread,
^e that has nothing else, must needs be dead;
^ake Bread for what can in this world be found,
^et all that therein is, is but a sound;
^n empty sound, there is no life at all,
^ cannot save a Sparrow from her fall.
Let us then use this World as we are bid;
And as in Olden Times, the Godly did.
Who buy, should be, as if they did possess
None of their purchase, nor themselves did bless
In what they have; And he that does rejoice
In what he has, should rather out of choice,
Withdraw his mind from what he has below,
And set his Heart on whether he must go.
For those that weep under their heavy Crosses,
Or that are broken with the Sense of Losses,
Let them remember, all things here are fading,
And, as to Nature, of a Self-degrading
And wasting temper; Yea, both we and they
Shall waste, and waste, until we waste away:
Let Temperance then, with Moderation be
As bounds to our Affections, when we see,
Or feel, or taste, or any ways enjoy
Things pleasing to the Flesh, lest we destroy
Our selves therewith, or bring our selves thereby
To Surfeits, Guilt, or Satan's Slavery. Deuteronomy. 8.3. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Col. 3,
1, 2. Genesis 3.19. Luke. 21.34.

8. Patience, another Duty, as we find
In Holy Writ, is on this house enjoined;
Her State, while here, is such, that she must have
This Grace abounding in her, or a slave
She Will quickly be unto their lusts and will,
That seek the mind of Satan to fulfill.
He who must bear all wrongs without resistance,
And that with gladness to, must have assistance
Continually from Patience thereunto,
Or he will find such work too hard to do.
Who meets with Taunts, with Mocks, with Flouts and Squibs,
With Raileries, Reproaches, Checks and Snibs;
Yea, he who for well-doing is abused,
Robbed, Spoiled, and Goal'd, and every way misused;
Has he not Patience, soon will be offended,
Yea his Profession too will soon be ended.
A Christian for Religion must not fight,
But put up wrongs, though he be in the right;
He must be merciful, loving and meek,
When they smite one, must turn the the other Cheek.
He must not render Railing for Reviling,
Nor murmur when he sees himself a spoiling;
When they shall Curse, he must be sure to Bless,
And thus with Patience must his Soul possess.
I doubt our framper'd Christians will not down
With what I say, yet I dare Pawn my Gown,
Do but compare my Notes with Sacred-story,
And you will find, Patience the way to Glory.
Patience under the Cross, a Duty is,
Whosoever possesses it, belongs to Bliss;
If it its present work accomplisheth;
If it holds out, and still abides with
The Truth; then may we look for that reward,
Promised at the coming of the Lord. Jam. 5.7, 8. Romans 12.12. Heb. 6.15. Rev.
13.10. Chap. 14.12. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. Mat. 13.21. Matt.
5.38, 39, 40, 41. 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. Joh. 18.10, 11. Heb. 6.15. Luke 21.19. Jam.
1.3, 4. Jam. 5.7, 9.

9. To entertain Good Men let us not forget
Some by so doing have had benefit;
Yea for to Recompense this act of theirs,
Angels have lodged with them unawares.
Yea to encourage such a work as this,
The Lord himself makes it a note of his,
When Hungry or when Thirsty I have been,
Or when a Stranger, you did take me in.
Strangers should not to Strangers but be kind,
Specially if conferring Notes, they find
Themselves, tho Strangers here, one Brotherhood,
And Heirs, joint Heirs, of Everlasting Good;
These should, as Mothers Sons, when they do meet,
In a strange Country, one another greet
With welcome; come in; Brother, how do do?
Whether art wandering? Prithee let me know
Thy state? Do want or Meat, or Drink, or Cloth?
Art weary? Let me wash thy Feet, I Am loath
Thou should depart, abide with me all Night,
Pursue thy Journey with the Morning Light. Heb. 13.1, 2. Mat. 25.35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40 Judge. 16.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

X. The way of reducing what is amiss, into Order here.
Although this House thus honorable is,
Yet it is not Sinless, many things amiss
Do happen here, wherefore them to redress,
We must keep to our Rules of Righteousness;
Nor must we think it strange, if Sin shall be
Where Virtue is; do'nt not all men plainly see
That in the holy Temple there was dust,
That to our very Gold, there cleaves rust?
In Abraham's Family, was a Derider
In The Palace of a King, will be the Spider. 2 Chronicles. 29.16, 17. Genesis 21.9.
Prove. 30.28.

Who says, We have no Sin, does also say
We have no need at all to watch and pray;
To live by Faith, the Flesh to Mortify,
Or of more of the Spirit, to Sanctify
Our Nature: All this wholly needless is
With him, who as to this, has naught amiss.
But we confess, 'cause we would not be Liers,
That we still feel the motions and desires
Of Sin within us, and should fall away,
Did not Christ intercede, and for us pray. 1 John 1.8, 10. Luke 21.32. Heb.
7.25.

We therefore do conclude that Sin is here,
But that it may not to our shame appear,
We have our Rules, thereby with it to deal,
And Plasters too, our deadly Wounds to heal.
And seeing Idleness gives great occasions
To'th' Flesh, to make it is rude and bold invasisions
Upon good Orders, it is ordained we see,
That none dwell here, but such as workers be;
So plain's the Law for this, and so complete,
It bids who will not work, forbear to eat;
Let then each one, be diligent to do
What Grace or Nature does oblige them to.
Who have no need to work for Meat or Cloth,
Should work for those that want. Not that the Sloth
Of Idleness should be encouraged,
But that those, poor indeed, be Clad and Fed.
Dorcas did thus, and it is to sacred Story
Committed, for her praise and lasting Glory. 2 These. 3.10 Acts 9.36, 37, 38,
39.

This House then is no Nurse to Idleness;
Fig Trees are here to keep, and Vines to dress;
Here Is work for all; yea work that must be done;
Yet work, like that, to playing in the Sun;
The Toyl's a pleasure, and the Labor sweet,
Like that of David's Dancing in the street:
The work is short, the wages is for ever,
The work like me, the wages like the Giver. Prove. 27.18. Mark 13.34. 1 John
5.3. 2 Samuel 6.14.

No Drone must hide himself under those Eaves;
Who sows not, will in Harvest Reap no Sheaves:
The sloathful man himself, may plainly see,
The Honey's gotten by the working Be.
But here is no work for Life, that is freely given;
Meat, Drink, and Cloth, and Life, we have from Heaven;
Work's here enjoined, 'cause it is a pleasure,
^ice to suppress, and augment Heavenly Treasure;
Moreover, it is to show, if men profess
The Faith, and yet abide in Idleness,
Their Faith is vain, no man can ever prove
He Is right, but by the Faith that works by love. Jam. 2.20. Gal. 5.6.

If this good Counsel is by thee rejected;
If work and labor is by thee neglected;
If thou, like David, lollest on thy Bed;
Or art like to a Horse, pampered and fed
With what will fire thy Lusts, and so lays Snares
For thine own Soul, when thou should be in the Wars:
Then take what follows, Sin must be detected,
And thou, without Repentance, quite rejected. 2. Sam. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Jer.
5.8. Chap. 13.27. Luke 13.1, 2.3.

This is the House of God, his Dewlling Place,
It Is here that we behold his lovely Face;
But if it should polluted be with Sin,
And so abide, he quickly will begin
To leave it desolate, and then woe to it,
Sin and his Absence quickly will undo it. Jer. 7.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

And since Sin is, of things the worst of all,
And watches like a Serpent on a Wall;
Or flies like an Eagle in the Air,
Or runs as desperate Ships, void of all care;
Or (as great Solomon has wisely said)
Is as the way of Wantons with a Maid,
Who tick, and toy, and with a tempting giggle
Provoke to lust, and by degrees, so wriggle
Them into their affections, that they go
The way to death, so do themselves undo:
As it is said, This mischief to prevent,
Let all men watch, yea, and be diligent
Observers of its motions, and then fly,
This is the way to live, and not to die.
He that would never fall, must never slip,
Who would obey the Call, must fear the Whip.
God would also that every stander by,
That in the Grass does see the Adder lie,
Should cry as he did, Death is in the Pot,
That many by its Poison, perish not.
But if that beastly thing shall hold its hold,
And make the man possessed basely bold
In pleading for it, or shall it deny,
Or it shall seek to cover with a lie;
Then take more aid, and make a fresh assault,
At it again, diminish not the fault,
But charge it home. If yet he will not fear,
But still unto his wickedness adhere,
Then tell the house thereof. But if he still
Persist in his abomination will,
Then fly him, 'cause he is a leaprous man,
Count him with Heathens, and the Publican. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

But if he falls before thee at the first,
Then be thou to him, faithful, loving, just,
Forgive his sin, tell it not to a Brother,
Lest thou thy self be served so by another. Prove. 25.9. Mark 4.24.

If he falls not, but in the second charge;
Spread not his wickedness abroad at large.
But, if thou think his sorrow to be sound,
Forgive his sin, and hide it under ground. Jam. 5.20. 1 Pet. 4.8.

If he shall stand the first and second shot?
If he before the Church, repents not?
Deal with him as the matter shall require,
Let not the House for him be set on fire.
If after all, he shall repent and turn
To God, and you, you must not let him burn
For ever under sense of sin and shame,
You must his sin forgive in Christ his name. 2 Cor. 2.6.

Confirm your love to him in Christ, you must
By all such ways as honest are, and just.
Shy be not of him, carry't not alooff,
But rather give him of your love such proof,
that he may gather thence, ye do believe
^o mercy Christ again does him receive. 2 Cor. 2.8, 9, 10.

Two things, monish you, as to this, I would;
The first, to show the Church wherein she should
^n all her actions so her self behave,
As to convince the faulty, she would save
His soul: and that it is for this very thing,
^he does him unto open Judgment bring.
Then would I show the Person they reject,
What will, without repentance, be the effect
Of this tremendous Censure, so conclude;
Leaving my Judgment to the multitude
Of those who sober and judicious be,
Begging of each of them a Prayer for me.
1. This House in order to this work must be
Affected with the sin and misery,
Of this poor Creature, yea, must mourn and weep,
To think such Tares in your neglect, or sleep,
Should spring up here, nor must they once invent
To think, till he is cast out, you are innocent. 1 Cor. 5.2.6, 7.

2. Thus Leven, the whole lump has levene
Israel was guilty of what Achan did;
And so must stand, until they purged are,
Till Achan does, for sin, his burden bear. Jos. 7.10, 11, 12, 13. Chap. 22.20.

The reason is, Achan a Member was
Of that great Body, and by Natures Laws
The Hand, Foot, Eye, Tongue, Ear, or one^ the^^
May taint the whole with Achans foul Disea^^
The Church must too be sensible of this,
Some leprous stones, make all the House ami^^
And as the Stones must thence removed be,
In order to the Houses Sanctity;
So it must purged be (in any wise)
Before it is counted clean (by Sacrifice.) Levit. 14.33. to 53.

3. Next have a care, lest sin, which y^^ should purg^^
Becomes not unto you a further scourge;
The which it will, if such shall Judges be,
Which from its Spots and Freckles are n^^ fre^^
Pluck thou the beam first out of thine own ey^^
Else the Condemned will thee vilify;
^^d say, Let not the Pot, the Kettle judge;
^ otherwise, it will beget a grudge,
^ great one 'twixt the Church and him that sinned,
^or by such means, can ever such be winned
(...) a renewed embrace of holiness,
^^re like be tempted further to transgress. Mat. 7.3, 4. John. 8.7.

4. Again, let those that loud against it cry,
^^e they don't entertain it inwardly;
^^n, like to Pitch, will to the fingers cleave.
^^ok to it then, let none himself deceive;
^^is catching, make resistances afresh,
^^hor the Garment spotted by the Flesh.
^^ Some at the dimness of the Candle puff,
^ho yet can daub theer Fingers with the snuff. Josh. 22.17. Jude. 23.

5. Beware likewise, lest rancor should appear
against the person, do all in things fear;
^wail the man, while you abhor his sin;
^^ty his Soul; the flesh you still are in;
^hy self consider, thou may tempted be;
^ast thou no pity, who will pity thee? Judges 20.23. Gal. 6.1. James 2.13.

6. See that the ground be good on whi^^ you g^^
Sin, but not Virtue, show dislike unto.
Take heed of hypocritical intentions,
And quarrel not at various Apprehensions
About some smaller matter, lest it breed
Needless debates, and lest that filthy seed
Contention, should over run your holy ground,
And lest not Love, but Nettles there are found. 1 Cor. 1.11. Tit. 3.9. 1 Cor.
11.16. 1 Timothy ^.3, 4, 5, 6.

7. You must likewise allow each man h^^ grain^^
For that none perfect is, sin yet remains,
And humane frailties do attend the best;
To bear and forbear here, will tend to rest.
Vain janglings, jarrs, and strifes will there abound
Where Moles are Mountains made, or fault i^ found
With every little, trivial, petty thing;
This Spirit snibb, or 'twill much mischief brin^^
Into this House, and it is for want of love,
It Is entertained, it is not of the Dove. 1 Timothy 1.6.20. 2 Timothy 2.16. Tit.
1.10. Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.13.

8. For those that have private opinions too
^^e must make room, or shall the Church undo;
^^ovided they be such as do'nt impair
^^ith, Holiness, nor with good Conscience jarr;
^^ovided also those that hold them shall
^^ch Faith hold to themselves, and not let fall
their fruitless Notions in their Brothers way,
(...) thus, and Faith and Love will not decay. ^^m. 14.13, 16, 22. 1 Cor. 8.9,
10, 11, 12, 13.

9. We must also in these our dealings show
^e put a difference 'twixt those sins that do
^ash with the Light of Nature, and what we
^erceive against the Faith of Christ to be;
those against Nature, Nature will detect;
those against Faith, Faith from them must direct
^he Judgment, Conscience, Understanding too,
^r there will be no cure, what ere you do.
^hen men are caught in immoralities,
nature will start, the Conscience will arise
^o Judgment; and if impudence does recoil,
^et guilt and self-condemnings will imbroyl
^he wretch concerned, in such unquietness
^r shame, as will induce him to confess
^is fault, and pardon crave of God and Man,
^uch men with ease therefore we Conquer can. Exodus 32.22, 23, 24. 2 Samuel 12.7.
to 13. John 8.9. Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

But it is not thus with such as swerve in Faith,
With them, who, as our wise Apostle says,
Entangled are at un-a-wares, with those
Cunning to trap, to snare, and to impose
By falcifyings, their prevarications:
No, these are slyly taken from their stations,
Unknown to Nature; yea, in judgment they
Think they have well done to forsake the wa^^
Their Understanding, and their Judgment too
Does like, or well approve of what they do.
These are (poor souls) beyond their Art an^ Skil^^
Taken Captive by the Devil, at his will. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Timothy 2.23, 24, 25, 26.

Here therefore you must patience exercise,
And suffer long, ye must not tyranize
It over such, but must all meekness show;
Still droping of good Doctrine as the Dew,
Against their Error; so its churlishness
You Conquer will, and may their fault redress. 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 1.13.

The reason why we must not exercise
That roughness here, as where Conviction lie^
In Nature, is because those thus ensnared,
Want Natures light and help to be repaired.
A Spirit has them taken, they are gone,
Delusions supernat'ral they are on
The Wing of; They are out o'th reach of Man;
Nothing but God, and Gospel reach them can.
Now since we cannot give these people eyes,
Nor regulate their Judgment: wherein lies
Our work with them, if not, as has been said,
In exercising patience? While displaid
The holy word before their faces is,
By which alone they must see what is amiss
With their poor souls, and so convert again,
To him with whom Salvation does remain.
Obj. But they are turbulent, they would confound
The truth, and all in their perdition dround.
Ans. If turbulent and mischievous they are,
Imposing their Opinions without care
Who they offend, or do destroy thereby,
Then must the Church deal with them presently,
Lest tainted be the whole with their delusion,
And brought into disorder and confusion. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18.

XI. The present Condition of those thus dealt with.
THE man that worthily rejected is,
And cast out of this House, his part in Bliss
Is lost for ever, turns he not again,
True Faith and Holiness to entertain.
Nor is it boot, for who are thus cast out,
Themselves to flatter, or to go about
To shift the Censure, nothing here will do,
Except a new Conversion thou come to.
He that is bound on Earth, is bound in Heaven,
Nor is his loosing, but the sin forgiven;
Repentance too, forgiveness must precede,
Or thou must still abide among the dead. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

XII. An Expostulation with such to return.
O Shame! Is It not a shame for men to be
For sin, spu'd out from good Society!
For man Enlightened to be so base!
To turn his back upon the God of Grace!
For one who for his sins has mourned, and cried!
To flight him, who for sin has bled and died!
What fool would sell his part in Paradise!
That has a Soul, and that of such a price!
What parallel can suit with such so well,
As those, for sin, cast down from Heaven to Hell.
But let me tell thee here is aggravation;
The Angels, tho they did fall from their station
Had not the caution thou have had; they fell:
This thou have seen; and seeing, did rebel.
One would a thought, the noise of this their Fall
A warning, yea, a warning, and a call
Should unto thee have been, to have a care
Of falling too: O how then did thou dare,
Since God did not spare them, thus to presume
To tempt him in his wrath, thee to consume.
Nor did the Angels from a Jesus fall,
Redeemed they were not from a state of thrall;
But thou! as one Redeemed, and that by Blood,
Redemption have despised; and the Mud
Or Mire of thine own filth again imbracest;
A dying bleeding Jesus thou disgracest!
What will thou do? see not how thou have trod
Under thy foot, the very Son of God?
O fearful hand of God! And fearful will
Thy Doom be, when his wrath thy soul shall kill. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6. Heb.
10.29, 30, 31. 2 Pet. 2, 20, 21, 22.

Yea, with a signal these must hear their sin,
This dirty Sow from Mire has washed been;
Yet there did wallow, after washed she was;
So to procure a lust, obtained this loss.
O shame! is it not a shame for man to be,
So much averse to his felicity,
That none can make him leave to play the fool,
Till to the Devil he be put to School,
To learn his own Salvation to prize?
O Fool! must now the Devil make thee wise?
O Sot! that will in wickedness remain,
Unless the Devil drives thee back again. Mat. 18.34. 1 Timothy 1.20.

Have quite forgot how thou wast wont to pray,
And cry out for forgiveness night and day?
Or do thou count they were but painted fears
Which from thine Eyes did squeeze so many Tears?
Remember man, thy Prayers and Tears will cry
Thee down to Hell, for thine Apostasy.
Who will not have what he has Prayed for,
Must die the death, his Prayers shall him abhor.
Have thou forgotten that most solemn Vow
Thou made to God, when thou did crave he bow
His Ear unto thee would, and give thee Grace,
And would thee also in his Arms embrace?
That Vow, I say, whereby thou then did bind
Thy self to him, that now thy roving mind
Recoile against him should, and fling away
From him, and his commandments disobey.
What has he done? wherein has he offended?
Thou actest now, as if thou wast intended
To prove him guilty of Unrighteousness,
Of breach of Promise, or that from distress
He could, or would not save thee, or that thou
Have found a better good then he; but how
Thou will come off, or how thou will excuse
Thy self, cause thou art gone, and did refuse
To wait upon him, that consider well;
Thou art as yet alive, on this side Hell.
Is It not a shame, a stinking shame to be
Cast forth Gods Vineyard as a barren Tree?
To be thrown over the Pales, and there to lie?
Or be picked up by'th' next that passes by? Luke 13.7. Joh. 15.6.

Well, thou have turned away, return again;
Bethink thy self, thy foot from Sin refrain;
Hark! thou art called upon, stop not thine ear:
Return backslding Children, come, draw near
Unto your God; repent, and he will heal
Your base backslidings, to you will reveal
That Grace and Peace which with him does remain,
For them that turn away, and turn again. Jer. 3.12, 14, 22. Hos. 14.1, 2, 3.

Take with thee words, come to the Throne of Grace,
There supplicate thy God, and seek his Face;
Like to the Prodigal, confess thy Sin,
Tell him where, and how vicious thou have been:
Suppose he shall against thee shut thee door,
Knock thou the louder, and cry out the more;
What if he makes thee there to stand a while?
Or makes as if he would not reconcile
To thee again? Yet take thee no denial,
Count all such carriages but as a trial,
Whether thou art in earnest in thy suit,
As one truly forlorn and destitute;
But hide thou naught of all that thou have done,
Open thy Bosom, make confession
Of all thy Wickedness, tell every whit;
Have thou a secret Sin? do'nt cover it;
Confess, thy self judge, if thou would not die;
Who does himself judge; God does Justify. Jer. 3.13, 23, 24, 25. Psalm. 32.5,
1 Cor. 11.31, 32.

To Sin, and stand in it, is the highest evil;
This makes a man most like unto the Devil;
This bids Defiance unto God and Grace,
This man resists him, spitteth in his Face;
Scorns at his Justice, mocketh at his Power,
Tempts him, provokes him, grieves him every hour;
When he arises, he will recompense
This sturdy Rebel for's impenitence:
Be not inccorrigible then, come back again,
There Is hope, beg mercy while life does remain.
Obj. But I fear I am lost and cast away,
Sentence is past, and who reverse it may?
Ans. The Sentence past, admits of Reprieve,
Yea, of a Pardon, can thou but believe.
Turn again Sinner, never make a doubt;
Come, the Lord Jesus will not cast thee out. Joh. 6.37.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 6. for Anp, read And. P. 17. l. 4. for When, read Where. P. 21.
l. 24. for the, read thee. P. 24. l. 18. for Disords, read Discords.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published a new Book, written by John Bunyan, the Author
hereof, Entitled, Good News for the Vilest of Men; Or, A Help for Despairing
Souls: Being a Discourse upon Luke 24.47. the latter part of the Verse:
Showing, That Jesus Christ would have Mercy in the first place offered to the
Biggest Sinners. Printted and are to be sold by George Larkin, at the Two-Swans
without Bishopsgate: And by most Booksellers. 1688.


