A VIEW OF THE PEOPLE OF THE WHOLE WORLD: OR, A short Survey of their
Policies, Dispositions, Natural Deportments, Complexions, Ancient and Modern
Customs, Manners, Habits and Fashions.

A Work every where adorned with Philosophical, Moral and Historical
Observations on the Occasions of their Mutations and Changes throughout all
Ages.

For the Readers greater delight Figures are annexed to most of the Relations.

Scripsit J.B. Cognomento Chirosophus, M. D.

LONDON, Printed by William Hunt. 1654.

The INTRODVCTION.
GAlen, to convince the error of Epicur^^ said he would give him an hundred
years to alter or change the situation, figure, or Composition of any one
part of the humane Fabric; and he did not doubt, but it would come to pass in
the end, that he would be forced to confess, that the same could by no means
have been made after any other or more perfect manner. Dr. Crook in his
Microcosmographia.
A modern Anatomist speaks a little more boldly, affirming, that if all the
Angels should have spent a thousand years in the framing and making of man,
they could not have cast him into so curious a mould or made him like to that
he is, much less could they have set him forth in any better manner. For, God
has wonderfully, and most artificially framed the body of man. The excellency
whereof is such, that the Anthropomorphites held that God had such a Body, and
that ours was but the Copy of his, because they knew God to be most excellent,
they attributed to him such a Body. And the Philosophers were so ravished with
the consideration of it, that Zoroaster cries out, as if Nature had undertaken
a bold piece of work when she made man, and Euripides says that man is a most
beautiful Creature, framed by a most wise Artisan. The Spirit of God speaks
admirably of the Body of man in Scripture, David Psalm. 39 ver. 15.
for, David says, that his Body was curiously wrought in his Mothers womb as a
piece of Embroidery or Needle Work, as the Hebrew word (rukkanthi) signifies:
Genebrard renders the word in the Psalm, vary contextus sum, and
diversificatus. Pelicanus, artificiose concinnatus sum, that is, with singular
variety, and most artificially fashioned.

Yet the blind impiety of some has led them to such a height of presumption,
as to find fault with many parts of this curious Fabric, and to question the
wisdom of God in the contrivance thereof, upon such Blasphemous fancies men
have taken upon them an audacious Art to form and new shape themselves,
altering the humane Figure, and moulding it according to their own will and
arbitrament, varying it after a wonderful manner, almost every Nation having a
particular whimzy as touching corporal fashions of their own invention. In
which kind of mutations, they do schematize or change the organicall parts of
their bodies into diverse depraved Figures. Cardan speaking of such outlandish
fashion-mongers, Cardan de rerum varietate lib. 8. cap. 13.
says, it appears that the humane form has bin varyed many ways, both by
Art and Diurnall succession; but whatsoever is done against the decree of
Nature, is noxious and inconvenient for the body: yet they who practice this
Art, conceive that they become thereby more healthful, strong and gallant. But
the Midwife ought to reduce to the natural state, and not to draw and force
the bodies of Infants into fantastic shapes. Sennertus (therefore) where he
writes of the diseases of Conformation, and those of Figure, Sennertus de
morbis Conformationis and Figurae.
among other Causes of the ill figures of the body, reckons this, that those
faults which are contracted in the womb or in the birth are not rightly
amended by Midwives and Nurses as they ought. And in his Prognostics, (there)
he says that the default in figure which is induced through evil
Conformation, or the difficulty of birth, or the unskilfulnesse of Midwives,
if it be recent and not long after the birth, may be a little corrected, while
the bones are yet soft and flexible; although in Adults, Jacobus Fontanus in
Pathologia lib. 3. cap. 14.
when the bones are now hardened, it is incurable. Fontanus where he speaks of
the causes of diseases of Conformation, reckons the Man or Woman Midwives, who
draw out the Children with their hands, the involutions of the Infant in
swathing Bands after the birth, or while it is handled with the hands, or from
immoderate motion, while little Children are suffered before a fit time to go
or stand, or are exposed to more vehement motions and as Pansa advises, Pansa
in practic. part. de orrroganda vita.
every part of the newborn Infants body is to be formed, and those parts that
ought to be concave, must be pressed in; those which should be slender,
constrained and repressed; and those which are naturally prominent, rightly
drawn out: the head also is diligently to be made round; and as Sennertus gives
the indication and cure, if in any part it be emminent above the natural
figure, there it is to be depressed; which can be done no other way, but by
working it with the hands, to wit, that the Midwife or Nurse by often gently
handling the head and involving it with headbands, abolish that figure which is
preternaturall and introduce into the head the true shape desired. Afterward
(as Pansa says) all the body is to be extended and remitted, and every part to
be put in mind of its office. And these crimes both of commission and omission,
committed by Midwives and Nurses so frequently in these times against the
tender bodies of Infants, appear more notorious, if we reflect upon the
careful practice of ancient times in this matter of high concernment: for it
should appear by a passage of Plato, Plato in Alcibiade.
that the Nutritii of old, whilst the bodies of Infants were tender, did
conform them most to the advantage of Nature, which is the office of
Cosmeticall Physic; not as some falsely suppose, only to provide fucus's to
disguise the natural, and that way only to palliate the defects of Nature:
Cosmetique is the exornatorie part of Physic, whose Office is, that whatsoever
is according to Nature, that it is to preserve in the Body, and so consequently
to cherish and maintain the native Beauty thereof. But Commotiques, that is
the Fucatorie, Galen took away from the parts of Physic, because too
curiously affected, it exists about false and lying appearances, and which
endeavors in vain to introduce and adulterate an ascititious Beauty, which in
adorning and setting forth the Body differs nothing from the ostentation of
Stage-plaies, and is no less indecent then fiction in manners; which damnable
portion of Cosmetique Art does flourish in the opinions and monstrous practices
of men and women, whereas that of the more Noble part is wanting and grown
quite out of use, whether by the overflowing luxury of these times, or the
ignorance of Physicians, Mecrurialis in Lib. De Decoratione seu de Art
Cosmetica.
it is not for me (says Mercurialis) to judge. Insomuch as considering these
injurious neglects, and the tampering that has been used among all Nations to
alter the mould of their Bodies, we may say as Plato in effect affirms, that
only the first men which the world possessed, were made by God, but the rest
were made and born answerable to the discourse of Man's invention. The just
contemplation of which vanity made that sound more strangly in my ears, that
in discourse I have heard to fall, somewhat in earnest, from the mouth of a
Philosopher (one in points of common belief (indeed) too scepticall) That man
was a mere Artificial creature, and was at first but a kind of Ape or Baboon,
who through his industry (by degrees) in time had improved his Figure and his
Reason up to the perfection of man. Plin. Lib. 11. Not. Hist.
It is (indeed) an old Observation of Pliny, that all the Race and kind of Apes
resemble the proportion of men perfectly in the Face, Nose, Ears and Eyelids:
which eyelids these Creatures alone of all four footed have under their eyes
as well as above: Nay, they have paps and niples in their breasts, as Women,
Arms and legs bending contrary ways, even as ours do, nails they have
likewise and fingers like to us; with the middle finger longer then the rest as
ours be; Thumbs and great toes they have moreover, with joints like (in all the
world) to a man: and all the inward parts are the very same that ours, as if
they were made justby one pattern. Yet they a little differ from us in the
Feet; for somewhat long they are like as their hands be, and the sole of their
Foot is answerable to the palm of their hand. Their nails are channelled half
round like a gutter tile: whereas in man they be flat and broad. And Galen, who
was a great dissecter of Apes, and therein acknowleged the resemblance to man,
yet observes that the Thumb of an Ape differs much from that of a man. But by
this new History of abused Nature it will appear a sad truth, that man's
endeavors have runn the clean contrary course, and he has been so far from
raising himself above the pitch of his Original endowments, that he is much
fallen below himself; and in many parts of the world is practically
degenerated into the similitude of a Beast. The danger of man since his fall is
more in sinking down then in climbing up, in dejecting then in raising
himself to a better condition or improvement of natural parts. It is a sad
thing (as a grave divine says) to consider the pronenesse of man to such a
descent, Dr. Done.
such a dejection and such a diminution of himself, a descent generally into a
lower nature being forbidden by GOD with Nolite fieri, Psalm 22. v. 9.
Be not made at all, not made any other then GOD has made you. GOD made man,
who was his medall at first (when God stamped and imprinted his Image on him,)
God would have this man preserve his dignity, Nolite fieri, be not made any
new thing, wherein he forbids him a descent into any depravations and
deteriorations of our Natures, be not perversely metamorphosed into a beast,
go no less, be not made lower. The first sin that ever was, was an ascending,
a climbing too high, and man in the secone place was overthrown by the same
affectation: but it seems this fall has broke the neck of man's Ambition, and
now we dare not be so like God as we should be; Ever since this fall Man is so
far from affecting higher places then his Nature is capable of, that he is
still grovelling upon the ground, and participates, and imitates, and expresses
more of the nature of the beast then of his own. There is no creature but Man
that degenerates willingly from his Natural dignity: Those degrees of
goodness that God imprinted upon them at first, they preserve still, they are
not departed from their Natural dignity, for any thing they have done. But of
man it seems, God was distrustful from the beginning, he did not pronounce upon
Man's Creation that he was good, because his goodness was a contingent thing,
and consisted in the future use of his free will: for, that faculty and power
of the will is virtus transformativa, by it we change our selves into that we
love most, and we are come to love those things most which are below us. Vive
juxta genus tuum says St. Ambrose to man, live according to thy kind, Non
adulteres genus tuum, do not abuse, do not allay, do not abastardise that
Noble kind, that Noble nature that God has imparted to thee, imprinted in
thee. This whole world is one book, and is it not a barbarous thing when all
the whole book besides remains entire, to deface that leaf in which the
Authors picture, the image of God is expressed, as in man. All other creatures
keep their ranks, their places and natures in the world, only man himself
disorders all, and that by displacing himself, by losing his place. While we
dispute in Schools whether if it were possible for Man to do so, it were
lawful for him to destroy any one species of Gods creatures, though it were
but the species of Toades and Spiders (because this were a taking away one
link of Gods chain, one note of his harmony) we have taken away that which
is the jewel at that chain, that which is the burden of the song, insomuch
that we are not only inferior to the beasts, but we are our selves become
beasts, a most lamentable descent; that as God said in the beginning, in
contempt and in derision, behold man is become as one of us: so now (as St.
Bernard makes the note) the Horse and Mule may say, quasi unus ex nobis, behold
man is become as one of us, insomuch as if the corrective part of Physic were
utterly unknown in the world, and the friendly offices it might perform to
Nature were quite excluded the use of Man, and no care continued to prevent the
increase of National monstrosities (without more restraining grace) the vanity
of man blown upon by the suggestions of the Enemy of Mankind, would enforce
and propagate so many corporal Errata's in every Region, that the humane
Figure would be so depraved, that (in time) the true shape of man would be
unknown, or lost in an injurious crowd of deformities: and although in these
parts of the christian world (we might think) there needed not so great a Damme
to be made against the inundation of this mischief: yet if we consider how
guilty the most civilized Nations are of tampering with the Body to the
deforming of it, and to the prejudice of Natures operations, and withal what
foolish affectations in vests we have, wherein we seem to vie deformities with
the most Barbarous Nations; so approving their affected shapes, that we are in
a manner unciviliz'd by them, we may justly doubt whether this, by the just
judgment of God may not in time reduce us to our first Barbarism, and so
consequently expose us to all the deformities and practical affectations,
which can proceed from a depraved imagination. For the better prevention of
which evils, in the behalf of Nature, whose vindication I have here
undertaken, and for the Honor of Physicians who profess themselves the
friends of Nature and to be her faithful servants, I could wish that this
reproach that lies upon them might be taken away by the promoting and reviving
of this Noble part of Cosmetiques, for the better establishing and preservation
of the honesty of the Humane Fabrique, and the regular beauty of the Body. It
is a wonderful thing that is reported of the Honor and esteem that the
perfection of the Body has been in among the Catheans, who ever chose the
handsomest man to be their King. Onescritus cited by Strabo Geographia: lib. 15.
Onesicritus reports that their boys two months after their birth are
publicly examined, whether they have a legitimate form and worthy of life or
no, and according as judgment is passed upon them by him who is Chief Censor
in this business, they are either permitted to live, or appointed to die. My
Lord of Montaigne in one of his Essays.
And my Lord of Montaigne thought much to be bound to own Monsters, although
they were of his own begetting. But those things savor too much of the other
extreme, and are neither to be approved or put in practice by us. We rather
recommend unto you that observation of my Lord Bacon to be well weighed, as he
would have it, which (as he says) may teach a means, to make the persons of
Men and Women in many kinds more comely and better featured then otherwise they
would be, by the forming and shaping them in their Infancy; wherein you may see
the opinion of that learned Worthy, touching helps toward the beauty and good
features of persons. And withal, I would have all possible means used to
prevent all unnatural and monstrous Encroachments upon the Humane form, and
where there happens any, to reduce it to the Natural State: that so the bodies
of men might (as near as can be) appear unblemished and accompanied with all
the requisites of beauty it enjoyed in its original perfection.

MAN TRANSFORMD: OR THE ARTIFICIAL CHANGLING.
THE FIRST SCENE. Certain Fashions of the Head, affected and contrived, by the
Pragmaticall invention and Artificial endeavors of many Nations.
HIppocrates observes, Hippocrates lib. de Aere, Aquis and Locis.
that the Natural mould or figure of the Head has bin tampered with, and
altered by Art. Sennertus de morbis Figurae.
Sennertus also, where he writes, De morbis Figurae, reckons amongst other
causes of the ill Conformation of Men's Heads, that they are now and then
induced after the Birth, Sugar-Loafe-like Heads.
whilst the tender Heads of Infants, are by Midwives and Nurses formed after a
diverse manner, while they are involved in Head-bands, and molded with their
hands according to their irregular and varying Phansies.

The first Cephalique Fashionmongers we read of, who offered this affront unto
Nature, Plin. lib. 7 and 6 Cap. 4 Mela. lib. 1. Cap. 21. Arist. lib. 1. Polit.
Sui. das ex lib. 7. Hist. rerum Trojanarum. Caelius Rhod lib. 17.6.3. Lemnius
de miracul. Huart. Exam. de ingeniis. Schenck Observat. de capite, obs. 26.
were the Macrones of Pontus, so called, because there were found many
Macrocephali, that is, such Long Heads, as no other Nation had the like: Among
whom (of old) it grew into a Custom, that they were esteemed for the best
Gentlemen, who had the longest Heads; Wherefore as soon as their Newborn
Infants were entered into the World, they had a special care, presently, while
their Heads were yet tender and soft, to press them together with their hands,
and fitting them to their minds, enforce them to increase in length: and lest
that shoud not do the feat, they bound them up with Head-bands and other apt
Instruments; which by connecting and gathering in their tender Heads,
prohibited the roundnesse of their Heads, and was a means to constrain them to
grow and increase in length; whence, when they were come to man's Estate, they
had all very Long Heads, so that at length it grew Natural unto them: For,
Nature finding her self justly agrieved at the Fantastical restraint they
imposed on her, began to conspire with Custom, and so left them to their own
vain invention, that there was no need of any Artificial compulsion. But let
us hear what Hippocrates recounteth of these sort of Men which he calls (...).
Hippocrates lib. de A^re, Aquis, and Locis.
The Scythians (says he) who inhabit Phasis, to be different from the vulgar,
chose for a token of their Nobility to have a Head like a sugar loaf. And to
shape this Figure by Art, when the Child was Borne, the Midwives took care to
bind their Heads with Swath-bands until they were Fashioned unto that form;
and this Artificialnesse grew to such force, as it was converted into Nature:
For, in process of time all the Children that were Borne of Nobility, had
their Head sharp from their Mothers Womb; so from thenceforth, the Art and
diligence of the Midwives therein became superfluous: but so soon as they left
Nature to her Liberty and her own ordering, without oppressing her any longer
with Art, she turned by little and little to recover again the Figure which
she had before: So true is that, Naturam expellas furca, licet usque recurret.

The Cilician, Atticke, Athenaeneus.
and Argive Women were noted of old, as the Phoxi were to have high turbinated
Heads. The Women in Peru, Strabo Geograph. lib.
although they are gracious by th^^r ^aire Faces, Maginus 2 Geograph. Americae
yet for the most part the tops of their Heads are absurdly acuminated, and run
into an acute Cuspi^. Strabo makes mention of some Indians, who he calls (...),
Capita cunei formia habentes, that is, having such Piked and Wedglike Heads.
This Figure of the Head is in Fashion and Request at this day with some
Nations, being endeavored with as much Art, as it was of old by the Macrones
of Pontus. For, the Genuensians (for the most part) have high and copp-crown'd
Heads, Pineapple form, after the condition of a sharp upright Pillar, in such
manner that the nether part is bigg and round, but the upper part sharp.
Claramont de conject. cujusque mor. l. 6.
And indeed, it is concluded, that the Midwives with their Head-bands and other
devises, are the cause of their Sugar-loafe-like Heads. This affected form of
the Head being common, and National unto them, is reputed so Fashionable, that
it is held a Note of Gentility and a Gallant Spirit among them.

Hippoc. 6 Ep. 1.
Hippocrates notes, that an acute Head is always naught, and verily, this
compulsive force of Art is many times very Injurious to Nature and her
operations, but not always: for the Genuensians who delight much in this
Figure of the Head, and are noted for the most part to have acuminated Heads,
have at least such an acumen of Wit, as makes them excellent for an Active
Life; and in the opinion of Claramontius, the form of the thing gives a
suffrage unto it; for, such a kind of turbinated Figure represents a certain
parvity, and therefore the Heat of the Heart is less broken by it, whereupon
Man is rendered more Active. Hofman Instit.
And therefore in this place we must admit what Hofman gives us to know: That
so long as the Actions of the Brain are not hurt, it is only a Natural or
Artificial fault or imperfection, no disease, but when they are hurt, then it
is a disease as it was in Thersites, who was (...), Homer Iliad.
and withal a Fool, and so sick of this Fashion.

For the truth is, as to the signs Diagnostick, a vicious Figure of the Head
is known by sight, which although it do chiefly declare the Conformation of
the skull, yet it is likely and agreeable, that the Brain which is concluded
in the skull, should Participate of the same Figure, but the discovery of it is
made also by certain effects; and it is easy to know the innate folly bred in
some Men, Scaliger Comm. ad lib 5. Theophrast. de causis Plant. page 287.
by the vicious Figure of the Head. Yet Scaliger gives another Character of
these Genuensians, which Imports that they pay for their Affectation: The
Genuensians says he, having received from the Mauritanians their Progenitors
this Custom, to compresse the Temples of their Infants as soon as they are
Borne, now, without that Compression, are Borne with a Thersiticall Head and
Heart.

We read in the Chronicles of the Prodigious Ostents, that Nature has many
times mocked Art in producing this Figure of the Head. For, Lycosthenes chr. de
prodig. and ostent.
Licosthenes writes that in Ploa a Town of Voitland, there was a Monstrous
Infant Borne, with such an acuminated Head, like a Cap that the Kings of
Persia, and the Priests in the old Law used, or like a Tiara or Turkish Tuffe:
and in Saxony in the Month of February 1545, there was another Infant borne
with a Long Head, notably marked as it were with a Turkish Cap. The Samaritans
also (as I am Informed by a Learned and Observing Traveller) have such
Sugar-Loafe-like Heads; There being a College of Samaritan Secular Priests in
Rome founded by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, who have all such Heads, and this
Figure of the Head, it seems, is so Gentilitiall to a Samaritan, that they are
apt there to suspect those Collegiates not to be true Samaritans, whose Heads
are not so exactly molded to this Figure: Nor is this as a private and
particular Observation, bounded with in the Walls of this College; For I have
had great discourse with some Merchants that have been great Travelers, who
told me, they have a kind of Physiognomy to discern of all Nations by the
figure of their Heads, which Observation is raised upon this ground; that
whereas every Nation have differences of manners by which they are easily
discerned one from another, insomuch as you may know of what descent from any
Nation any one is, either by his Voice, Speech, Discourse, Policy,
Conversation, Diet, Affairs, Love, Hatred, Anger, and manner of Warfare and
such like Exercises: so every Nation, whether Civil or Barbarian, has not
only Peculiar Customs and Rites, but also Peculiar Affectations of Form or
Shape of their Bodies, which will be Abundantly discovered by a world of
strange Artifices and Pragmaticall endeavors Practiced in this History, even
from the Head to Foot, all tending to Accomodate their Affectations with the
Pride and Vanity of such unnatural distinctions.

The Women of Siginnus a City of Egypt, Long-Heads
Bruson. Facet. lib. 4.
are reported to have great care that they may seem to have most Long Heads,

The Low-Country-Men or Dutch of Belgia, Schenekii observat. de capite obs. 26.
ex vesalio.
have some what Long Heads; which with them is the most Fashionable Figure,
this their Mothers cause, being careful to bring them to it, laying them when
they are Infants, and wrapped in swaddling Clothes in their Cradles, suffering
them to sleep most upon their sides and Temples. Baptist. Port. Hum. Physiogn.
lib. 2. Pinaeus opusc. Phys. and Anat. lib. 1.


The Portugals have generally long Heads, which happen by the same Artifice of
the Midwives; for as God makes, so the Midwife shapes; and she is directed by
the Mother and Women present at her Labor and lying in, who all will be sure
to put the Midwife in mind of moulding the Childs Head to the Fashion most in
request. Some also by an affected or an enforced thin Diet have attained unto
the same badg of Gentility; For, that will do it as Hippocrates affirms, for
thereby the Temporal Muscles being dried up, the Temples become thereupon
hollow; And so their Heads seem longer, the proportionate Latitude of the Head
being thereby diminished. Short-Heads


This affectation of Nurses in diverse Regions and Families, practiced upon a
supposition of conferring Beauty upon Children, Fabric. Hild. Cent. 2.
observat. 99. Sennertus Inflite lib. 2. pars. 2. cap. 13.
and their straight binding their Heads to force them to the Formis; Sennertus
and Hildanus both take Notice of and condemn. For by the compression of the
Skull, and that thus extending of it in length, the Brain, together with its
Ventricles are compressed, whence, the Spirits not sufficiently prepared and
well wrought, the Head is weakened, and made obnoxious unto Cathars; and if
such Children grow up to Adolescency (which yet happens very rarely) they prove
to be of a slower and duller Wit, that old saying being manifestly verified in
them, Malas arts Inventoribus male cedere.

Audraeas Vesaelius, lib. 1. cap. 5 de Corp. Hum. Fabr.
The Germans have short Heads for the most part, such Heads being in repute
among them; which they attain unto by their Mothers or Nurses care, who lay
them in their Cradles when they are Infants, so that they always sleep upon
their Backs, their Hands for the most part left out unswathed, being tied on
both sides on the Cradle.

Purchase Pilg. 4. lib. 6.
The Men of Brasil have flat Heads, the hinder part not round but flat, which
may very well be imagined to proceed from some Affectation or Fancy, that they
have of such a form of the Head.

The inconveniences that many times attend this affected Fashion of the Head,
when the Nape with a little bunchines remains not, but the Nodock is made
flat are, that the Brain is not so Figured as is requisite for Wit and
Hability; For, the depression of this posterior prominency of the Head, weakens
the Ability to Action, as Galen shows; the reason is, because Voluntary
motion depends upon the Nerves, whose principle the Cerebellum is: Since
therefore the Original and chief Instrument of Voluntary motion, resides in
the hinder part of the Head, Men are by this depraving the Figure of their
Heads, made more cold and indisposed unto motion, and so likewise unto
recordation, the After-Braine, the seat of Memory being thus perverted.
Benivenius de abditis
Which effect was observed (as Benivenius reports) in the dissection of one
James a Famous Thief, the hinder part of whose Head, where the seat of Memory
is, was found so short, that it contained but a very little portion of Brain;
for which cause, when he could least of all remember the Banishments,
Imprisonments and Torments he had suffered for his former Villainies, falling
like an impudent Dog to his Vomit, was at last Hanged, which put an end to his
Life and Theft together.

Round Heads
Baptist Port. Hum Physiogn. lib. 2.
The Greeks of old were noted to Love and affect a round Head, as suitable and
best agreeing with those that spoke ore rotundo; and it was so Fashionable a
Figure with them of old, and so nourished by Art, that Pericles the Athenian
(who as Plutarch writes) had a long Head in Fashion of a Mallet, Plutarch in
the Life of Pericles. Galen 6* Epid Com. 1 Aph 37.
which is the most exact and Natural form, was derided for it by the
Comedians of his Time, and the Attick Poets called him Cynocephalum, that is,
Dogs-head. The Attick Poets call him Schinocephalos, as much as to say, as
Headed like an Onyon; for those of Attica do sometimes name that which is
called in the Vulgar Tongue Scilla, that is to say, an Onion of Barbary, or
the Sea Onion, Schinos. Phylocles the Comic Poet calls him Oxycephalum, Suidas.
scoffing at his coppid crowned Head, which appeared like the head of a
Lapwing. Among the rest of the Attick Poets, Cratinus has never done playing
upon Pericles for this deformity, Comically jesting, at his Monstrous joulting
Pate, sir-naming him joult-Head, and Onions-Head, or as we would say,
Squil-Head, and it was held so great a reproach unto him, that the Statuaries
that made his Statute, to hide this supposed deformity, or rather want of
conformity, always made him with a Helmet upon his Head: Whereby you may see
how ridiculous a thing it is to have a Head out of Fashion.

At this Day the Grecians and Turks have round Heads much resembling a Globe,
which they affect and nourish by Art in their Children, as holding it the most
commodious form to fit their Turbants and Shashes which they wear on their
Heads.

The Antuerpiensians have also round Heads, which is a Comely Fashion as they
think, and in good repute among them.

The Virgins of Bruxels, likewise for the most part are Roundheads, but only
that they have a sharper Chin. Caelius Rhod. variar. lect. lib. 18.
The French are observed to have their Heads somewhat Orbicular, to which their
disposition and Natural temper is Analogicall. And the unnaturalness of the
Figure leads us to suspect the Artifice of the Nurses hand to concur to their
conformation, therefore the French Haberdashers being furnished only with Hats
proportionable for such Heads, have much ado to fit an English Man's Head with
a Hat, insomuch as when they fall upon this difficulty, they are wont to tell
him, that his Head is not A-la-mode.

All that they gain, who thus Trespass against the Justice of Nature,
enforcing their Heads to a Sphericall form, or, through roundnesse, is, a quick
moving, unstablenesse, forgetfullnesse, small discretion and little Wit. For
the Motion of the Spirit never cease nor rests, Broad-Heads
as in many French Men and Spaniards, Hilly Phisiog-
and the like in certain Germans, has been observed and noted. For when the
form of the Head is through round, then is the middle Ventricle large, and the
Spirits working in the same so large, until these find a large place, which
in the mean time are not sufficiently united: and in such wise is the virtue
Estimative weakened, by that the Spirits are carried round about the bounds of
the same; insomuch that such Men having the like formed Heads are ill reported
of for their proper qualities and conditions in Physiognomie. Albertus magn. de
secret Mulier.
Albertus Magnus (indeed) commends a Roundhead, and would have Boys loved
that have round Heads, because that is the most Noble Figure: Therefore, Nurses
says he are wont to compresse and endeavor to make Boys Heads round, which
hence seems to have been accustomed either in Padua or Ratisbone.

Spigel. da Hum. Corp. Fabr. lib. 1.
The Muscovites, who are for the most part of a square proportion, broad, short
and thick, have broad Heads, which is in Fashion with them at this Day. And
when they are young Infants, and in their tender Age apt to be drawn and bent
to any shape, their Faces are explained and flatted by Art, and so directed to
grow into this Gentilitian form. Thin narrow Heads.


The Apichiqui, Pichunsti, Sava, Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
People of the Indies, affect the same mad Gallantry of a broad Head and
platter Face; to bring their Children to which Affected deformity, they lay one
board on the Forehead and another on the Neck, so keeping them in press from
Day to Day until they be four or five Years old.

The Women of Cumana affect a very long Head and Face, as accounting it the
most comely and Beautiful Figure of the Head. A long Face and thin Cheeks
being their chief Beauty. To attain unto which desired Deformity, they gently
compresse the Heads of their Infants between two little Pillowes to extend
them. Such contradictions there is in the Fantasies and opinions of Men and
clashings in point of Elegancy in the Figure of the Head, that we may well cry
out with Pliny, Plin. Not. Hist.
that there is no thing so vain and so Proud as Man.

Square-Head
Ca^dan. de reram var^e. lib. 8 cap. 42.
In the Province of Old Port in the West Indies there are men that have a
square-Head, so made by Art. For they to bring their Childrens Heads to this
Fashion (no doubt) in great request with them, put them between Boards when
they are newborn, which being tender and young, are enforced to grow after the
Form of that square wooden Box that encloseth them on every side. And this Art
passes at length into a kind of Nature, by long succession.

The Geometrical pates of our Square-headed and Platter-faced Gallants, is a
new Contrivance: For, these Fashions of the Head were not known and discovered
in the time of Galen, nor the violation of this Artifice practiced; Galen
reckoning up the four unnatural Figures of the Head, the first, where the
Anterior eminency is lost, the Posterior remaining in good case; the second,
when the hinder Eminency or out-shoot is wanting, the Frontall Jettie safe; the
third, when both of them are missing; the Fourth when the Temples are Eminent,
the Occiput and Sinciput depressed, says for this last Figure, it may be
imagined, but not possibly be found, against which Vesalius opposes himself,
Vesalius, cap. 5. lib. 1.
alleging both Authority and Experience; the Authority is of Hippocrates, who
(as he says) writes, that the Head sometimes does more remarkably protuberat
at the Ears then either forward or backward. His Experience is taken from
Three, Whereof the First he says he saw at Venice, another at Bononia, a Third
at Genua; Against him again Fallopius opposes himself, and as for
Hippocrates he says, that for this cause he had read Hippocrates through
twice, and could never find any such thing, and for the Experience, he had
seen the Venetian Boy, who had not this Fourth Figure. To Hofman it seems that
this ought not to be accounted among the unnatural or unvaletudinarie Figures;
For, Pet. Aponensis Different. 79. Conciliator.
not insisting upon these Occidentall Indian square-Heads, above presented, he
finds Conciliator to write, that he had seen two, nay measured their Heads,
and to have found a greater distance from one Temple to the other, then from
the Occiput to the Sinciput. Hugo Senensis also had seen this Figure, as Th.
Veiga testifies: Th. Veiga Comment. in cap. 11. Art. Medicinal. Gal.
and Petrus Martyr says, he saw such a Boy at Milane. At last, Hofman agrees
with Galen, that such are Monstrous, rare and invitall.

And verily these square-Headed Gallants must needs suffer some damage in
their intellectuals by this affectation; for Physiognomers affirm, that a Head
that has Angles argues an impediment of Judgment and ratiocination. For even
as an Echo is less oppositely formed in Angular Buildings, then in an Arch or
winding Rounds; So the Vigor of Judgment is more flourishing in a Skull,
Naturally round, then in Heads knotty and Angular. And therefore Man Naturally
has a great Advantage over other Creatures in the roundnesse of his Head; for
although in the Fabric, all Creatures seem to answer one general Rule,
although they are of diverse species and use, yet by the wonderful Device or
Invention of God (as Lactantius speaks) there is one Similitude of frame in
all, for, one disposition and one Habit produces an innumerable variety of
Living Creatures; For in all Creatures, that Breath, for the most part, there
is the same Series and order of Members, nor do the members only observe and
keep their Tenor and Situation, but also the parts of the Members; for in one
and the same Head, the Ears, the Eyes, the nostrils, the Mouth also, and in
the Mouth, the Teeth and Tongue, possess a certain place, which being the same
in all living Creatures, yet there is Infinite and Manifold diversity of
Figures, for that they are either more produced or contracted, or comprised in
lineaments variously differing. As for Example; the Head in other Creatures is
formed after a Triangular manner, and whereas it ought to be round in Man,
these Nations distending the orbicularity of their Heads, change it into an
Angular Body, thereby, to the great affront of Nature and abasement of the
Humane Form, maintaining a greater Analogy between them and bruits then ever
she intended. If any accidental depravation of the Head resembling this
affected Irregularity, threaten prejudice to the operation of the intellect,
the mischief may be prevented in Infants, by the Physical Corrector or
Cosmetique Surgeon, whose Office it is to preserve what is according to
Nature, and in case of misprision to reduce unto the Natural state, the
endeavor of which, Art has succceeded happily to many. Dr. Garenciers told me
he knew a Child that through the difficulty of Birth and the usual accidents
of hard Labor, Dogs-Heads
his Head was so compressed and driven into a kind of Angularity, that they
much suspected some detriment would thereby accrue unto his understanding; yet
by the Midwives and Nurses care, who indeed have the only opportunity to
officiate in this business (I would they had as much judgment and ability for
the place) the Childs Head recovered the Natural shape, and it proved to have
a very good Wit and understanding.

Many have held Opinion, that Megasthenes, Pliny and Aulus Gellius were loud
liars, when they wrote and published that there lived a certain kind of
People in Scythia which had Dogs Heads; and, verily although Pliny has been
by some incredulous and Ignorant Men Pater Mendaciorum, and an impudent liar;
yet I have somewhat of his to show not only for his truth but also for his
Modesty: for when he comes to write of the strange and wondrous Shapes of
sundry Nations, he does advertise the Readers of his History, that he will not
Pawn his credit for many things that he therein delivers, nor bind them to
believe all he writes as touching strange and Foreign Nations, refer them
rather he does to his Authors, whom in all points (more doubtful then the
rest) he cites and alleges, whom they may believe if they list, only he would
not have them think much to follow the Greek writers, who from time to time in
this behalf have been more diligent in penning, and more curious in searching
after Antiquities.

And although the Author of the Treasury of Times, indeed holds this for a
Fable, because all those Countries have been discovered, and do declare no
deformity on the Peoples Bodies: yet the relation is confirmed by some of the
order of Predicants sent as Legates from the Apostolic State unto the Tartars,
De rebus Tartar. c. 9.
who assure us that there are a certain Nation in Tartary who have a
Dogs-Face; Vinc. Hist. lib. 31. cap. 11, and Johannes de plano minorita.
the same Authors adding withal, that although the Men have such a resemblance
of a Dogs-Head as beforesaid, yet the Women have a Humane Visage as other Women
in the World have. Therefore there is such a Nation, the Authors being many and
considerable who affirm it, and Kornmannus assents thereto, conceiving the
relation to be true, insomuch as it were a shame for any Man to be refractorie
in point of belief, and not to afford Credit to so Evident a truth. For
although this Nation of Men has been accounted by many among the Types and
Fabulous Narrations of the Ancients, yet in these latter Times we have received
credible Intelligence of such kind of Nations newly found. Johannes de
Plancarpio and Vincentius Burgundius make relations of Nations lately
discovered having such Dog-like-Heads. Odericus Poster affirms, that in
Nicoverra a City of India there are men that have Dogs-Heads, Mandevils Travels
cap. 61.
in the Isle called Macumeran, which is a great Isle and a fair, the Men and
Women, who are reasonable, have Heads like Hounds.

Marcus Paulus the Venetian assures us, that there is an Island named Daganian,
(Kornmannus calls it Anganian) the Inhabitants whereof have Heads like unto
Dogs, and live by feeding on Humane Flesh; and Pausanias delivers unto us a
relation of one Euphemus by descent a Carian, who saw such People in the
Islands of the Oceans, when he was driven thither by a Tempest as he was
sailing into Italy.

That testification also that Aristotle gives of Pigmies, is much reverenced by
Johannes Camers, Hector Pintus, and (of the Ancients) by Isidore, as affording
good ground of probability, of the being of a Nation of Cynocephali, or Men
with Dogs-Heads, and they are reported to be Negroes inhabiting a Mountain
near the River Indus, and so numerous, that there are an hundred and Twenty
Thousand of them, being called by the Indians Calistrios, which the Greeks
would call Cynocephalos, id est, Canioipites. Indeed the Historical truth is
much embased by many vain appendices, as that they bark and howl like Dogs, and
so understand one another, having no other Language, that they have Teeth
greater then Dogs Claws, but longer and rounder; that although they cannot
speak, they make signs with their Hands and Fingers, as Deaf and Dumb men use
to do, that both the Men and Women have Tails at their Rumps like to Dogs;
Headless Nations
but that they are greater and thicker of hairs, that they engender with Women
more Canine, accounting any other way of Copulation shameful; all which
Additaments are more advantagiously read then believed.

By what means these Natives might come to be thus monstrously deformed, and
the shape of their Heads to degenerate into the similitude of a Dogs-Head,
shall be sufficiently declared in our succeeding Face-moulders Scene, where we
shall present the Cynoprosopi or Men having a Dogs Face. The Artifice used
being as I probably conjecture, the same in both.

Ancient Writers have spoken of Acephali, Mela. lib. i. cap. 4.
or a headless Nation. Mela writes that the Blemii are Headless, and have all
the parts of their countenance in their Breast. Solinus. cap. 153.
Solinus delivers the same thing: there are says he who want their Necks, and
have their Eyes in the Shoulders. And before these Authors, many have written
the very same thing; Aul. Gell. At. lib. 9. cap. 4. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2.
whom Aulus Gellius reckons up. Pliny in open words does frequently assert the
same, for he delivers that their Heads are wanting, their Mouth and their Eyes
affixed in their Breasts, and not far from the Troglodytes there are certain
Men that have no Neck, Petr. Apian. 2. pars. Cosmograph, cap. 3. Mandevil in
his Travels. c. 62. and. cap. 68.
having their Eyes in their Shoulders.

Sr. John Mandevil reports, that in one of the Isles belonging to the great and
mighty King of the Island Dodyn, there are Men that have no Heads, and their
Eyes are in their Shoulders, and their Mouth is on their Breast. He gives their
original, Cham (says he) took the best part Eastward that is called Asia,
being the mightiest and Richest of his Brethren, and of him are come the Pannim
folk, and diverse manners of Men of those Isles, some headless, and the other
Men disfigured. And because some things spoken by him might seem strange and
scarce Credible, therefore he thought good to make known to all that will see
more proof hereof in his Book called Mappa Mundi, there they shall find the
most part of the same ratified and confirmed.

St. Augustine makes commemoration of such a Nation, August. de civ. D^i. li.
6. cap. 8.
and although he there does not impose a necessity of believing the Relations
that are made of such kinds of Men; so he seems to grant that it is not
incredible; Nay, he testifies, that he had seen them himself, for he assures
us in these words: I was now Bishop of Hippo, August. Sermon. 37. ad fraires in
Eremo.
and with certain servants of Christ, I Traveled to Aethiopia to preach the
Gospel of Christ unto them, and we saw there many Men and Women, having no
Heads, but gross Eyes fixed in their Breast, their other Members like unto
ours; Fulgos. lib. 1. de mirac. Sr. Walter Rawleigh Histor. of Gui. ana.
which place of August. Fulgosus cites to the same purpose.

But let us hear, Sr. Walter Rawleigh his relation of this kind of transformed
Nation; the Ewaipanomi says he are a strange headless Nation, for on the
Banks of the River Caora are a Nation of People, whose Heads appear not above
their Shoulders, which though it may be thought a mere Fable, yet for my own
part I am resolved it is true; because every Child in the Province of Arromaia
and Comurs affirm all the same: they are called Ewaipanomi, and are reported
to have their Eyes in their Shoulders, and their Mouths in the Middle of their
Breasts, and that a long train of hair grows backward between the
Shoulders. The Son of Tomawari, which I brought with me into England, told me,
that they were the most mighty Men of all the Land, and use Bows, Arrows, and
Clubs, thrice as bigg as any of Guiana, or of the Oronoqueponi, and that one of
the Iwarawakeri, took a Prisoner of them the Year before our arrival there,
and brought him into the Borders of Aromaia his Fathers Country. And further
when I seemed to doubt of it, he told me that it was no wonder among them, but
that they were as great a Nation, and as common as any other in all the
Provinces, and had of late Years slain many hundreds of his Fathers People, and
of other Nations their Neighbors; but it was not my chance to hear of them,
till I was come away, and if I had but spoken one word of it while I was there,
I might have brought one of them with me, to put the matter out of doubt. Such
a Nation was written of by Mandevill, whose reports were held for Fables many
Years; and yet since the East Indies were discovered, we find his relation true
of such things as heretofore we held incredible; whether it be true or no, the
matter is not great, neither can there be any profit in the imagination; for my
own part, I saw them not, but I am resolved that so many People did not all
combine, or fore-think to make the report. The Translator of the History of
Congo written by Pigafetta hopes, that in time, some good Guianean will make
good proof to our England, that there are this day headless Men. And if any
make Conscience to join Faith to these things upon these relations, yet they
ought not to think this wonder impossible, especially being certified by such
Authors as are here alleged.

For these strange Histories of Monstrous Nations, which in Pliny and other
Ancient Authors I have heretofore counted vain, do now require and deserve some
Credit: since in these times there is a new Nature revealed, new miracles, a
new World, full of strange varieties and sincere novelties. Dr. Franasus
Hernandus, who by the Command of Philip the second, sailed to the new World to
discover the condition thereof, whose manuscripts are kept in the Kings Library
of St. Laurence in the Escuriall, and other Manuscripts sent to the King of
Spain about the affairs of India; by the Advantage of which, Eusebius
Neirembergensis was enabled to write his new History of Nature, do justify
these and stranger relations of diverse kind of men among the Indians, in
stature, disposition, form, and deformity, as Monstrous as these Acephali or
headless Nation. Avicen was so bold to affirm, that after the immense
inundations of the World, not only mankind, but all other Creatures were
produced from the tabid Carcasses by the Celestial influx without seed; which
is a thing no wise man can be brought to believe, that so Noble a Creature
should arise out of a putrid matter, about whose Creation the whole Godhead was
employed, wherefore so great and Beautiful a work that was worthy of the
Divine Labor, could not spontaneously proceed, it being most unlikely that Man
being Compos mentis, which is a particle of Divinity, should result from so
vile an original. Sanct. Augustine in lib. de Civitate Dei.
St. Augustine, where he speaks of these Acephali and other Monstrous Nations,
somewhat better resolves the doubt of their Original; It is demanded (says he)
whether Noah's sons, or rather Adams (of whom all Mankind came) begot any of
those Monstrous Men; and he concludes, that whatsoever he begot that is Man,
that is, a Mortal reasonable Creature, be his form, Voice, or whatever, never
so different from any ordinary man's, no Faithful Person ought to doubt that
he is of Adams Progeny: yet is the Power of Nature shown and strangely shown in
such. God made all, and when or how he would form this or that he knows best,
having the perfect skill how to Beautify the Universe by opposition and
diversity of parts; but he that cannot contemplate the Beauty of the whole,
stumbles at the deformity of the part, and not knowing the Congruence that it
has with the whole. Yet God forbid that any one should be so besotted, as to
think the Maker erred in these Men's Fabric, though we know not why he made
them thus, be the diversity never so great, he knows what he does and none
must reprehend him; therefore what Nations so e're have shapes differing from
that which is in most Men, and seem to be exorbitant from the Common form, if
they be definable to be reasonable Creatures and Mortal, they must be
acknowleged for Adams Issue. But St. Austin here speaks more like a Divine then
a Philosopher; for although the supreme efficient and supernatural cause of
Monsters is God, and that when Nature seems to deflect from the common Law
established, she is rapt by a Divine force, and there is aliquid Divini in the
peculiar cause of these transfigurations of the Humane form, and that the
final cause of these prodigious apparitions may be the anger of God, who is no
way bound to the Law of Nature, and who in revenge for some crime committed,
may transform a Man as he did Nebuchadnezzar, or give over a self-deformed
Nation, to the vanity of their own inventions; yet it sounds very harsh to the
principles of our Philosophy, that the God of Nature should be so glorified by
such strange apparances, that evil and imperfect Creatures should concur to
the perfection of the universe, since they have no reference to the Beauty of
the World: because the Beauty of the universe consists in things perfect and
permanent, and Monsters, (quatenus Monsters) being nothing but defects and
privations, can contribute no perfection, and so consequently appertain not to
the Beauty of the universe; if they did conferr any ornament, they should for
the most part be produced, because the great decorum of the World is sustained
by frequent effects, but Monsters happen rarely, and therefore they ought to be
segregated from the Ornaments of the World; and if they had come to light to
adorn the World, they had from the beginning of the World appeared, which we
read of no where.

How this Monstrous alienation from the Humane Form was first introduced and
continued is not so easy to conjecture. St Augustine de civit. Dei.
St Augustine thinks that the same reason may be given for these deformed
Nations, as there is for those Monstrous productions of Men which sometimes
happen among us, of which kind of prodigious productions there are many records
wherein Nature seems to have upbraided Man's invention, and to retaliate his
affectations.

Anno Dom. 1525, at Wittenberg an Infant was borne without a Head.

Anno 1554, In Misnia an Infant was born without a Head, Fincelius de mirac.
nostri temporis.
the Effigies of Eyes expressed in his Breast.

Anno Domini 1562, in the Calends of November at Villafranc in Vasconia a
Monster was borne, a Female Acephalon; the Pourtraiture of which headless
Monster, Fontanus who religiously affirmed that he had seen it, having
communicated to Johannes Altinus the Physician, Schenchius de monst. capit.
he presented it to Paraeus when he was writing his Commentary of Monsters.
Paraeus lib. 24. cap. 6.


And reason may persuade us that it is not impossible, for it may happen by the
constitution of the Climate, that the Neck may not be allowed to be eminently
advanced above the Shoulders, and yet the instruments of Nature may perform
their Office in a nearer approach of the Neck unto the Body, Kornmannus lib. 1.
de vivorum miraculis
which is the opinion of Kornmannus. But for my own part I much suspect some
villainous Artifice and affectation to have been concurrent causes of this
nonappearance of the Head, and some fantastical dislike of the Natural
distance between the Head and the Body by the interposition of the Neck, which
has been the humor of some other Nations, who have in a manner no Neck, as
appears in this Scene, and in the fifteen and sixteenth of this our practical
Metamorphosis, where you shall find this very Nation described as if they
affected to have their Shoulders higher then their Heads; And Sr Walter
Rawleigh says, their Heads appear not above their Shoulders. And I conceive
that they are not so much headless, as that their Heads by some Violent and
constant Artifice are pressed down between their Shoulders, and affecting to
have their Shoulders higher then their Heads, the Scapula's by the constant
endeavor of their Levators grown to a habit, has drowned the Head in the
Breast, the Head being crowded too close to the Shoulders, and as it were
growing to them, the Neck is quite lost and the Eyes seem planted as upon the
Shoulders, and the Mouth in the Breast, a shadow of which resemblance we may
sometimes see in very crooked short neck'd Men. And consequently all the uses of
the Neck in point of circumspection are quite lost by this Artifice, and the
Donation of Nature therein is made void, for they cannot with ease turn their
Head about to and fro, every way to look about them, the Spondyles or turning
round Bones tied and fastened one unto another by joints and knots, cannot
possible in this posture accomplish their Motions.

But this charge and evidence I give in only against them by way of
presumption: you Gentlemen Readers of the Jury may give up your Verdict
according to your judgments, and either find Billa Vera, or return Ignoramus.

Sr. John Mandevils Travels cap. 83.
Beyond the Land of Cathay there is a Wilderness, wherein are many wild Men
with Horns on their Heads very hideous, and speak not, but rout as Swine.

That men should be so cornuted, or have horns grow on their Heads, is a thing
neither impossible nor incredible, for many have been Borne cornuted.

Amat. Lusit. cent. cur. 51.
Amatus Lusitanus speaks of a Boy Borne with a little horn on his Head.

Lycost. Chron: de prod. and stent.
Ann. 1233, In Rathstade a Town in the Norican Alps, which the Inhabitants call
Taurus, there was an Infant Borne cornuted.

Jacobus Fincelius de miraculis.
Anno 1551, in a Village of Marchias called Dammenuvald near Whitstock, a
Country Man's Wife brought forth a Monster with such a horned Head.

Among the Subalpians in Quierus, a little Town ten Miles distant from Taurin
(Teurin) Anno Dom. 1578, Amb. Paraeus lib. 24. cap. 2.
the seventeenth of January about 8 of the clock at Night, an honest Matron
brought forth a Child having five horns one against another on his Head like
unto Rams horns.

Lanfraneus saw a man who came unto him for his advice, Lanfraneus tract. 3.
Doct. 2. cap. 3. Chirur. Major.
who had seven Eminencies in his Head, one greater then another, and in diverse
places, whereof one was so great and acute like the horn of a young Goat, or
an Inch long.

Ingrassias says, Ingrassias
that together with that prudent Chirurgian Iacobus a Sorius, he saw at Panhorn
a certain Noble Virgin, who had many crooked horns, sharp at the end,
representing the Effigies of the horns of a young Steer, which rendered her so
deformed, that she rather looked like a Devil then a Woman.

One Margaret, about sixty years, the Widow of David Owen a Welsh Man, had
growing in her Forehead a horn much like unto the horns of a Lamb, as I find
in a private marginall note to Schenckius observations, written by some
Physician or Surgeon that owned the Book.

It is reported of a certain Sect of the Bannian Priests, Aloisius Epist.
Meaco Iaponis ad Indias and Sinas missa.
that they have as it were a little horn standing out upon their Heads.

I remember I have read in Camerarius or some other, a Story of a certain
King, who being jealous of his Queen, and supposing himself to be a Cuckold,
dreamt one night that he was cornuted indeed, and that he had real horns
budding out of his Forehead, and he found his dream true when he waked; which
the Author there descanting upon, conceives to be possible, by Virtue of
Imagination, transferring matter thither fit for such a production.

Horned Nations
That horns may be engrafted upon the Head appears possible by the report too
we have read of some Nations, who are wont to cut off the spurs from the heels
of Cocks new gelt, and to ensert them so cut off into their own Foreheads,
which afterward increase there and grow in a wonderful manner.

Now whether this cornuted Nation was the offspring of any horned Monsters,
sufferd to propogate themselves, and so to become national, or whether they at
first affecting such a badge of Beastiall strength, engrafted them and so it
became Natural unto them, I leave to my Masters of the Jury to find out upon a
Melius inquirendum.

Among other contrivances of Man's cruel invention I shall annex a strange
Histoy out of Fabricius Hildanus.

In the Year 1593, at Paris there was an Infant about 15 or 18 Months old, who
had the skin of its Head so extended that it exceeded the magnitude of the Head
of any Infant Hydrocephalos that was ever seen. This Child's Parents did carry
it about from Town to Town to show, and thereby exceedingly enriched themselves.

At length there being a great concourse of People, and the Parisian Magistrate
being a very discreet Man, suspecting it to be some base deceit, did cast the
Parents into Prison; And having examined, they confessed their Barbarous and
impious crime, saying that they had cut the skin of the Infants Head by making
a little hole about the Crown to the very Muscles, and by that very hole
(putting in a Reed between the skin and the Muscles) had blown into it,
Hydrocephalon.
and by degrees, within some months, (by continual puffing into it) the skin
of the Infants Head was extended to that altitude, and that they did expose it
to all here and about France to get money thereby. They had made the hole so
neatly, that drawing out the reed, with wax or some such material they could
easily close the same; When they had fully found out this horrid savage
inhumanity for certain, they put both the Parents to death. Fabr. Hild.
observat. chir. cent. 3. obs. 18.
This History Hildanus affirms to have received from Ocular witnesses and
persons of Credit.

Among other Monstrous forms and prodigious apparitions of the Head, we shall
here present Bicipites or Men with two Heads. I saw (says Hali) a Man that was
Borne having two Heads, one separated from the other.

Coelius Rhodiginus is reported to have seen two Monsters in Italy, one a man
the other a Woman, Paraeus lib. 24. oper. suor. cap. 2.
their Bodies in all parts well and neately composed, but that they had two
Heads, of which the Woman lived five and Twenty Years.

Bicipites.
Anno 1538 there was one Borne who grew up to the perfect Stature of a Man, with
his Head and Shoulders only double, so that one Head was backwardly opposite
unto the other wonderful like one another, their Beards and Eyes very much
resembling each the other, they had both the same appetite to meat, both
sensible of one hunger, Ru^ff. lib. 5. cap. 3. de concap. and generat. hom.
their voice alike, the same desire of one Wife, which they had, and of
enjoying her was to both Heads, he was above 30 Years of age when my Author
chanced to see him. The like Monster Lycosthenes saw in Bavaria Anno 1541,
Lycost. Prodig. and ostent. Chron.
she was a Woman of about Twenty six Years old with two Heads, whereof one
was sufficiently deformed.

I confess I have not in all my inquisition discovered a Nation of such Men,
although there may possibly be such a Nation in the World, since there have
been such of both Sexes, and we by these relations, see they may live to the
Age of generation, although it be against the common condition of Monsters, who
for the most part are very short lived: for as they are borne against Nature so
they live, moreover they are very irksome to themselves because they are
mocking-stocks to other Mortals, therefore they judge their life displeasing to
them, but the number of those that have been Borne with two Heads are very many.

Lycost. Anno mundi, 3791. Ruff. lib. 5. cap. 3 de generat. Homi.
In Vientum there was a Boy Borne with two Heads.

At Frusinon, a maid brought forth a Son with two Heads.

Anno Domini 601 there was a Boy Borne that was double Headed. Men with two
Heads:
Lycost. lib prodig. An. 3838. uterque ut Schenchius videtur ex Julio
obsequente. Lycost. lib. prod.


Anno 1552 in Hassia three days after the Feast of the three Kings or
Twelfth-Tide there was a Masculine Infant borne with two Heads, a double Neck,
and with a Body very well compact and agreeing with the other members.

Anno 554 in the Village of Senas, there was a Monstrous Boy Borne with two
Heads, which Valeriola reports from the Testimony of Men of Credit who were
Spectators and Eye witnesses of this Prodigy. Valeriola loc. com. lib. 1. cap.
18


Cicero speaks of a Girl Borne with two Heads. Cicero de divinat. Aventimus
Annal. Bojorum lib. 7.
About the Year of our Lord 1413. On the 9th of the Calends of April, there
was a Girl Borne in Sanders-Droff with two Heads.

Anno 1544 in the Month of January there was a Female Child Borne with two
Heads, Cardan de variet. lib. 14. cap. 77.
in all other things representing one Body.

Anno 1487 at Patavia there was an Infant Borne, Licosth. lib. prodig.
in whom besides this Capital luxury there was nothing uncomely to behold.

Anno 1536 at Lovane there was an Infant Borne with two Heads. Gemma lib. 1. c.
6. Cosmocrit.


And in the memory of Peucerus there was a Child seen in Hassia, Peucerus
Teratoscop. 440. Facie aversa.
the fifth of the Ides of January Anno 440 with two Heads reflected toward the
Back, whose Faces being obverse beheld one another with a frowning countenance.

Anno 1553 in a certain village of Misnia, Lycosth. prodi.
called Zichest, not far from Pirnauu, there was an Infant Borne with two
Heads, being absolute in all the other Members. Bicipites.


The apparition of these Monstrous Men was ever held prodigious: Porphirius
says that over the Land of Sicilie there happened a great Eclipse, Rabbi Moses
partic. 24 Aphorism.
and that Year the Women of that Region brought forth deformed Sonns having
two Heads.

Lycost. lib. prodig.
Anno Domini 1104 there were monstrous Births brought forth, Cattle and Men
Borne with two Heads. Aventinus lib. 5 Annal. Bojorum.
After Clement the third was driven out of the City, among other prodigies
there were also Monstrous Births, Men Borne with two Heads.

But we must know above all things, that these apparitions that be contrary
to Nature, happen not without the providence of Almighty God, but for the
punishing and admonishing of Men, these things by his just judgment are often
permitted, not but that Man has a great hand in these monstrosities: for,
inordinate Lust is drawn in as a Cause of these Events, whereby the seed of Man
is made weak and unperfect, whence the productions thereof must necessarily
prove weak and imperfect; for from a precedent defect in the seed, it is a
conseqence that the issue must be defective, and on the contrary, if the seed
be superfluous, out of a superfluous a superfluous is begot, as any one may
easily collect.

Now to vindicate the regular beauty and honesty of Nature from the
depravations of Art, we say that the Head, when free from any irregularity of
Nature or mischievous endeavors of Art, it obtaines its Natural Figure; by
the testimony of Galen it resembles a Sphere, but oblong, the parts about the
Temples a little depressed on both sides; The Heads true Figure.
and when it observ's its ligitimate magnitude, it answers with its length,
which is from the end of the Chin to the Crown of the Head, the sixth part of
the whole Body: That the parts also should agree among themselves, it requires
four equal lines; the first is that which they call the line of the Face, and
reaches from the bottom of the Chin to the top of the Forehead; the other is
that which we call the occipitiall line, and it is drawn from the top of the
Head to the first Vertebre of the Neck; the third is of the Forehead, running
out from one Temple to the other; Lastly, the fourth led on from the bottom of
the Ear (in which place the mammillary process is) to the highest part of the
Synciput: These four lines if they be reciprocally equal, the Head is called
proportionate; but if they have declined to any inequality, they are said to
recede so much from their just and natural constitution, as they draw nearer
to that. For of these lines, if that of the Face be longer, the Head is called
long, but if shorter it shall be called short, If the line of the Forehead
exceed the rest in length, it makes a broad Head; if that of the Occipitium
transgress its bounds, the Head is acuminate; if all be equal; the Head
proves round and Natural, If they be all unequal, or some or more, from
thence arises that form of the Head, which with Hippocrates and Galen is
called (...); So that there are some Heads long, some broad, some acuminate,
Spigel. Annat.
and some round, and others (...). So Spigelius. All commonly fashioned by the
pragmaticall endeavors of the Midwives and Nurses in every Region: but because
many Physicians and Anatomists have questioned the propriety that our
Sugar-loafe-like headed Gallants have in the word (...), we will do them that
just favor as to set forth their Title. Aristotle calls such who have Capita
acuta, (...), quasi proacuminata capita habentes, vel ex fastigiatione quam
vocant (...), or from the form of fire, which is called (...). But Anatomists are
of opinion that (...) signifies only a deformed or depraved Head and not this
acute, Gal. lib. de usu part. 17.
since Galen reckons an exact round and Sphericall Head amongst the species of
(...), and therefore they think that Siculus and Regius have done ill to render
it acutum. Siculus de ossibus apud Gal. and Regius 9. de usu part. 17.


Amongst the rest (Sennertus) speaking of the vicious Figures of the Head,
thinks that all Heads which recede from the Natural Figure are by Galen
generally called (...), and so they are not only (...) which have capita
fastigiata, copt-crown'd, or acuminate Heads; but also those in whom either the
fore, or hinder, or both the emminencies are wanting, or jet out more then is
meet: so that Heads only backward, Phoxi.
or forward, or upward, may appear sharp toward the top. For, either the
Synciput or anterior part of the skull is more emminent then it should be, the
hinder part of the Head on the other side, as it were vanishing away and not
extuberant, or else the hinder part of the Head is prominent and neither the
Anterior nor Posterior eminency protuberates; and if it be not depressed on the
sides, it exhibits as it were a perfect Sphere; and if it be depressed in the
Temples, the Head may run out in the top or crown and be acuminate.

Hofman says, Hofman Inst. med. lib. 3.
that (...) with the Greeks are those who want the fore and hinder eminency of
the Head, called in Dutch Spitzkoepf, the same also are (...), and (...), he
knows not how to call them in Latin, yet he will describe them, Qui acuminato
sunt capite. And therefore though Fallopius will have all those who have a
preternaturall Figure of the Head to be called (...) of Galen, and that
therefore it ought not to be rendered acutum or acuminatum, but depravatum,
that it might be rightly opposed unto the Natural. Yet Hofmannus is for the
first version; Hofman comment. de usu part.
for since (...) by the confession of Fallopius himself is opposed to (...),
(the word which Galen uses to express the very Natural Figure of the Head)
who sees not (says he) that the Head cease to be (...) oblongum, and thereby
to be made acute or acuminate when either or both the Eminencies perish? and if
Galen extend the word more largely to those who have the Eminencies
protuberating beyond the Natural proportion, The Heads true Figure.
that ought not to evert the proper signification received of all Authors;
therefore (...) is properly he who has an acuminate Head, such a one as he
thinks the Latins call Chilonem, Bauhin. Anat. lib. 3.
and which Bauhinus accounts for a fifth Figure of the Head contrived by Art.

But it appears plainly, that (...), to wit, sphera oblonga, not prolonga, as
some interpret it, (which Galen seems to point to as it were with the Finger,
where he calls it spheram quasi compressam) which you must conceive about the
Ears and the Temples) is the only Natural Figure of the Head, which when
Columbus denies, affirming all Figures of the Head to be equally Natural, he
does nothing; for, this is Natural which is for the most part; which also is
most commodious to the Actions of Nature; But such is the Figure which Galen,
out of Hippocrates, says does constitute the Natural Figure, a sphere not
every where equal, but such a one as has cavities and Eminencies. For, the
best Figure of the Head which is Natural is assimilated to a sphere gently
compressed on each side, and which is in the Temples after a manner plain, but
in the forepart and hinder part is more prominent then in a Sphere; yet it
more protuterates in this, then that, in the Crown it observes the convexity of
a Sphere: they therefore who chance to have such a Head with a decent
magnitude, they enjoy a vigorous alacrity of senses, and are endowed with a
good strength of Body. But why this laterall compression should be the most
proper and Natural Figure of the Head, that the forepart and hinder parts
thereby are made more gibbous, and the final cause thereof ought to be
enquired.

Avicens opinion is, Avicen.
that although the skull be round, yet it is oblong made in length, because the
original of the Nerves are disposed from the Brain in longitude, and therefore
it was fit they should not be straightened, and it has two Eminencies, one
before and another behind, that the Nerves might descend, which descend to the
front and the Nucha.

Zonardus well notes that the Head has such a Globous roundnesse, Zonardus
which on both sides is somewhat plain, in the Anterior part it is somewhat
acute and elevated, and that to retain the Ventricle of the Brain in the
fore-deck of the Head, out of which the Nerves which cause the five Senses
proceed, and after the same manner, it is a little elevated in the hinder part
for the reception of the Ventricle in the stern or hinder deck, from whence
the spondible Marrow and the Nerves which procure voluntary motion arise.

Hugo Senensis says, Hugo Senensis.
this manner of compression was contrived for the better distinguishing of the
places from whence it was opportune the Nerves should arise, which would not
have been well distinguished if the Head had been exactly round. Secondly,
because the former and hinder Ventricle ought to have a greater cavity then the
middle, and because the middle Ventricle ought to be a way from one to the
rest; therefore it was necessary, that the Anterior and Posterior parts should
have an Eminency. Archangelus Picholomenus thinks, Pichol. praelect. Anat. lib.
5.
the Brain is lightly depressed on each side, and a little exporrected in
length for the foremost Ventricles sake, made hollow in it, which appears to
be oblong, to whose hinder part the third Ventricle adheares, and to the third
the fourth: wherefore a Brain not perfectly Globous, but gently compressed on
each side and lightly protended in length, was convenient for the Ventricles.

Antonius Ulmus, defin. Barbae, Hum. s. 2
Antonius Vlmus to these true opinions of the Ancients has thought of another
end of this Figure of the Head, which is confirmed by the testimony of sense,
who is of opinion that the Head was laterally compressed for the Eies-sake, to
wit, the better to promote the action of the Eye, whose action is then better
when it exists more free. Now the Head compressed, the Eye is enlarged to the
seeing of things backward to the right and left hand; and although not simply
to the universal space of a circular vision, yet at least to some portion of
the same. Men may know the truth of this if they first try it in the
Cephalicall compression, standing with a stiff Neck, and turning one Eye to the
outward Angle, let them endeavor until they perceive where the visory Rays
do come, in which experiment they had need have the place marked with some
note; Afterward, remaining fixed in the same place, and standing just as in the
same experiment, he would have them by some device to have their Heads rotunded
or rounded, that they may obtain a perfect sphericity, then let them turn the
same Eye to the outward Angle, and try to find whereabout or how far the
Visory Rays reach the place formerly seen, and marking it with some note; that
done, let them consult with Sense, what portion of the place is hid from the
very Eye by rotunditie of the Head; for, Sense will apparently teach, that in
this Cephalicall compression to the sides, the Eyes more freely expatiate to
the back parts; the gaining of which advantage he thinks to be the cause of
such compression.

Having thus presented the artificial contrivances of Man's Invention,
practiced on the Head, upon imaginary conceits of Beauty and generosity, and
discovered the inconveniences of such foolish and fantastical devices, how
derogatorie they are to the honor and Majesty of Nature and prejudicial to
her operations; and having set down the Canon of Nature, for the true and
proper Figure of the Head, with the uses and final cause of such a shape,
which is the only true and natural form of the Head; and having condemned
them of the crime Laesa Majestatis, who have forced Art (the usual Imitator of
Nature) to turn Praevaricator in humanity, we cannot but commend those
Nations who have been tender in this point of offering violence to Nature,
namely the Lacedaemonians, whose Nurses had a certain manner of bringing up
their Children without having any Crosse-cloaths, Plutarch in the life of
Lycurgus.
or any thing to left the Natural growth of the Head, but left nature free to
her own course, which made their Heads better shaped. The like modest
acquiescence in the wisdom of Nature, Block-heads and Logger-heads
I suppose to be the reason why the Switzers Heads for the most part are so
conformable to the Canon and intention of Nature.

I knew a Gentleman had diverse sonns, and the Midwives and Nurses had with
head-bands and strokings so altered the Natural mould of their Heads, that
they proved Children of a very weak understanding; his last Son only, upon
advice given him, had no restraint imposed upon the Natural growth of his
Head, but was left free from the coercive power of head-bands and other
Artificial violence, whose Head although it were bigger, yet he had more Wit
and understanding then them all.

Hitherto of those Nations who have tampered with the Figure of their Heads,
and have labored to introduce a change and alteration in the most Noble part
of the Humane Fabric. There be other Nations fit to be brought on this Stage,
who use Art to alter the substance and temper of their Heads; For Blockheads
and Logger-heads are in request in Brasil, Purchase pilgr. 4. lib. 1.
and Helmets are of little use, every one having an Artificialized Natural
Morian of his Head: for, the Brasilians Heads, some of them, are as hard as the
wood that grows in their Country, for they cannot be broken, and they have
them so hard, that ours in comparison of theirs are like a Pompion, and when
they will injure any white Man, they call him soft Head, so that hard-head and
blockhead, terms of reproach with us, attributed to them, would be taken for
terms of Honor and Gentleman-like qualifications. This property they
purchased by Art, with-going bare headed, which is a certain way to attain
unto the quality of a Brasilian Chevalier, and to harden the tender Head of any
Priscian, beyond the fear of breaking or needing the impertinent plaster of
predantick Mountebanks.

The Indians of Hispaniola, De Bry in Hist. occid. Ind. Cardan. lib. 5. de
subtle.
the skuls of their Heads are so hard and thick, that the Spaniards agreed,
that the Head of an Indian, although bare, was not to be struck for fear of
breaking their Swords, which I suppose to happen through the same Artifice.

The Egyptians also are hard Heads; for, their Heads are so hard, that a Stone
can hardly break the skin; which they attain unto by having their hair shaved
from their childhood; so that the sutures of their skuls grow firm and hard
with the heat.

Hence we read, that in the Battles that passed between the Egyptians and
Persians, Herodotus and diverse others took special notice, that of such as
lay slain on the ground, the Egyptians skuls were without comparison much
harder then the Persians, by reason these go covered with Coyfes and Turbants,
and those from their Infancy ever shaved and bare-headed. King Massinissa, the
Emperor Severus, Caesar, and Hanniball, in all weathers were wont to go
bare-headed; and Plato for the better health and preservation of the Body, does
earnestly persuade, that no Man should ever give the Head other cover then
Nature had allotted it; And Varro is of opinion, that when we were appointed to
stand bare-head before the gods, or in the presence of the Magistrates, it was
rather done for our health, and to inure and harden us against the injuries of
the weather, then in respect of reverence.

And I suppose we in this Kingdom incurr some inconveniences by keeping our
Heads so warm as generally we do, neither (I believe) do the Brasilians or
Egyptians escape the affliction of Headaches; for by this their Artifice, the
sutures grow together and be obliterated in them, as they are found to be many
times in those who have suffered incurable Headaches, strangling Cathars,
Apoplexes and other Maladies, for no other cause then that their sutures began
to close, and their skuls to grow solid, the skull growing dry many times in
young Men, even as it is wont to do by reason of Age. A thing usual in hot
Countries, as Celsus notes, and Paraeus affirms, that the Ethiopians, and
Moors, and those that inhabit the hot Regions, about the Meridian and
Equinoctial, have their skuls harder, and parted with none or few sutures; by
which temper of their climates and their concurring Artifice, they obtain
indeed a notable defense against outward injuries, more then the ordinary
provision of Nature does afford, but thereby they become more obnoxious to
internal injuries, to wit, to those diseases, which arise from the retention
of fuliginous vapors, and their thick skuls may render them more indocile and
oblivious, as the Indians of Hispancola are noted to be. Celsus therefore is
mistaken, where he affirms their Heads to become thereby more firm and safe
from pain; but he more derogates from the justice and Wisdom of Nature, when
he affirms that the fewer sutures there be, the health of the Head is more
thereby accommodated, both which opinions of Celsus, Fallopius very moderately
expounds by way of distinction, saying, Gabr. Fallopius comment. in lib. Gal.
de Offibus.
that his opinion is partly true and partly false; for if you understand him of
those affections that have pain from an internal cause, then it is so far
that their Heads should not ache, that they rather ache, since there are found
many affections which arise from vapors and smoke retained: but if we
understand it of those griefs which may arise from long abode under the Sun, or
from the coldness of the ambient Air, his opinion is most true, because since
there are no sutures, there can be no transpiration of external air hot or
cold; therefore he must be understood of pains which proceed from an
extrinsique cause. But the other part of his opinion is not to be endured of
those, who tender the reputation and honor of Nature; For, Reald. Columb.
Anat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Columbus from many most certain arguments drawn from experience, and
dissections made upon the skuls of many men, (and which is more strange and
scarce credible) some Women who have died of incurable Headaches, have been
assured (finding in their skuls small sutures, and those conjoined close
together) that their pains have been occasioned from that too close
composition of bones; and has hence took a just occasion to right Nature by
this honorable conclusion, That the sutures of the Head do not only confer
to the defense of the Bodies health, but do conferr more unto it by how much
the greater and looser they shall be.

Wherefore (says he) I could never approve of the opinion of Cornelius Celsus,
asserting that Heads without sutures are not only most strong and firm, but
also free from all manner of griefs, such as are to be found in hot and
scorching Regions; for he only takes notice of causes hurting the Head from
without; sure if the saying of Celsus were true, those Heads should be weaker
and more apt to suffer, which had remarkable sutures, then those which had
small or no sutures at all. But since it is otherwise, and the Brain is more
apt to be damnified by internal suliginous recrements, then outward injuries,
we must conclude that those Heads which have more ample sutures, are far safer
from pain, then those that are destitute of them, or are intersected with
small and very close ones.

SCENE II. Bald pates.
Certain Fashions of Hair affected by diverse Nations, and their opinions and
practice about Haire-rites, most derogatory to the Honor of Nature.
THe Arymphaei who dwell near the Ryphaean Mountains, Ravisius ex Herodoto.
esteem Hair upon the Head to be a very great shame and reproach, and
therefore they affect baldness, and are so from their nativity, both men and
women.

The Arnupheae (as Pliny reports) be all shorn and shaven, Pliny, lib. 6.
for both Men and Women count it a shame to have hair on their Heads.

The Argippaei, Jo: Bohemus de ritibus gent. lib. 2.
that live under the roots of the high mountains in Scythia, are bald from
their Nativity both Men and Women.

The Miconii also are borne without Hair, Strabo lib. 10.
and baldness is lovely and National to them, wherefore they are wont to call
bald Men Myconians. And it is likely that this which now is natural unto them,
proceeded at first from some affectation and endeavor of Art, which in time,
through the indignation of Nature, made the Heads of their offsprings
Naturally barren of Hair, which is not very improbable, considering the
strange conclusions that have been tried, to cross and turn the ordinary
course of Nature into the channel of Men's fantastical inventions.

Lindschoten. lib, 1. cap. 26.
The Japonians account it for a great Beauty to have no Hair, whch with great
care they do pluck out, only have a bunch of Hair on the Crown of their Heads,
which they tie together.

Grimstone of their manners.
Another says, some of them pull away their Hair before, and others behind,
and the peasants and meaner sort of People, have half the Head bald: the
Nobility and Gentry have few Hairs behind; and if any one touch them that are
left, they hold it for a great offense.

Sr. John Mandevils Travels cap. 54.
In the Land of Lombe where grows good Wine, and Women drink Wine, and Men
none, the Women shave their Heads, and not Men.

Montaignes Essaies.
Not only in the Province of Baske, but in other places, Bald-pated Women.
Women are accounted fairest, when their Heads are shaven, and which is strange
in some of the northerly frozen countries, Plin. Not. Hist.
as Pliny affirms,

That the Hair should be, as these Nations conceive, a most abject excrement,
an unprofitable burden, and a most unnecessary and uncomely covering, and that
Nature did never intend that excrement for an Ornament, is a piece of
Ignorance, or rather malicious impiety against Nature.

How great an Ornament the Hair is to the Head, appears by the deformity is
introduced by baldness: If the Hair were an excrement, it should be shut
quite out of the Body, but this remains in, and they have many different
accidents, of which they ought to give a final cause, and not to tie them to
the necessity of matter, which is supposed one end of their production. Neither
do they proceed from the fuliginous excrements of the Brain, as some are
pleased to think, but rather as Spigelius well notes, of Blood attracted by the
root of the Hair unto the rest of the Plant and Trunck, which may be procured
from those things, which in other Creatures hold analogy with the Hairs of
Man. And therefore when the Brain is consumed, baldness ensues; the allowed
plenty of blood exhausted, The Natural use of Hair.
to wit, that from whence Hairs, and wherewith the Brain and the circumstant
parts are nourished. The prime end therefore of the Hair of the Head is to
defend the skin, the second use is to defend the Brain from injuries from
without, or from within. From without there may happen to fall upon it Air,
Rain, Hail; from within, Vapors, exhaling from the inferior parts, may prove
troublesome. The Air may hurt the Head many ways, by coldness constipating
the Pores of the skin, whence the regresse of Vapors is exhibited; by heat,
whence the Spirits are dissipated and the Brain as it were sod; by moistness,
relaxing the internal parts; by dryness, astringing all, and consuming the
innate humiditie: against all these inconveniences (which the foolish malice of
these Men bring upon their Heads) the Hair by covering the Head does very
aptly bring relief. Rain moistens, Hail smites on it; the density of the
Hair keeps off one, the other the ductus or course of the Hair turns away;
for the thickness of the Hair admits not easily of Rain, and the turnings of
the Hair do straightway cast off the Hail that falls upon the Head. In like
manner they abate the force of internal Contingencies, for they afford a
passage to Vapors, elevated from the inferior parts, and ascending to the top
of the Head, granting a free and open way unto them. And since the Brain is
severed so far from the Fountain of heat, and confining so near the Bones,
and under them fenced with no fat, these Hairs protect and warm it. They
therefore that cut them wholly away, do not only bring a deformity upon
Nature, but afford an occasion to defluxions. We must avert (then) from
Nature these calumnies of the opinions and practices of Men: That no Hair is
necessary or comely in Man; That Hairs are a purgament of the Body altogether
unprofitable, growing only that they may be shaved, being made by Nature to do
nothing: and recommend those Cosmetiques as laudable, which preserve Hair for
the use and intention of Nature, condemning all those ways of decalvation
practiced by the Ancients to the prejudice of Nature, nothing but the rigid law
of inexorable necessity, in case of diseases, being able to excuse Man for
introducing upon himself a voluntary baldness, shaving (generally speaking)
being servile, ridiculous, and proper to Fools and Knaves, an infamous blot of
effeminacy, an index of ignominy, calamity and damage, uncomely, because
allied unto depiled baldness, being in sooth a voluntary, spontaneous, and
wilful baldness; shaving off the Head unto the quick, being from all
antiquity appropriated unto Fools, being proper in them to signify the utter
deprivation of Wit and understanding, and at first began in mockery and to move
laughter; not to mention how repugnant it is to divine writ, it is apparently a
shame and a disgrace put upon Nature, and the reproach, as an indeleble
Character of infamy, cleaves unto the memory of him who bears the Name of
Corses, for being the first who suffered the Hair of his Head to be shaved.
His wit (therefore) was affected with a shameful and impious Itch, who
scratcht his Head for such a Paradox as praised baldness; Sinesius by Name,
who therein showed more Wit then Honesty; for because Dion had justly commended
a bush of Hair, he forsooth on the contrary, would take upon him to commend
baldness. That the Hair is a Natural Ornament, all Allegorical Authors have
significantly maintained, The Natural Dign: of Hair.
and that the depravation and voluntary absence thereof is a blemish and
introduces an aspect of humiliation: most Nations have by their practice
asserted, and therein given their suffrage to the Natural comeliness thereof.
Amongst the Indians the King causes the Hair of the greatest Malefactors to
be cut, thinking that to be the greatest reproach and punishment.

Herodot. Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
The Persians and the Canaryns Women, cut their Hair at the Funeral of their
Friends.

The People of Brasil and Southern parts of America, Idem pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
although when they are angry they let their Hair grow long, when they mourn
they cut it.

Idem Pilgr: 2. lib. 7.
In Pegu, Men and Women that be near akin, shave their Heads in sign of
mourning.

Jeremiah 48. cap. 37.
And baldness, and a shaved Head, were practical tokens of mourning among the
Jews.

Munster Cosmograph. lib. 6. cap. 38.
The Egyptians only who have many strange customs contrary to Nature, whereas
most mortals in Funerals shave their Heads and let their Beards grow long, they
on the contrary let their Hair grow long and shave their Beards.

The Abantes or Euboensians (as the Brasilians do now to the Crown) were wont
to shave the forepart of their Heads, Fantastical Tonsures.
Bruson. facet. lib. 7.
and were the first that used this kind of barbing; which was also used by the
offspring of Theseus; the Curetes (that is to say, clipped) of the Greek word
Coura, which signifies clipping, and the Aetolians did the like; they of the
Region Quicuri, and other West-Indians do the like. The ancient Gauls, says
Sydon. Apol. wear their Hair long before, and all the hinder part of the Head
shaven. Montaigne Essay 49.
A Fashion which our wanton Youths, and effeminate Gallants (says Montaigne)
have lately renewed, and in this new fangled fond doting age brought up again,
Petr. Martyr decad. 7.
with wearing of long dangling Locks before. Eare-locks being also a pestilent
cusome, as Petrus Martyr observes, Mad Shavers
in the Province of Duharo in the West Indies.

Bruson. Facet. lib. 7.
The Maxies wear their Hair long on the right side of their Head, and shave
the left side.

Herberts Travels.
They of the Cape of Good Hope, some shave one side of their Heads, and leave
the other curled and long.

Grimstone of their manners.
The inhabitants of S. Croix of the Mount, their Heads are shaven bare on either
side, having a tuft of Hair in the midst: some shave but one half, either on
the right side or on the left, and most of them round about, suffering the
Hair to grow in the midst, they say they received this custom from one
Paicume.

Capt. Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
The Sasquesahanoughs, a Giant-like People of Virginia, wear their Hair on the
one side long, the other short and close, with a ridge over their Crowns like
a Cocks comb.

The Tartarians commonly shave the back part of their Heads, and let the other
grow long, Grimstone of their manners.
which they tie behind their Ears: not only the Tartarians are shaven after
this manner, but also such as go to remain in their Coun-try. Bruson. Facet.
lib. 7.


The Dacians shave the crown of their Head, suffering the Hair to grow in the
middle, clipping it here and there in orb.

Although these Men deprive themselves in a manner of half the benefit
intended them by Nature, yet some of them did it not out of any malice to
Nature: for whereas they had before-time much Hair upon their Foreheads, and
the Enemy taking occasion thereby to lay hold on them the more easily, they
shaved themselves before, and kept their Hair long behind. But the ancient
Gauls had no such colorable excuse, but they remained as they use to paint
opportunity.

Front capillata, post est occasio calva.

And if the Maxies and the inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope offer no
affront to Nature in shaving one half of their Heads, and letting the other
grow, M^ns Hair fillited.
David was very impertinently angry with Hanun for serving his Ambassadors
after that manner, and they needed not to have staid at Jericho until their
Hair was grown. And Demosthenes might have walked abroad without reproach,
when he had thus shaved his Head, that for shame of being seen in so deforming
a Garb of Hair, he might keep the closer unto his study. Neither are your
Catch-Poles thus shaved at the Inns of Court, any way ill entreated.

Pet. Mart decad. 3.
They of the Region Quicuri, in the West Indies; the Women use to cut their
Hair, but the Men let it grow behind, which they bind up with fillets and
wind it in sundry rols, as our Maids are accustomed to do.

Cap Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
The Women the Natural Inhabitants of Virginia are cut in many Fashions
agreeable to their Years, but ever some part remains long.

Capt. Smiths descrip. of New England.
In New England among the Native Inhabitants, when a Maid is Married, she
cutteth her Hair and keeps her Head covered, until it be grown again.

Pet. Mart. decad. 7. Hieron Giravae Cosmograph.
The Chicoranes nourish their black Hair down to their Girdles, and the Women
in longer trace round about them, both Sexes tie up their Hair.

Magin. Indor.
In China the Men as well as the Women do^ wear long Hair, rolling it up upon
the top o^ their Heads, which they fasten with a silver pin.

Magin. America.
In Peru the Men wear long Hair which the^ bind up with fillets.

Lindschoten.
The Bramenes never cut their Hair, but wear it long, and turned up as the
Women do.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The Quieteves Haire-Fashion is in horns, mocking them, that want them as
Women; Long-haired Men.
for as the Males have horns, which the Female Beasts want, so these salvage
Beasts also. The Quieteves have a Fashion none may imitate, four horns, one of
a span long on the mould of the Head like a Unicorne, and three of half a
span, one on the Neck, at each Ear another, all upright to the top.

The Cyguanians have their long Hair wreathed and rolled after a Thousand
Fashions. Pet. Mart. decad. 1


In Savoy, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11.
Dauphine, and Languedock, about the Alps, both Men and Women wear long Hair;
whereupon a part of France was called Comata.

D. Junius the reverend Pastor of Delph, Revius de usu Capillitii.
does witness, that in an Island called the Beautiful Island, the Men wore
their Hair as long as Women, which they had much ado to make them leave off.
Whereby you may see it is true what Pliny affirms, that Men by the Donation
of Nature, have as long Hair on their Head as Women, if they let it grow and
never cut it.

The Hair in a more special manner was given Woman for a covering. In all
kind of Creatures, and in every sex Nature has placed some note of
difference, Hair Regulated.
and the judgment of Nature is no way ambiguous, where she has granted by a
peculiar indulgence, as an Ornament and beauty, the increase of long Hair,
even down unto the Feet: Nature having allowed them in recompense of their
smoothness and want of a Beard, prolixe Hair, which use has rolled up, a
custom some seem too strictly to urge, who will not allow Women to have Hair
hanging down by their Cheeks, but all to be bound up and hid. Certainly such
a dependant part by it self, of its own Nature, is not contrary to the Law of
Nature, or unlawful, neither is it intrinsically evil, so that it can never
be honest; for, positis ponendis, it may stand with the honesty of Nature, and
the modesty of a Christian Woman. But for a Woman to be shorn, is clearly
against the intention of Nature: in suffrage to which truth, the Germans and
ancient Gauls thought there could no greater punishment be inflicted upon a
Woman for adultery, then to cut her Hair, and to turn her so disgracefully
out of doors (deprived of the peculiar Ornament of her sex.) It is noted also,
that that Consult of the Senate of Athens, upon occasion of their Army which
perished in Aegina, was against the Law of Nature; which commanded Men to
nourish their Hair, and the Women to cut theirs. And no less despite against
Nature, showed Aristodemus the Tyrant of Cumana, when he commanded all the
Virgins to be trimmed round.

For Men to nourish long Hair is quite contrary to the intention of Nature,
even by the judgment of St. Paul. Does not Nature (says he) teach you, that
long Hair in a Man is a shame? It Is true, our common parent nature has
planted the Head, the tower of Reason and the Senses, and the principle
Sanctuary of the faculty of the Soul, with a fruitful grove of Hair, partly
that they should imbibe the afflux of subrepent humors, partly that this
covering might be useful against the injuries of Air, and the stings of
insects; yet she would not as it were by an irrefragable Edict, establish a
sempiternall and unrestrained permission, to the luxury of Hair, but made it
lawful for us to cut it according to our arbitrament, and to revoke that
superfluous and recrementitious offspring of Hair to a just moderation: and as
we prune luxurious Vines, so we may take away and freely coerce that
improficuous matter of Hair; nourishing of extraordinary long Hair, having
been ever infamous to Men in all ages, and Tonsure comely, necessary to the
trimming of the Body, proper, healthful, and honorifique, an argument of
virility to a free and politic Creature as Man is; for to what use or purpose
should that superfluous crop of Hair serve? or what emolument it can bring
none can see, unless it be to breed Lice and Dandro, after the manner of your
Irish; who as they are a Nation estranged from any humane excellency, scarce
acknowledge any other use of their Hair then to wipe their hands, from the fat
and dirt of their meals, and any other filth, for which cause they nourish
long fealt locks, hanging down to their Shoulders, which they are wont to use
in stead of Napkins to wipe their grensie Fingers. The Getae also and Barbarous
Indians, are condemned for never cutting nor regulating their Hair, as
suffering themselves to enter into a nearer alliance with Beasts then ever
Nature intended, who has made Man more smooth and nothing so hairy as they
are. The Hair Regulated.
For Man therefore to wear Hair so long as it may serve for a covering, as
Woman's Hair is, was never intended to be allowed by Nature: since such Hair
may somewhat hinder the actions of common life, which the Nazarites, who cut
not their Hair, seeing and knowing by sense, they not only converted their
Hair unto the sides, but turned them behind their Ears, and to the hinder
parts of the Head, by that means sparing their Hair, and meeting with the
inconvenience which may happen to the action of the Eye and Organ of the Ear,
if they be covered with Hair. Which parting of the Hair occasioned that
discerning Organ, seam or Middle way, which appears so commonly in Women, being
not a Natural, but an artificial line of distinction, because made by Art,
although for a Natural end, such as are the Actions of the said Eyes and
Ears. And in troth, if we examine the matter more fully, to what end, should
we either mingle or change the custom, or the sequestring variance of virile
Nature with Feminine, that one Sex cannot be known or distinguished from
another? for, we that we may be no less differing in our trimming and
Ornament, then we are in Sex, do cut our Hair, neither is there any more
Reason that we should counterfeit Women then they Men; None can deny but that
both have been accounted a shameful reproach. Diogenes, to one with curled
long Hair, asking a question, denied to answer, until he was ascertained
whether he was a Man or a Woman; But the maine Quaere is, what long Hair it is
that is repugnant to Nature, against her Law, and against, above, or beside the
Natural use, and against the order of Nature, Tonsure Regulated.
which very Beasts observe, and which turns to the Damage of the user, which
is nothing else, then to be strange from the end for which Hair was given to
Man; whether the Hair of Man ought to be any longer, then barely to cover the
skul, or whether they should be allowed, which touch not the Cranium and are
not in the Head, but notably descend below the skul, and can bring no relief
to the Head, and whether such Hair can be either honest, comely, or full of
Majesty? Some think that God has delineated the bounds of the Hair about the
Forehead, and that since the bounds are so Graphically struck out as it were
with a pair of Compasses, therefore it is not lawful to transgress these
bounds: Which does not follow; for by the same rule, Women are to be shorn,
since they have (originally) those determined bounds of the Hair, which are
called by our Barbers the Normal Angles; Because the Bones are delineated where
they arise, therefore should they run out no further? Nature has determined the
place whence the Nerves arise, ought they not therefore to spread over the
Body, but be cut off there where they arise? It is no good argument from the
bound of a things rising, to the bound of its progress. And the Hair was not
only intended to cover and warm the skul, for it may cover the Temples and the
Neck, because there are most thin Bones; This is the principle of the Nerves
which spread themselves over the whole Body, and are cold by Nature, therefore
by the Counsel of the best Physicians, these parts are to be covered with the
Hair; They therefore who would have us believe that the Hair should descend
no lower then the Ears, and which transcend those limits, should
contumeliously despite Nature, The decency of Hair stated.
as having so much intrinsique malice in it as cannot stand with innocence,
had need prove that Adam had scissers, and cut his Hair in Paradise. They are
yet more severe, who would have it against the Law of Nature, to wear Hair
below the skul; for there is some difference between Nature and the law of
Nature: The Law of Nature is that, which by reason of Rational Nature is
common to all Men among themselves, which is written in the Hearts of all Men,
according to which they accuse or excuse themselves. They are not of the Law of
Nature which many Nations never had, nor have, notice of, it must be known to
all Men; Some think this Law is written in all Men's Hearts, explicitly as to
some things, implicitly as to others, and we shall not charge all Nations of
Malice or wilful transgression against the law of Nature, who nourish Hair
besides the intention of Nature, since there are many conclusions which are of
the law of Nature, which are not known to all Men. To conclude, Hair long or
short, thick or thin, more or less, is a matter of indifferency; wherein there
is a variety incident according to the diversity of complexions, ages, seasons
of the Year, Climates or places of habitation, diseases or health: the
prolixity or brevity whereof we cannot positively determine. Upon pretense of
their hot Climate, the Turks call such as wear long Hair on their Heads,
slovens, and account them Salvage Beasts, for they themselves wear no Hair at
all upon their Heads. We in colder climates are bound by a principle of
Natural practice and convenience, to reduce our Tonsure to a just moderation
and decency; wherein some regard must be had to custom, which is the rule of
decorum for he does that which is ridiculous, Black Hair affected.
and less honest and convenient, who offends against Custom, which is the
Rule of Decency, who being singular, is Poled and closely cut among those who
wear a bush, or bushie among those who are Poled.

The Maldives, esteem black Hair a great Beauty, and make it come so by Art,
by continual shaving, keeping their Heads shaven until eight or nine years,
they shave them from 8 days to 8 days, which makes the Hair very black.

The Turks have a black powder made of a Mineral called Alcohole, with which
tincture they use to color the Hair of their Heads and Beards black; Lord
Bacon Not. Hist. cen. 8. vici.
And diverse with us that are grown gray, and yet would appear young, find
means to make their Hairs black by combing it (as they say) with a leaden
comb, or the like.

Verily the Art Cosmetique refuses to accommodate any in this business, it
being not to be attempted by Art, since Natural whiteness of aged Hairs is
rather an Ornament then a shame unto the Head; and therefore since graynesse,
as it cannot be amended, so it ought not to be palliated with any Fucus, and he
that assaies to do it is justly derided, of whom Martial.

Mentiris juvenem tinctis, Lentine, capillis, Martial. l. 5. Epigr. Idem lib.
1. Epigr. 99.

Tam subito corvus qui modo cygnus eras.
Non omnes fallis, scit te Proserpina canum,
Personam capiti detrahet illa tuo.
Cana est barba, tibi nigra est coma, tingere barbam,
Non potes, haec causa est, sed potes Ole comam.
Artificial black Hair.
Sandys Travels lib. 1
The Turkish Women also practice this Art, of blacking their Hair, as a foil
that makes the white seem whiter, and more becoming their other perfections.

Peter Mart. Decad 3.
The Ciguanians (if Nature deny it them) make their Hair black by Art.

Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 3.
The Water of the River Busentus, would serve these People for a curious
Cosmetique, which is reported to have a property to die the Hair black. The
like would another River (as that in Booetia) which makes the fleeces black of
those Sheep that are dipped in it.

Linschoten lib. 1. cap. 26.
In Japan, contrary to the opinion of most Nations, who think it a goodly sight
to see Men with white and yellow Hair, esteem it the filthiest thing in the
World, and they seek by all means they can, to make the Hair black, for that
the white causes their grief, Trigaut. lib. Iapon.
and the black makes them glad; And therefore they mourn in white.

In Germany the Noble Virgins, that they may seem to have somewhat exotique
and peregrine Hair, or that they may differ from the Plebean Maids, to whom
the yellow or Golden color is grateful, affect to have their Hair black.

Sic suum cuique pulchrum, be it their own by traduction or artificial
purchase. These Virgins seem to themselves to do as that Aethiope, who lived
in the Court of a certain Germane Prince, who often when he saw in the nursery
a fair Virgin, and withal a little black whelp, he said unto the Virgin, you
are not fair, but this Dog is fair and beautiful; Gaudet sic concolor atro,
as Julius Scaliger says: And I have known some Women among us, Yellow Hair
affected.
who rejecting their own Hair for its Natural redness, have worn black
curled locks; which although it falsified their complexions, and therein was a
trespass against Nature, yet they seem to agree with their clear skins, as the
Natural do, with the black Women that are clear skinned.

This tincture of Hair, is but a foolish and ridiculous affectation, and many
times proves a sinful vanity: Galen therefore, a Famous Mr. in Cosmetiques,
would never communicate to any loose and wanton Woman, any medicament to make
their Hair black, because he knew they would abuse it: Hier. Morc. lib. de
decoratione.
but to Matrons who lived honestly, he willingly afforded this accommodation.

The Women of old time, did most love yellow Hair, and it is found that they
introduced this color by Safron, and by long sitting daily in the Sun, who
instead of Safron sometimes used medicated Sulphur. This Art of changing their
Hair with Safron, was called Crocuphantea. Tertullian observing this artifice,
tells them that they are ashamed of their country, and would be Gaulise Women,
or Germany Women, so much did they disguise themselves, whereby is known how
much red Hairs were esteemed in the old time, which to seek out by Art, St.
Cyprian and St. Jerome with Tertullian, do say, that the same do prasage the
fire of Hell.

Galen affirms that in his time most Women were dead with the Headache,
Galen. lib. 1 de vestimentis localibus cap. 19
neither could there be any remedy applied to this Evil, Matenesius de luxu
and abusu vestium.
because they stood a long while bare-headed in the Sun, to render their Hairs
yellow, and he reports that for the same cause, some of them lost their Hair
and became bald, Artificial yellow Hair.
and were reduced to Ovids remedy, for that defect, either to borrow other
Women's Hair, or to ransack the Graves of the Dead, for a dishonest supply.

Tertullian. lib. de ornatu foeminarum.
Tertullian speaking of this thing, says, that Women were punished for this
their lasciviousness, for that by reason of their daily long abode in the Sun,
their Heads were often most grievously hurt with the Headache, Lucian in
Epigram.
and it seems when this folly was grown habitual unto them, it degenerated
into Dotage; for Lucian very lepidly derides an old Woman, who notwithstanding
she was seventy Years of age, yet she would have her Hair of a yellow
tincture, and exhorts the old Mother to desist from her folly; for although
she could color her silver Hairs, yet she could not recall her age. The
Venetian Women at this day, and the Paduan, and those of Verona, and other
parts of Italy, practice the same vanity, and receive the same recompense for
their affectation, there being in all these Cities, open and manifest examples,
of those who have undergone a kind of Martyrdom, to render their Hair
yellow. Schenckius observat. lib.
Schenckius relates unto us the History of a certain Noble Gentlewoman, about
sixteen or seventeen years of age, that would expose her bare Head to the
fervent heat of the Sun daily for some hours, that she might purchase yellow
and long Hair, by anointing them with a certain unguent; and although she
obtained the effect of her desires, yet withal, she procured to her self a
violent Head ach, and bled almost every day abundantly through the Nose: and on
a time being desirous to stop the Blood by the pressing of her Nostrils, not
far from her right Eye toward her Temple, through a pore, as it were by a hole
made with a needles point, the Blood burst out abundantly, Mad affectat: of
yell: Hair.
and taking away her fingers, again caused it to run through her Nose; and at
that very time she was diseased by the obstruction of her courses.

Another Maid also by using this same Art, Johannes Francus, med. Camicensis.
became almost blind with sore Eyes.

Had these Women known the secrets of the art Cosmetique invented to this
effect, especially that harmless and unknown rarity of Lusitanus, Lusitanus
cent. 3. curat. 59.
they might have gone a better way to work, or had they known the tincture
which the Egyptian Women use to color their Hands and Feet into a Golden hue,
they (as Prosper. Alpinus speaks) could have nothing which they might more
securely use to guild their Hair, Prosper. Alpinus. lib de plantis Egypt. cap
13.
neither should they need to burn themselves in the Sun beams, and diverse
ways offend their Heads; neither by reason of this depraved tincture of their
Hairs, would they, as some Virgins have been, affected with such perilous and
wonderful symptoms; Upon observation of which exemplary punishments, Johannes
Francus the Physician thus speaks: So they who are studious to augment their
Beauty, oftentimes deforme themselves.

What a curious accommodation to these People had some Fountain been, Pliny
lib. 3. Not. Hist. cap. 106.
that had a harmless property to color their Hair according to their
minds, such a one as the River Crathis mentioned by Pliny, Ovid Metamorphosis.
whose Nature was to make Hair yellow, which efficacy Ovid attributes to
another.

Crathis and hinc Sybaris, nostris conterminus oris, Electro similes faciunt
Auroque Capillos.

Montanus taking notice of this erroneous practice of Women in his time in
Verona, Mad affecters of yell: Hair.
and other parts of Italy, very rationally and Learnedly observes, that this
endeavor for Ornament, cast them into a greater mischief, for although they
obtained their end in coloring their hairs, yet afterward thereupon they
become shorter, hard and harsh, whereas commonly Women have long and soft
Hair. But these Women, choosing ever that which is worst, use strong Waters
which are dryers; for although they think their Hair is colored by them, yet
they rather burn them and make them short, they destroy moreover their
substance, and which is worse, they destroy life it self. A caution to be
considered of by our Gallants.

Io: Bohem. de moribus gentium lib. 3.
The European Galatians although they have yellow Hair by Nature, yet they use
great diligence to increase the Native color, making their Hairs thicker by
Art, that they differ nothing from Horse maines.

In the low Countries, the Jewish Women who are all black Hair'd by Nature,
wear great yellow Periwigs, which, I suppose, is either out of foolish dislike
of their own complexions, or else a desire to conform themselves, to the
general hue of their Hair among whom they live; or both.

Description of Nova Francia
The Savages of Nova Francia, although their vanity stretch not so far as to the
curling of Hair, yet it does to the coloring of them; for as much as when
they are merry, and paint their Faces be it with blew or with redd, they paint
also their Hairs with the same colors. And indeed painting the Hair of the
Head, has been anciently noted in the Indians by many Poets, who took
occasion to describe them.

His coma, liventes imitatur crine hyacinthos, Tincture of Hair condem:
Ruffus Festus. Dyonisius Afer Lucan.
Atque gerunt similes Hyacintho front capillos, Et qui tingentes croceo
medicamine crines.

Tincture of Hair is most shameful and detestable in Men; so in that impotent
creature and untamed Animal, Woman (to the more honorable sort of whom
Ornamentall dresses of Hair are permitted) the indulgency is to be moderated,
and their license herein granted them by Nature to be restrained within
certain bounds, that it neither extend to too much curiosity or any fucus,
since all fucusses in the very endeavor of Beauty are ugly and dishonorable
to Nature.

One thing (says Kornmannus) is strange and most singularly remarkable out of
Gulielmus Parisiensis, upon the saying of St. Paul 1 Corinthians. 11. A Woman ought
to have her Head covered, because of the the Angels. This some have understood
of the evil Angels, whose lust they thought was vehemently provoked and
inflamed by the Beauty of Women's Hair: and hence the Incubi are more
troublesome and prone to vex Women, who have a fair head of Hair; which
happens throug^h the just permission of God, for the vanity, pomp, and idle
complacency of such Women, who spend too much time in trimming, and coloring
their Hair, insolently glorying in that improved Ornament, and oftentimes by
their Beauty, inflaming others to lust: and so perchance for terror, the
providence of Divine goodness, permits them to suffer this tentation from
evil spirits, that they might desist from such vain care, fearing to ensnare
Men with their Hair, to lust after them, since they seem to instigate and
provoke to lust the very Devils themselves. Which may serve for a caveat to the
frizeled and over powdered Gallants of our times, Haire-Anointers.
lest they provoke some succubus, to give them an unlookt for visitation.

Purchase pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
The Abassines let their Hair grow, which serves them for an hat and Head tire,
and for finer bravery they curle and anoint their Hair with butter, which
shows in the Sun like grass in the morning dew; lest their locks and curles
should be disordered, when they go to Bed, each one pitcheth a forke or
cratch, a foot high in the ground, betwixt the horns whereof he reposeth his
Neck, and sleeps with his Head hanging. The Jessamine Butter with which our
Gallants anoint their Hair, is a precious invention belonging to the same
vanity. Helyn Terra Nigrit.
The Manicongo Nobility for the greater Gallantrie anoint their Hair with the
fat of Fishes which makes them stink most abominably.

Here Is Glorious Cosmetiques for our tender Gallants, which would prove as
pleasing to their hostericall Mistresses, as the sweet Atoms, which make such
a Cirque of Olimpique dust upon their hoarie Shoulders. And to make a little
bold with the handsome expression of a Gentleman, who, as I understand, could
have been content my Book by coming a little sooner to his hand, had afforded
him the same opportunity. Our Gallants witty noddles are put into such a pure
modified trim, the dislocations of every Hair so exactly set, the whole bush
so curiously candied, (and which is most prodigious) the natural jet of some
of them, so exalted into a perfect azure, that their familiar Friends have much
ado to own their Faces. For by their powdered Heads, Powdered Hair.
you would take them to be Meal-men. It Is a great benefit of Nature to to have
the liberty of a free transpiration, whereby through the curious emunctions of
the pores, she does constantly emitt and disburden herself of superfluous
evaporations, which otherwise we may well think, those sewers being blockt and
choakt up with that sweet artificial dust, conglomerated into dirt, by the
furious acting of their fiery Brains, may in time dissolve in distillations,
and (if not obfuscate their inventions, when they have a disposition to court
their Mistresses, with some rare Piece of Posie) find a passage to their Lungs,
and cacexicate their pretty Corpusculums, if not in time make way for a
Consumption. And besides the oppilation of those invisible perforations,
through which Nature is wont to wire-draw spare humors into a fine excrescency
for a supplementall handsome Ornament, it is to be doubted the old stock too,
by vicinity after a while, grow putrid and fall away, and then they will either
look like pill'd Ewes, or else must put on a beastly thing called a Perriwigg,
and make their Friends put a worse interpretation upon the matter, then there
may be cause; indeed one advantage they may happily have by this artifice, that
by often sweating and new dredging their Heads, for recruit, in short time
their Heads may grow so well stockt in six footed Cattle, that they need not
be to seek at any time of a medicine for the Jaundies.

Frizling and curling of Hair with hot Irons, which was lately much in fashion
with us, an artificial affectation in imitation of a natural bush of Hair,
was in practice among the Romans.

Men with plated Hair.
Ovid de remed amore.
Cum graciles essent, tamen and lanuginis instar,
Heu mala vexatae quanta tulere comae!
Quam se praebuerat ferro patienter and igni!
Vt fieret torto Nexilis orb sinus.
Clamabam scelus est, istos scelus urere crines
Sponte decent, capiti ferrea parce tuo.
In proem ad lib. 1 controvers.
Seneca well observed and censured this vanity: It is now held the accomplished
Gallantry of our Youth, to frizle their Hair like Women, to speak with an
effeminate smalnesse of voice, and in tenderness of Body to match them, and to
bedeck themselves with most undecent trimming. But their extreme curiosity, in
platting and folding their Hair, he in another place most lively describes,
and as sharply, but justly reproves: how do they chafe if the barber be never
so little negligent, as if he were trimming a Woman? how do they take on if any
thing be lopped off their feaks or foretops, if any thing lie out of order, if
every thing fall not even into their rings or curles; which of these would not
rather choose, that the state whereof he is a member, should be in combustion,
then his Hair should be displatted? who is not much more solicitous of the
grace of his Head, then of his health? who makes not more account to be fine,
then honest?

Periwigs also have been an ancient vanity, and assumed by them, who were not
well pleased with Natures donative, for the Romans (as many Gallants among us)
wore Hair which they bought instead of their own.

Jurat capillos esse quos emit suos
Fabulla, nunquid illa, Paul, pejerat? Periwlgd bald pates.

Fabulla swears, her Hair (which at a rate
She bought) is hers, is she forsworn in that?
And this without any shame they openly bought.

Foemina procedit densissima crinibus emptis,
Proque suis alios efficit art suos,
Nec pudor est emisse palam --
Calvo turpius est nihil comato, Martial. lib. 1. Epigr. 7.

Then bushie baldness nothing is more deformed.
Little Foreheads affected
SCENE III. Frontall Fashions affected by diverse Nations.
Ferrand. Erotomania. Montaigne in his Essaies.
THe Mexicans judge those the most beautiful that have little Foreheads, and
whereas they shave their Hair over all their Bodies besides, by Artificial
means, they labor to nourish and make it grow only in their Foreheads; and it
is to be suspected that the Matrons of Secota in Florida by some such artifice
have a short Forehead. De Bry. Hist. Ind.


The late Fashion generally used amongst us both by Men and Women, of bringing
down the Hair to cover the Forehead, and almost to meet the Eyebrows,
savored somewhat of this affectation.

Nature has circumscribed the whole space, we call the Forehead, which
beginning from the Eie-brows, ascends even to the forepart of the Head toward
the coronall suture: Low Foreheads affected
which is the latitude of the Forehead, the longitude is from one of the
Temples unto the other, toward the suture, which extends to the stony bones,
to which place the Hairs also come, so that three parts of the front are
bounded out with the Hair of the Head, the Eie-brows enclosing the fourth: all
which place Nature intended to be moveable, and void of Hair, (none Naturally
growing therein) because the use of the Hair is to cover, whereas the Forehead
is so much covered with Hair as we please: to what end had Hairs grown in the
Forehead? which could not have been suffered without prejudice to the Eyes,
whom they will have shadowed: to remove which obstacle, we should have stood in
need of continual tonsure, which Nature providently prevented, lest our Body
should have perpetually made work for us. It Is true, that part in Bruits,
which answers to the Forehead, is hairy, yet is thought no way to hinder the
action of their Eyes: but that may be in regard their Eyes are placed more to
the sides then men's are, and their prone aspect makes it not so inconvenient,
and therefore we may with Hofman ask whether the erect Figure of Man did not
require such a smoothness and bare Forehead: the growing of Hair in such an
insolitary place, is accounted and reckoned by Platerus for a deformity, since
a large smooth Forehead is thought to add somewhat to the beauty of the part.
They therefore who thus labor to remove the bound and Haire-marke of Nature,
to cloud the throne of Love and Honor, and the Imperial seat and mansion
place of Wisdom, placed in the front of Man, offer a gross indignity and
despite unto Nature, and seem to claim kindred of Cats, and Sowes, who among
other hairy fronted Animals, have little and narrow Foreheads: And if Nature
should justly answer them in their folly of forcing their Hair to a
preternaturall descent, and streightning their Foreheads more then is
convenient, (as she sometimes does) she should send much crasse and
excrementitious humors about the forepart of the Bra^ne, which should make
their Faces more inelaboratei and confused: that in their little Foreheads, by
reason of tegument of Hair, and the humors in the forepart being less
perfrigerated then is fit, and heat agitating the humors, there should ensue
such a moveable disposition, as should intercept and abate the purity of
judication, which are the common accidents of such Foreheads; for, little
Foreheads contain but small ventricles of the brain, whence the spirits
straightened and reflected, rise again, causing a mobility of cogitation. Now
it seems to me (who am a little enabled by plodding on this argument, to smell
out the abusive suggestions of the grand Enemy of Mankind, who labors all he
can, to alter and deprave that part of the Image of God, which remains in the
Fabric of man) that in the conformation of their Foreheads, they prevaricated
two ways, either by making their Foreheads more angust then is Natural,
according to longitude or according to latitude, High Foreheads affected
either by so compressing the skul and Temples equally on each side, the Head
was elongated from the forepart into the hinder part, and so the Forehead
straightened more then was necessary, and the decent longitude in the bone
failed: the other way was by laying the Hand above their Infants Foreheads, so,
that the end of the Vola or Palm fell about the roots of the Hair, and their
fingers above the suture Coronalis; so strongly compressing the Bone, until
they straightened the Forehead and made it longer: in both which they offered
great violence to Nature, in thus perverting the Natural form of the Forehead.

The Spanish Women seem to be so extremely affected with a high Forehead, and
to account it so transcendent a beauty, that they extend the borders of the
Forehead, beyond the natural confines of the Hair, making the Synciput or
forepart of the Head all Forehead; for by a wonderful invention and artifice,
they take off the Hair of the Synciput, and lay it bare, so that it lies open
in a larger extent, then the Forehead it self. Oswaldus Gabelhover.


Which art of making a fair Forehead, Oswaldus Gabelhover seems either to have
learned of them, or they of him.

High Foreheads and Foretops:
The English commonly love a high Forehead, and the Midwives and Nurses use
much art and endeavor by stroaking up their Foreheads and binding them hard
with fillets to make the Foreheads of Children to be fair and high, and we are
now very lately returned from the practice of clowding the Forehead, with a
praecipies of Hair, and to nourish a foretop which tends most to the
advancement of the Forehead, and the glory of the countenance.

Spigelius.
The Russians love a broad Forehead, and use art to have theirs so; Their Faces
being explained and drawn out in their infancy, thereby to direct their
Foreheads to grow in this form.

All endeavor to pervert and alter the Natural form of the Forehead, is a
disparagement of Nature, Broad Foreheads.
and any mutation wrought therein by Art implies a fault, imperfection; and
privation, and the further the altered figure recedes from the Natural, the
greater the affected transgression of the Phancie is. But to speak the truth,
a broad square Forehead, so it be proportionate, is not a figure much different
from the Natural; And indeed to the Russians, who are of a square proportion,
for the most part, broad, short, and thick, a broad Forehead which in a manner
resembles a quadrangle, may be somewhat suitable. I call that a quadrangle
broad Forehead, which is longer in one part, and has two opposite sides
equal, having right upper angles in the front, produced unto the Bones of the
Temples, and ending in that part wherein the Anterior implantation of Temporal
Muscles arises: which quadrangular figure since it has two equal sides
opposite one unto the other, one of these greater sides of the quadrangle is
above nigh to the Hair, the other opposite unto it, is described in a right
line, stretched about both the Eyebrows, and protracted even unto the extreme
parts of them: The lesser sides are those which are noted by a line descending
by both the Temples, and knitting in both the greater sides together, which
figure is Platonic; for from such a broad Face and Forehead, Plato had his
name, as Plutarch and Nearchus report.

The People of Syginnus, a City of Egypt, use great care to have exporrected
Foreheads.

The Italians, for the most part, do much rejoice in a prominent Forehead,
especially in the upper part of the Forehead, which is perpendicularly opposite
unto the Nose, wherein a certain part of their Hair jets out so, Prominent
Foreheads.
that it seems to represent a certain hillock, which they most affect,
thinking it to be a sign of a valiant Man: insomuch that they who would seem
to be Valiant and Military Men, nourish that part of the Hair, procuring it to
incline upon their Foreheads, that it may show (being unequal in the middle) a
certain gibbosite, as it were the lesser part of a little stoole-ball, which
fashion seems lately to be revived by some of our Ladies.

However this politic Nation may delude themselves with the opinion and
practice of this error; yet there is nothing in this affected Fashion that is
very manly, a round prominent Forehead with such a convexity, being rather
feminine: nay, has somewhat in it of the Forehead of an Ass. Baldus would
call such a Forehead elevated in the middle, seeming to represent the lesser
half of a Sphere, a ridiculous monster, being a preternaturall figure, which
cannot afford a good Wit, which is a passion following the Natural state of
the Head; and if I should not charge them with tampering with the mould of
their Foreheads, (as I think I justly might,) since what ever any Nation
affects as fashionable, that they account most amiable and decent, and the
Gallants will have (if Nature deny it them) by the provocations of Art, (as
that will do it:) yet we must accuse them of a high Trespass committed
against the Majesty of Nature, in that by that labored prominence of their
Forehead, they apparently damnifie Nature, in one of the most considerable and
important actions of the Eye, which is the sublime and contemplating aspect
thereof to Heaven. To vindicate the regular beauty and honesty of Nature, from
these Plastique Impostors, we say, that a Forehead that keeps its Natural
magnitude, is one of the unisons of the Face, whose longitude (which we must
conceive of a right line descending perpendicularly) is the third part of the
Face, and ought to answer the length of the Nose; so that if we compare it to
the rest of the Face, it ought to have the proportion of a half part to a
duple: its longitude also naturally is such, that the front is likewise in a
duple proportion of one to two; you may confer it with the gyre of the hinder
part of the Head, after this manner, let the occiput of a man well
proportioned, be measured with a thread, beginning at the part of the Temples,
wherein the Hairs terminate the Forehead, and leading it round in orb by the
occiput, until you end in the other part of the Temples, this thread will
prove half the length, which is from both the Temples by the front and
Synciput; this is the length of the Forehead, and is to the circumference of
the Occiput, under which the last venture of the brain is, and the beginning of
the After-braine, as one to two: and its altitude to the rest in like manner,
and to the whole Face, that it is its third, not otherwise also then it is the
third part of the whole circumference of the Head. This Forehead is also called
a great Forehead, Cloudy Foreheads affected.
if it be compared with a feminile Forehead; and it appears so much the
greater, the more it approaches to a plainness, being neither globous nor
tuberous, as the Forehead of Women, Boys, or those which transposed beyond
Nature by the violence of Art are.

The reason why the Forehead should rather draw nigh to a certain plainness,
then a concavity or a convexity, is this; for, that plainness is a certain
mean between a unequal and a concave figure. Now a front that is disposed
according to Nature, comes into a Natural mediocrity, because that conduces
most to the advantage of Man, that he might be vigorous in sense and memory,
which he cannot well exercise, unless he have an out-jetty of the occiput,
which could not be done unless the part of the Sphere opposite unto it should
be pressed together; therefore it is so framed that a plain Forehead is
adjoined to a tuberous occiput.

Porta Physiogn, lib. 2.
The Scythyans ( contrary to the Bononians, who for the most part have very
smooth Foreheads) have all cloudy Foreheads, made on purpose so by art, and he
that has not such an one, does not Scythice intueri.

A contrivance clean crossing the intention of Nature, Stigmatized Foreheads.
who never meant the Forehead should be always cloudy, nor ever clear, but to
change scenes occasionally, according to the several affections of the mind.

The Samians were wont of old to burn letters in their Foreheads, and in a
bravery to stigmatize themselves; whence Aristophanes calls them populum
literatum: and it was a proverb, Samiis nominem esse literatiorem.

The ingenious Women are marked with certain notes in the Forehead, Johan.
Bohem. de moribus, lib. 3.
which is accounted a kind of generosity, they esteeming it an argument of
ignoblenesse to be without them.

Among the Thracians (also) these frontall characters were most familiar,
Pancerol tit. 2. de porcell.
and esteemed a great ensign of Honor and Nobility. Cicero lib. 2. de offic.
Cicero's phrase is, that they were notis compuncti, and hence such marks were
called Threiciae notae: and many of the Indians are at this day of the same
opinion and practice. I remember to have seen in London, a well favored
Blackmore Boy, who had the mark of a barbed Arrow standing in the midst of his
Forehead.

The penal laws of some states, have indeed inflicted upon runnegate slaves
and Malefactors, Spotted Foreheads.
as notes of slavery and infamy, branded marks on the Forehead; but for Men
ingenious and free, to affect such stigmaticall characters, as notes of
bravery, and Ensigns of Honor and Nobility, is a very strange fantastical
prevarication; for, Nature never intended the Forehead to be; Tanquam rasa
Tabula, a fair blanke table of the affections, and a plain Index of the mind,
not to be charged with our artificial characters, but the Natural impression
of motion only.

Purchase pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
The Bramines of Agra mark themselves in the Forehead, Ears and throat, with
a kind of yellow gear which they grind, and every morning they do it, and so
do the Women.

Idem eod. lib. 9.
The Gentiles of Indostan, Men and Women both, paint on their Foreheads, and
other parts of their Faces, red or yellow spots.

The Gusaretes and Banianes of Cambaia, they wear a Starr upon their Forehead,
which they rubb every morning with a little white saunders tempered with Water,
and three or four grains of Rice.

Lindschot. l. 1.
The Malabars and Mestichos have also some such Frontall custom.

Pet. Mart. dec. 1.
The Cyguanians are of a horrid aspect, much like the People called Agathyrsis,
of whom the Poet Virgill speaks; for they were all painted and spotted with
sundry colors, and especially with black and red, which they make of certain
fruits nourished in their Gardens for the same purpose, with the juice whereof
they paint themselves from the Forehead even unto the knees, Painted Foreheads.
which painting the Spaniard used as a stratagem to take their King.

The Relator says, that a Man would think them to be incarnate Devils, broke
out of Hell, they are so like Hell Hounds. I am sure they violate and
impudently affront Nature, thus to obscure the Natural seat of shame and
modest bashfulnesse with their painting; so that the flushings of the Purple
blood, which Nature sends up to relieve the Front in the passion of shame,
cannot significantly appear in their Native hue.

Beetle-browes affected.
SCENE IV. Eye-brow Rites, or the Eyebrows abused contrary to Nature.
Ex relatione amici ingeniosi.
THe Russian Ladies tie up their Foreheads so strict with fillets, which they
are used to from their Infancy, that they cannot move their Eyebrows, or use
any motion; the meaner sort also affect it: the skin is so streined, that one
would wonder how they could endure it, but they being used unto it from their
infancy, it is easy. What a plot have these Women upon Nature, thus to bind
their Eyebrows to the observation of so strict and unnatural a silence, to
hinder her in one of her most significant operations, and to exclude that part
of the mind which uses to be exhibited by the Eyebrows.

Montaigne in his Essaies.
Among some Nations, Beetle-brows are in fashion: which is not only quite
against Zeno's Philosophy, but against the ordinance of Nature, thus perversely
to join whom she has separated. Stiff strein'd Foreheads and Beetle-brows
affected.
For this intercilar space was intended by Nature to distinguish and divide the
hairy arches of the Eye, and to make good that laudable duplicity or Natural
fraternity of the parts of the Face.

In the Indies, Purchase his Pilgr.
the Cumanans pluck off all the Hair of their Eyebrows, taking great pride,
and using much superstition in that unnatural depilation.

In Nombre de Dios, Lindschot. li. 2.
the Women with a certain Herb, make the Hair of their Eyebrows fall off.

In Peru they use offerings in pulling off the Hair of their Eyebrows, to
offer unto the Sun. Purchase his Pilgrimage.
The Brasilians (also) eradicate the Hair of their Eyebrows. Idem. eodem.


These hairy extremities of the Forehead, the Eyebrows, whose circumscription
and figures, show that they were made for the Eyes sake, Haters of Hair upon
the Eye brows
and indeed they do conferr much to the honesty of the Eyes were borne with
us, the skin thereof being harder, that the Hairs might be of equal number,
and not increase to too great a bulk; which although they be equal in length,
number, and thickness, yet lie not straight, but are produced oblique, in
manner of a bended Bow or Triumphant Arch, according to the roundnesse of the
Eye, that they might the better cast off any thing that comes against the Eye,
which if they were shorter, fewer, or thinner, they could not so well defend
the Eye: if on the contrary, they were longer and thicker, they would hinder
the sight; And therefore when they prove overgrown in old Men, by reason of the
relaxation of the couching together of the bone wherein they are planted, so
suffering a transmission of the humors, they stand in need of clipping.
Moreover, the Brows do help the Eyelids, and make fair the Face: For he that
has not his Brows hairy, is not comely. Behold here, what inconveniences the
despightfull prevarication of some Nations have brought upon them, who wilfully
deprive themselves of these useful and comely Ornaments of the Face. For,
Eye-brow makers and great Eyebrows.
robbing the Eyes of their Natural Pent-house or water table, they expose them
bare to imbrications.

From the perpetual magnitude of these Hairs, Gal. 10. de usu partium.
and those of the Eyelids: Galen takes an occasion to deride Moses and
Epicurus, from which calumny Rabbie Moses defends him, Rabi Moses in Aphorism.
Montanus Mod. pars. 2.
and that very excellently; which place is worth the reading, by those who are
curious, which argument they may find dilated in Montanus and Hofmanus.
Hofmanus comment in Gal. de usu partium. 11.


Of old time, the Women when their Eyebrows were long and broad, they made
them narrow, subtle, and arched, either with pincers or scissers, which
artifice would not be approved of in Java Major, where to their little Eyes,
they have great Eyebrows: and therefore no doubt nourished as in request. The
wickedness and madness of the Greeks and Romans, in this effeminate plucking
and pulling of their bodies; and abusing it with depilatories, we willingly
pass over, lest I should abuse good Paper with so foul narrations; who lists
to hear of these unmanly practices, may find more then enough in Franciscus
Junius. Fran. Junius de coma cap. 7.


This we may say with Galen, that such effeminate Men are to be pitied,
Eye-brow painters.
who are so averse to the truth, that they know not they have a Mind that they
owe Culture to, rather then to the Body.

The Women of old time, when the Hair of their Eyebrows were yellow or white,
they black them with soot, as you may read in Tertullian, Plautus, Athenaeus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, and others.

And there Women did not blush to have it known, that usually they painted not
their Faces only, but their very Eyebrows.

Ovid de rem. Amor.
Scitis et inducta candorem quaerere cera,
Sanguine quae vero non rubet, Art rubet.
Art supercilii confinia nuda repletis,
Parvaque sinceras velat aluta genas.
Nec pudor est oculos tenui signare favilla,
Vel prope te nato livide Cydne croco.
Martial speaks of one whose Face did not sleep with her, but she did innuere
with an Eye-brow, put on every morning. What this Fuligo or soot was, is not
well explained by Authors; Mercurialis thinks it was that Fucus which by
Pliny is said to have been called Callipleuron; Mercurialis. lib. de decorat.
the like Fucus made with coledust, the Women of these times use for the same
purpose.

Grimstone of their manners.
The Arabian Women have a certain black painting made of the smoke of Gals and
Saffron, with the which they paint their Eyebrows of a Triangular form.

The American Women do with a certain Fucus paint their Eyebrows, which they
lay on with a pencill; Triangular and High arched Eyebrows affected.
a thing also usual with French Women who have little modesty.

They of Candou Island put a certain blackness upon their Eyebrows. Purchase
Pilg. 2. lib. 9.


The Tartarian Women anoint their Eyebrows with a black ointment. Idem Pilg.
3. lib. 1.
L. Bacon Not. Hist. cent. 8.


The Turks have a black powder made of a Mineral called Alchole, with which
they color the Hair of their Eyebrows which they draw into embowed Arches.

The Women affect very much black Eyebrows, Sandys Travels lib. 10.
and likely they are naturally so, if they be not, they die them into this hue
by Art, made high and half Circular, and to meet if naturally they do not.

The regulating of the Hairs of the Eyebrows when they chance to grow out of
order, Eye-brow d^yers.
and the reducing them with Pinsers or scissers to conformity, is but a
Cosmetique elegancie. But this general conspiration of all Nations to black
them, when Nature has produced them of another color, is somewhat destructive
to the true knowledge of complexions, and prejudicial to the cautionary Art of
Physiognomy, which Nature has so favorably founded in the Face to an
observers notable advantage; and even now, when this sheet was going into the
press, an understanding and discreet Lady, falling into discourse of this
vanity, told me, she knew a Gentlewoman, who being displeased with the native
color of the Hair of her Head which was yellow, procured a water of a
Physician about this Town, to die her Hair Black. And being advertised of the
incongruitie of the Hair of her Eyebrows which were white, with that new
tincture of the Hair of her Head, she applied this water to her Eyebrows to
black them also, which soon fetched off all the Hair, and thereby introduced a
very ridiculous aspect, being, without all recovery, deprived of the Native
Ornament of this part.

To draw them into embowed Arches, is but an imitation of Nature: but to make
them meet, is more then she ever intended; but (as the Arabians do) to paint
them in a Triangular form, is a piece of Geometry, which we cannot allow to be
exercised in the Eyebrows.

SCENE V. Eyelids turned backward toward the Forehead.
Eyelid Fashions affected as Notes of Gallantry and Beauty by diverse Nations.
The Giachas or Agagi of the Ethiopian Countries beyond Congo, Purchase Pilgr.
2. lib. 7.
Lindschoten lib. 1.
have a custom to turn their Eyelids backwards toward the Forehead and
round about; Pigafetta's report of the Kingdom of Congo.
so that their skin being all black, and in that blackness showing the white
of their Eyes, it is a very dreadful, and divilish sight to behold; for they
thereby cast upon the beholders a most dreadful astonishing aspect.

What strange and prodigious Cosmetiques has the great Enemy of Mankind
instructed these Infidels in, persuading them to defraud themselves of a
Natural convenience, for a Diabolical fashion, exposing the most tender part,
to all the injuries incident to so odious an apparition, Eyelids turned
upwards toward the Forehead.
and withal inferring not a little damage to the important operations of the
Eye; for, the external conformation of the Eye, consists not only in the Ball
or Apple of the Eye, but of the circumstantiall parts of the Eyelids, hairs,
and Eyebrows; any of which in the leastwise changed, it will necessarily
follow, the Eye cannot rightly perform its Office, Vision being a most
sumptuous thing, consisting in so accurate a proportion, that it stands in need
of many things to its accomplished perfection; and actions are hurt, not only
when the principal part is hurt or perverted, but any other thing that is
useful and assistant unto the principle, as the Eyelids are to the Eye; for
these Coats of sight or shutting windows of the Eyes, are called Cilia a
Celando Oculos: their Natural office, being first to cover the Eyes, lest with
variety of Objects, they should distract the mind or ocupy it superfluously;
the second employment, is by a meet interception of the Air, to subtillize it:
and so to keep and preserve the sight sereen, Arist: lib. 40. de Annimal.
they according to Isidore being called Palpebrae, quia palpitando moventur, ut
assiduo motu obtusum oculum reficiant, there motion being intended to refresh
the Eye, when the sight thereof grew obtuse, The use of the Eyelids.
and their Nature consists in a Nervous thin substance to facilitate their
motion; which being almost continual, they thereby correct the Air, and so
keep the Eyes from the injuries thereof: another use of them is to adorn the
Eyes, and to comfort them; whence Aristotle says, Arist. lib. 4. de Animal.
that Creatures that want Eyelids are weak-sighted, as Fishes and Hairs; And
Quadrupedes, close their Eyes by the upper Eyelids, and Birds by their lower
Eyelids; all which are rather to be called Coopertoria, and Tela than
Palpebrae, which are proper to Man. Moreover, the Eyelids do not only much
conduce to the quietness of the sight, but of all the other Senses, it being
probable that the Eye of all the Senses, was encompassed with this defense for
the agilitie of the Sense of sight, and a communion with the other Senses:
whence we may observe, that so long as we hold our Eyes open, or are
necessitated to hold them so, we cannot sleeep; nay, they who have their
Eyelids cut off, as Marcus Attilius Regulus had, they are easily killed with
watching, unless their defect be recompensed by the substitution of some other
thing, which may help to recreate the Eyes with sleep, which is the natural
use and office of the Eyelids: much more is their use in Nictation, when we
are awake. One use of the Eye-lds is, that by their opacitie they might hinder
light from insinuating it self too much in the Pupil; for, such a thing would
have been an obstacle to vision, an argument whereof we have, that when we
would see a thing more acutely, and distinctly, we draw together our Eyelids,
that they almost meet, sometimes we hold our hand over our Eyes, that the
pupil might be more shadowed; Averroes de sensu and sensili.
and for this reason it is that Averroes affirms those Creatures to see
farther who have thicker Eyelids; Eradicators of Hair on the Eyelids.
and for this reason it is, that Fishes and Insects see more obtusely, for they
want Eyelids. Now all these intended benefits of Nature, by this divilish
devise, are frustrated and lost.

Johan. Bohem. de moribus Gentium, lib. 2.
The Tartars, under the great Cham, have the clean contrary appearance, for
they have gross prominent Eyes, very much covered with their Eyelids,
insomuch that the opening in them is very small: whether they use any Artifice
to cause this extraordinary expansion of the Eyelids, I have not as yet
discovered, but certainly they hold it no imperfection. For although of all
men, they are most deformed in Body; yet this Nation contemnes all other Men,
thinking themselves to excel in prudence and goodness, that they disdain and
explode all others from them.

Munster Cosmograph. lib. 6. cap. 55.
The Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope, which Pomponius calls the Head of
Aphrica, pull off the Hair of their Eyelids, and therein they paint diverse
things in a manifold color, as white, black, sky color, and red.

Purchase Pilgr. 1. lib. 4.
The Brasilians also, and those of Sierra Leona in the East Indies, pull off
and eradicate the Hair growing on their Eyelids, Lindsc. lib. 2.
which makes them show for the most part fearful and ugly.

Med. pars 2.
Montanus it seems was not aware of this unnatural kind of depilation,
practiced by these Nations, where he says, that none ever desired to destroy
these Congenite and natural Hairs, either Male or Female, but all as well as
they can, endeavor to preserve them, although in the Postgeniti they descent;
for there are some who desire to have them, The use of the Hair of the
Eyelids.
and some affect them them not, as Women and effeminate Men, to whom he has
afforded a learned, although somewhat too officious an accommodation.

Man is then perfect when he wants none of those things which he ought to have,
for that is his perfection. Every Essence has its perfection; the Eye of a Man
is then Humane, when it obtaines hairs on the Eyelids and Eyebrows. It may
be objected, that Man lives without these, and sees: who denies it? but that
man who is deprived of these, does not live nor see humanely, according to the
order and laws of kind constituted by Nature. Whatever is in the Body of Man
according to Nature, that is simply necessary, you may measure the necessity by
the essence; for both are convertible: for if they prove defective, or any
thing be wanting, that Body is no longer perfect and absolute, but lame and
imperfect. Whatever Hair is in the Body, whatever it be, (so nothing happen
besides Nature) it is necessary, which we ought to be persuaded of, and that by
a reason, no way contemptible, taken from the dignity of Nature, who always
whatsoever she does, she does for some end; for it is absurd, as Plotine says,
to say that there is something constituted in the order of things, and to have
nothing that it can; for an Ens is such naturally, that it should Act or suffer
something, which sentence is not only true of the species of Essences in
general, but of all parts that Naturally exist in any specifique Body, as
those hairs do: and if we examine the uses of the Hair in these parts, we
shall soon perceive the folly and madness of these nations, who to their own
shame and prejudice, have rejected the natural benefits intended them by the
wisdom and providence of God, manifested in the Fabrique of the Eyelids: for
first, the great builder of our Body, has imposed a necessity upon them, of
observing an equal proportionate magnitude, longitude, number, and intervall;
so that they need no clipping, making withal an exact provision for their
inoffensive positure from casting any shadow upon the Eye, to intercept the
continuity of objects, or hindering the Eye from looking upwards, which
otherwise perchance might have been pretended and pleaded in excuse of their
impious depilation, and robbing the Eyelids of their defensive Palisado, not
only made (as some would have them) for an Ornament unto the Eye, but for
perspection, and to direct the sight of the Visory spirits, and the Rays which
flow from the Interior parts. And this by Kypler, Kypler.
is accounted one reason of the contrivance of the Eyelids, that these
teguments of the Eyes, by their convenient contraction, might infer a due
shadow from the innate Hairs of the Eyelids; whence it is, that when we
would perfectly view a thing, we bring our Eyelids as near as we can to the
pupil of the Eye, that by conniving only we might better behold a thing.
Since these fallen or retorted, which never happens but in the great affections
of the part, Man cannot see (as before) right forward, or far off. And it is
observed, that the Tovopinambaultians, who likewise practice this unnatural
dipilation, become thereby dim-sighted, and of a torve or crooked aspect: And
when they rest in sleep, they preserve the Eye from being hurt. The frequent
Nictations also in Men awake, is to recreate the sight, and to prevent the
violent falling of any thing into the open Eyes, which is ensnared in them as
in a Net; They therefore that want these preservers of sight (as experience
has showed us) are offended with the least dust, and of all things almost that
occur, Eyelid painters.
though never so small.

Pliny notes, Plin. Lib. 11. Not. Hist.
that the Women of Rome did color the Hair of their Eyelids every day with
an ordinary painting that they had: so curious are our Dames says he, and
would so feign be Fair and Beautiful, that forsooth they must die their Eyes
also. Nature ywis gave them these hairie Eyelids for another end.

The People of Candou Island put a certain blackness upon their Eyelids.
Purchase Pilgr: 2. lib. 9.
Lord Bacon Not. Hist. cent. 8.


The Turks have a black powder made of a Mineral called Alchole, Sandys Travels
lib. 1.
which with a fine pencill they lay under their Eyelids, which does color them
black, whereby the white of the Eye is set off more white: with the same powder
also they color the hairs of their Eyelids, which is practiced also by the
Women. And you shall find in Xenophon, that the Medes used to paint their Eyes.

All endeavor of Art pretending to advance the Eye above its natural Beauty,
is vain and impious, as much derogating from the wisdom of Nature. Art
indeed, where Nature sometimes fails, and proves defective, may help to
further her perfection: but where she appears absolute, Eyelid hairs
painted.
there to add or detract is instead of mending to mar all. Yet perchance the
Turks in painting the hair of their Eyelids, might be excused, if they did it
to a Natural end, (which I doubt they do not, but in a Fantastical bravery)
for some think that the hair of the Eyelids do cast a shadow upon the Eye,
helping thereby the blackness of the thin membrane Chorion, the first that
covers the Optique sinew, and prohibits the diffusion of the splendour of the
Christalline: Philippus Montalto. 4. Opt. 8. Johnstoni Thaumato graphia. Hfoman
de usu paraium lib. 10. cap. 7.
which as Montalto says, is better done when they are black; which he shows
by the example of one, who having gray Eyes, and somewhat white hairs on his
Eyelids, as often as he blackt them with Ink, he saw better. Of this Man he
reports, that in his Childhood and Youth, he saw better in the Night then in
the Day, but when he was a Man, the case was altered with him. And he adds,
that the Moors having taken him, blackt the Hair of his Eyebrows with ink,
whereupon he saw better, but his old defect returned if he had wiped off the
Ink. The cause whereof being omitted by Montalto, the most learned Plempeius
thoroughly understood, to wit, that the white Hair of the Eyelids did too much
diminish those things which were painted in the Net-like Coat, called
Retiformis. And Kypler would not have this notion neglected, that the Hairs of
the Eyelids, do chiefly conduce by their umbrosity, to a more express Picture
of speciesses, to which end for the most part, they happen to be black, and
they who have them white, see not so perfectly.

SCENE VI. One Eyed Nations.
Monstrous conformations, properties, colors, proportions, and Fashionable
affectations of Eyes, amongst certain Nations.
NAture solicitous about so excellent an Action of the Eyes, bestowed on living
creatures, not one, but to every one two. That Cognition might be perfect, and
that when one fails, we should not presently be altogether deprived of so
great a gift.

Yet there are found in the Indies (as Cosmographers testify) Men who have but
one Eye; and that planted in their Foreheads; Authors of no contemptible
authority, avouch that there are such One-Ey'd Nations. Aulus Gellius
witnesses, Aul. Gel. Noct. At. lib. 9. cap 4.
that he had learned from very Ancient writers, that in Scythia, there are a
certain Nation who have but one Eye in the middle of their Foreheads, who are
called Arimaspi, and Appian places them in Asia. Pet. Appian Cosmogr. de Asia
cap. 3. Solinus cap. 19. Idem cap. 32.
Solinus says, that about Besglithra (placed not far from the Caspian Sea)
there is an one-Ey'd Nation; and in another place he says, that toward the
Occidentall part of Aethiopia, the Agriophagi inhabit, who feed upon the flesh
of Panthers and Lions only, Idem cap. 53.
having a King that has but one Eye, and that in his Forehead. In another part
of his Book, we read says he, of Men among the Indians, who are Monoculists,
Plinius Not. Hist. li. 7. cap. 2.
or borne with one Eye. Pliny reports also of the Arimaspi, to be a Unocular
Nation, having one Eye in the middle of their Front, and he places them near
unto those Scythians, that inhabit toward the Pole Articke, and not far from
that Climate, which is under the very rising of the North-East Wind, and about
that Famous Cave or hole, out of which that Wind is said to Issue, which place
they call Gesclithron, that is the Cloisture or Key of the Earth. These
maintain War ordinarily about the Metal Mines of Gold, especially with
Griffons, a kind of wild beasts that fly, and use to fetch gold out of the
Veins of those Mines (as commonly it is received) which Savage Beasts, (as
many Authors have re-corded, as namely Herodotus and Aristeas the Proconnesian,
two writers of greatest name) strive as eagerly to keep and hold those golden
mines, as the Arimaspians to disseise them thereof, Step. Ritterus
Grunburgensis Cosmograph. prosometrica.
and to get away the Gold from them. Ritterus says they obtained the name of
Arimaspi from their defective singleness of Eye; for Ari with the Scythians
signifies one, and Maspos an Eye; according to Herodotus cited by Caelius
Rhodiginus, lib. 16. cap. 22. National properties.
Isidor. lib. 11.3.
Arima signifies one and Spu an Eye. Isidor likewise affirms, that the Cyclops
are Monocular Indians. Sr. John Mandevill, Sr. John Mandevils Travels cap. 62.
whose relations since the late discoveries of the new World, are held very
credible, reports that in an Isle under the government of the King of Dodyn,
are Men that have but one Eye, and that is in the midst of their Front. And
although the wonders related of Polyphemus in Virgil, Servius Com. in Virgil
Aeneid. lib. 3.
as Servius his Commentator conceives, are but Poetical fictions; yet it is no
Fable, that there are Men Monocular; Seeing that when Fulvius Torquatus was
Consul against the Volscians, there was brought out of Mauritania to Rome, such
a single-Ey'd Man, intercepted in the vast deserts of Egypt, who was carried
through the City to be looked upon as a wonder, whereupon there happened a
thing memorable; For Macrina the Wife of Torquatus, Narravit. M. Aurelius
Faustinae llxoris familiaribus Colloquiis quae habentur apud Mundognetum, in
ejus vitae lib. 2. cap. 22.
a Woman of singular chastity, during the absence of her Husband, no where
presented her self to be seen, or went out of doors. Now when this Monocular
was carried about, he was by chance brought before the doors of Macrina, her
Maid relating the passing wonder, invites her Mistress to behold it; she
(although desirous to see this one-Ey'd Monster) had rather die through
curiosity of Mind, then show her self at her door. In the Island Taprobana,
Lycost. Append. Chron. prodig.
there are Humane Creatures, who among other praevarications from the lawful
form, have one only Eye in their Forehead. Aug. de civit. lib. 6. cap 8.
Neither is it incredible that a one Eyed Nation may be found, and that even in
the judgment of St. Augustine, nay he affirms in express words, Nations
without Eyes.
that he saw such a Nation with his own Eyes. Sermo 37. ad Fratres in Eremo.
I was now, says he, Bishop of Hippo, and I traveled with certain servants
of Christ, unto Aethiopia, to Preach the Holy Gospel of Christ unto them, and
we saw in the lower parts of Aethiopia, Men having only on Eye in their
Foreheads, Fulgosus lib. 1. de Miraculis.
etc. And the same reason may be afforded for the possibility of such Nations,
as is for the productions of such Monocular Monsters, Lycost. Chron. de prod.
and ost. anno mundi, 3772. Zonarus in Michaele ducis filie.
as we sometimes meet with in the Chronicles of prodigious ostents; And
Zonarus reports that in Constantinople, there was a Monocular Child borne: for
as it happens for Men to be borne without both Eyes, so nothing hinders but Men
may be borne without Eye only. And there are Historical Records of Men borne
without Eyes.

Livie decad. 4. lib. 8.
Livie witnesses, that at Ariminum there were ingenious Boys borne without
Eyes, and without a Nose; Zonarus in Mauritie.
Zonarus testifies, that in Thrace there was one borne without Eyes and
Eyelids.

Lycost. lib. prodig. Anno Domini 1503.
In Hassia, there was an Infant borne with all his Members well distinguished,
saving that wholly he wanted Eyes, Ears, and Nostrils, having only a Mouth in
his Face.

Sr. John Man. Travels cap. 62.
Sr. John Mandevill reports of Nations without eyes; for he says, that in an
Island belonging to the King of Dodyn, there are Men without Eyes, but they have
two round holes instead of Eyes. And in another Island, are Men that have no
Head nor Eyes, and their Mouth is in their Shoulders.

Such Monstrous constitutions of Eyes, have also been seen in certain Men,
that have had four Eyes. Anno Domini 308 at Daphnes, that most pleasant and
ambitious Suburb of Antiochia (A horrid thing to relate or see, Nations with
Eyes misplaced
) there was borne in the times of Constantine the Emperor, a Monster, to wit,
an Infant with two Mouths, two Teeth, a Beard, four Eyes, and two very short
Auricles. An Anconitanian Woman, brought forth a certain Monster: for in the
third or fourth Month of her impregnation, she sent forth a certain misshapen
fleshie little Body, which was all rough and hairie, having four Eyes.

We read of some Nations whose Eyes are misplaced, and planted in other
strange and hid parts of the Body.

Sr. John Mandevill reports, Sr. John Man. Travels.
that in one of the Islands under the Government of the King of Dodyn, there
are men that have Eyes in their Shoulders, and their Mouths on their Breasts.

In Egypt it pleased them to nourish a Portent, a Man with two Eyes, Pliny
lib. 11. cap. 52.
in the hinder part of his Head, but seeing not at all with them: but this
being a single Monster, is not so admirable as if there were some such Nation
found: and why not a Nation as well as single Monsters, which in Chronicles we
meet with?

In Millane, Anno 1542, Pet. Lampagn. lib. 2. prodigior. suor.
a certain Plebeian Woman, called Faustina, brought forth an Infant, with Eyes
seated in his shoulders, such an one was Borne in Vasconia, and in Misnia an
Infant was borne which had his Eyes in his Breast, which you shall find spoken
of before, in our relation of headless Men.

It is not without a miracle of transformation, Aulus Gellius lib. 9. cap. 4.
what Aulus Gellius reports, that there are Men, who have two Pupils in each
Eye, both Men and women, Eye-painters.
and that they kill them whom they long behold when they are angry, and that
these are in Illyria, but Pliny says, that they are not only in Illyria, but
in Triballio and Scythia, which is called Bythinia: and also he reports of such
men inhabiting Pontus, and that have sometimes in their Eyes the Effigies of a
horse.

Pliny lib. 7. cap. 2.
But Pliny was deceived by the ambiguitie of the word, as Voscius and
Dalecampius observe for the word in Philarchus was Horse-Eye.
Hippos, which signifies a perpetual shaeling of the Eyes, which Pliny has
falsely rendered the Effigies of a Horse.

Sr. John Mandevils Travels cap 92.
Beyond the valley, on the left side the River Pison, in an Isle Northward,
there are many evil and foul women, who have precious stones in their Eyes,
and they have such a force, that if they behold any Man with wroth, they slay
them with beholding as the Basilisk does.

Purchase Pilgr. 1. lib. 1.
In the 49 degree of the South Pole, there are Giants, who have red circles
painted about their Eyes, among other notes of their fearful bravery.

Idem. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
They of Cape Lopos Gonsalves, both Men and Women, use sometimes to make one of
their Eyes white, the other red or yellow.

Lindschoten lib. 1.
The Guineans, use to paint one Eye red many times, the other white or yellow.

Fox North-west passage.
The women in the Northern Islands, about Greenland, have blew strokes about
their Eyes.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The subjects of a certain King, far from the River Gambra, for a distinction
have three streaks under their Eyes.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lilb. 7.
The Negro slaves of Barnagasso Kingdom, and Colo Brava, have certain marks
between their Eyes made only for a Bravery with a cold iron.

The Turks have an Invention whereby they affect to beautify their Eyes; for
they put between their Eyelids and their Eye a certain black powder, with a
fine long pencill, made of a Mineral brought out of the kingdom of Feze,
Sandys Travels lib. 1.
and called Alchole, which by the not disgracefully staining of the lids, does
better set forth the whiteness of the Eye, and though it trouble for a time,
yet it comfort the sight, and repelleth ill humors: they are of elegant
beauties, for the most part ruddy, clear and smooth, as the polished Ivory,
being never ruffled by the weather, and daily frequenting the Bannias, but with
all by the self same means they suddenly wither.

Sundry kinds of Eyes.
Pigafetta Relavon of Congo. Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 7. Idem Pilgr. 3.
The People of Congo, a region of Aphrica, the Apples of their Eyes are of
diverse colors, black, and of the color of the Sea.

In China they have narrow Eyes, generally egg-form'd, Helin Geogra. Johan.
Bohem. de moribus gentium. Maffaeus, li. 6. Magin. Geographia descrip. novae
Franc. Purchase Pilg. lib. 10 Idem eodem lib. 9.
black, and standing out: and therefore when they would pourtract out a
deformed Man, they paint him with broad Eyes.

The Cathaians have little Eyes, and sharp sight.

The Chinoyse have very little Eyes.

The ancient Scythians have small Eyes, so have the Women of Cosmin near
Ganges.

The Inhabitants of Candou Island, for the most part have little Eyes, and when
the Sun is set they cannot see at all, no, though forty Torches were lighted:
which is a kind Nyctalops or Nocturnall Coecitude that befalls them. There are
some that can-see when the Sun shines: Eusebius Nieremberg. Hist. Not. lib. 8.
ca. 2.
for there is a very black Nation of Moors, among whom (as it is reported)
there are some born no less white and red then those that are born in these
northern parts of the world; these are presently struck blind at the presence
of the Sun, although they behold it not, it is enough if the Sun shine on them,
the most beautiful Eye of Nature does so fascinate these Nations; The
Spaniards call these Albinos, Pet. Appian. Cosmograph. 2. pars.
that is, Whites, as they call the others Blacks. These are surely allied to
them of Albania, near the Caspian Sea, who see better by night then by day.
Munster. Cosmograph. lib. 5. cap. 149. Paulus Venet. lib. 3. Polinus Cardan. de
rerum variet. lib. 18.


In Zanziber they have horrible Eyes, and the Women are deformed by reason of
their prominent and gogle Eyes.

The Tartars have gross prominent Eyes, yet for the most part, they have
squint hollow Eyes.

The Jewish Women for the most part, Great Eyes affected
Sandys Travels lib. 3.
are goggle-ey'd.

The Cymbrians had horrible great Eyes. Steph. Ritter. Cosmograph. prosomet.
lib. 3.


The Azanaghi of Aethiopia, have prominent black Eyes and of a torve aspect.

The Turkish Women (who are small in stature, Helin Geogra.
which they amend with Choppines) are accounted most beautiful and amiable,
which have greatest Eyes, and are of the blackest hue; And because great Eyes
in Turkey are esteemed such an excellency, therefore Mahomet well knowing their
desire, promises them in his Paradise, wenches with great Eyes, or Eyes like
Saucers. Great Eyes also are in principal repute, and affected by the Greeks.

The Peruvians judge those the most beautiful that have great rolling Eyes.
Ferrand Erotomania.


The absolute magnitude of the Eye cannot be defined, yet this is generally to
be noted, that the greatest Eyes are not ever the best: for as in looking
glasses, or other little optique pipes, the Images of things are perfectly
exhibited, so it falls out in little Eyes, yet the natural magnitude of the
Eye, proportionate with that Face wherein it is lodged, ought to be such, that
so much as the semicircle of the mouth is, so much should be the semicircle
of the Eye: and the intervall from the middle of the Eyebrows, to the end of
the external angle of the Eyes, should be so much as is from thence to the
roots of the prominency, which subsides the Apple of the Eye, although Sense
cannot very well judge of it, by any other way of ratiocination.

Now the Eye of Man is round, and it is naturally observed, that the diameter
of the Orb or Sphere of the Eye is to answer the length of the Nose. One-Ey'd
Nations.
Now Eyes that exceed the natural mediocrity, being less or greater then the
same measure, are not to be commended; because they become not a Face, those
Eyes being truly laudable which are neither too great nor too little, but of a
mean proportion, which consists in the abnegation of both the extremes:
Physiognomists therefore prefer the midling state of the Eye, which has so
well framed and corrected a mediocrity of greatness as cannot be bettered or
reprehended. This affectation then of great Sawcer-like Eyes, is a fancy
against the rule of Nature; For, an Eye greater then the proportion of the Face
and Body requires, cannot be really beautiful in a Natural acceptance,
although it should have a gallant featnesse and elegancie of appearance annexed
unto it.

Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 8.
Some of the Inhabitants of Malheda, are blind and squint Eyed People.

Idem eodem. Petr. Appian descript. Ind. Occid.
The Brasilians, a few of them, have but one Eye.

In the Mountains of Peruana, which are always covered with Snow, the
Inhabitants are all purblind or blind.

Lud. Romans Patr. navigat. lib. 6. Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
In Sumatra, they have Eyes, obrotund. of green color.

The Guineans have white Eyes, of a sharp sight, and see further then we.

Steph. Ritterus Grunburgensis Cosmograph. Prosometrica, lib. 3.
The Sarmatians had Eyes like Lizzards, and were called Sauromatae, ab Oculis
lacertarum. (...) enim est lacerta, sicut (...), oculus.

The Gauls were blew-Ey'd, which was noted especially in the Women, Ammian,
Marcel.
when they were in choler, being notable shrews and too hard for their
husbands.

The People of Taprobane, as Pliny reports, Ocular properties
Plin. Not. Hist.
have blew Eyes. Of which there may some doubt be made considering the climate,
which is in the 8, 9, and 10 degrees only. Lindschot. Travels lib. 2.


The Cumanans have always spots in their Eyes, and are dim-sighted. Solinus
Draudii.


The Budini, a great and Populous Nation inhabiting the European Scythia, near
the River Borosthenes, were all gray Eyes like a Cat. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 7.
out of Isogonus the Nicean.


In Albanie there be a sort of People borne with Eyes like Owls, whereof the
sight is fire red, and can see better by night then by day.

Man only has his Eyes enameled round with diverse colors, the Eyes of all
other creatures vary not, but keep the constant color of their kind, this
variation happening to men and Nations, according to the diverse tempers of
their Brain and Eyes, but in respect Nations are much mingled, we know not
what rareness to choose for the beauty of Eyes, for many love blew Eyes, and
some the gray Eye, that seems to be all Christalline; some love black Eyes,
esteeming them most amiable: and others love them green, which were also in
ancient time much praised: for among the Sonnets of Monseiur de Covei ( which
was in old time so great a Clerk in Love matters, Songs were made of it; Green
Eyes were praised. He that would make a new comment upon Hippocrates his Book,
De Aere, Aquis and Locis to supply the want of that much desired Comment of
Galen, upon that Book, might perchance among these Ocular distinguishing
properties of diverse Nations, find matter to furnish his conceptions with.

Nose-manglers.
SCENE VII. Certain forms and strange shapes of the Nose much affected, and
Artificially contrived, as matters of singular beauty and Ornament, in the
esteem of some Nations.
Purchase Pilgr. 3. lib. 1. Helin Geograp.
THe Tartarian Women, cut and pare their Noses between their Eyes, that they
may seem more flat and saddle-nosed, leaving themselves no Nose at all in that
place, anointing the very same place with a black ointment; which sight seemed
most ugly in the Eyes of Friar William de Rubraquis a French Man, and his
companions, who observed the same in the wife of Scatai, when they came to his
Court. And this shape of the Nose, Nose-parers.
is in great request, as you may easily imagine, when the Kings wife at the
time of public audience appeared in that fashion. And indeed they are an ill
favored Nation, all flat nosed, the women being suitable to the Men.

It is impossible the adulterate wit of women should commit a fouler trespass
against beauty, and the majesty of Nature, or introduce a more odious
alteration in the Face, then is done by the contrivance of this fashion; for,
whence the Nose should excite so great a comeliness and beauty in the Face,
cannot well be imagined, but from its Discrimination it makes of the parts
thereof, for this discretion of the Nose is so true and necessary to the whole
Face, Severinus.
that Severinus should think, that this was the cause, for which it was made,
that from this one part very much grace and honor should accrue unto the Face,
and that the Nose either cut off, or vitiously depressed, there follows
thereupon so great a deformity. Certainly the Face among all the parts, is
therefore most honorable, and most goodly to behold: for that it is variously
insculpt and distinguished. But what does discriminate and disterminate the two
Eyes, the two Sunshine Apples, the Cheeks, and the two sides of the Face, Men
with their Nostrils cut off.
but the Nose alone which as a banck, or equal ridge of hills, is extended
along the Face, to maintain their Elegant separations.

For, the Nose is placed in the very middle of the Face, as the most worthy and
honorable situation, and necessarily placed between the Eyes: since not only
a great beauty accrews unto the Face thereby, but as some will have it, it
serves to distinguish the Eyes one from another, and is the cause that the
visory spirits are not confounded and mixed together, and in the interim, being
annexed on both sides, to the bones of the Genae, it covers and fills up that
horrid den, which otherwise would appear so abominable unto the sight, as it
does in their practice, who break down the partition wall that Nature had
interposed between the Eyes, and against the law of Nature, remove her bounds
and mangle that goodly promontory that runs along to divide the Pasifique Sea
of beauty in the Face, thereby endeavoring to their own confusion, to join
those together, whom God and Nature had so wisely separated. By all which it is
too too evident, what real beauties these Nations deprive themselves of, for
an imaginary and supposed elegancie, or rather an affected deformity; whereby
to the great injury of Nature, not only the beautiful proportion of the Nose
is lost, but the official elegancy thereof very much impaired. For although
notwithstanding these fashionable maimes of the Nose, they may see, and breath,
and speak, and in some sort enjoy the other uses spoken of, yet not so well as
they otherwise might, nor in so absolute a manner as they ought, by the
constitution of humane Nature.

The Citizens of Rhinoculaura or Rhinocorura, ( which Pliny places in Idumea,
Men deprived of Nostrils.
Pliny lib. 1. Coelius Rhod. St. August. de civit. Dei lib. 16. cap. 24.
and Strabo in Phoenicia, but according to Lodovicus vives, stands in the
confines of Egypt and Arabia) had no Nostrils to their Noses: from which
mutilation of their Noses their City had its name. Lodovicus Comment. in Aug.
de civit. Dei.
Lodovicus vives says, that without all question, the Jews and Egyptians
claimed it to themselves, and peopled it with the Aethiopians, whom they
conquered and cut off their Noses. Diodorus li. 2.
Yet Diodorus Siculus, makes a contrary relation, Actisanes (says he) King of
Aethiopia, having conquered all Egypt, partly by force, and partly by
condition, set up a new law for Thieves, neither acquitting them, nor punishing
them with death, but getting them altogether, he punished them thus; first he
cut off their Noses, and then forced them to go into the farthermost parts of
the Deserts, and there he built a City for them, called Rhinocorura, of their
want of Noses. I confess my Evidence is not so clear and Authentic, as to
charge these Rhinocorurites, with a voluntary continuation of this first
imposed deformity, yet we have presidents where a deformity intended for a
national punishment, has afterward bin received and continued as a fashion.
Nose-wanting Citizens.
But since historians speak not up directly to the point, Plinius Not. Hist.
lib. 6. cap. 30. Lycost. Chr. 16. Ex Plinio lib. 7. cap. 2. Scenckius observat.
Kornmannus de Mirac. viro. rum. Sr. John Mandevils Travels.
we shall wave our accusation. Yet you shall read of Nations that have no
Nostrils, there being an equal plainness throughout their whole Face; that
Face must needs be plain that wants a Nose.

Megasthenes reports, that there is a Nation among the Indian Nomades, having
holes only in the place of the Nostrils, and that they are called Syrictae:
Sr. John Mandevill speaks of some Nations, that have no Nose, but two small
holes, whereof one serves them to breath, the other serves instead of a Mouth.

Great is the Ornament, that the Face receives by the Nose; that part of the
Face which the Nose takes up, being styled by the ancients, the imperial seat
of Majestique beauty; that admiral variety of Faces, and individual
distinctions being chiefly occasioned by the Nose, the very least alteration
whereof, causing a manifest change in the air of the Face. If but a little
part of the Nose were cut off, it were a hard matter to say, how deformed the
whole Face would prove, Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
a maim in the Nose, therefore being justly called by Virgil, a dishonest
wound, Truncas in Honesto vulnere Nares.

The protuberating or strutting part of the Face, carries with it, says
Laurentius, a kind of beauty, yea of Majesty. The beauty that is added to the
Face of Man, by the Organ of smelling (I mean the Nose) Dr. Crook gives us a
pregnant instant thereof, Dr. Crook emicro Cosmograph.
in an example worth our remembrance; a young Man being adjudged to be hanged,
and the executioner at hand, a certain Maid suborned by his friends, and
quaintly dressed and set out, goes unto the judges, and makes supplication for
his life, The Honor of the Nose maintained.
requiring him for her husband; well, she overcame the Judges: this done, the
guilty young Man being set at liberty, and coming from the Gallows unto the
maid, attired and dressed in such costly Ornaments, he presently cast his Eye
upon her Nose, which indeed was very deformed, and instantly cries out, that he
had rather have been hanged, then freed upon condition of undergoing so
deformed a choice in his Matrimony; to this is that of Horace answerable.
Horat. in Art Poetica.


Hunc ego, si quid componere curem,
Non magis esse velim, quam pravo vivere Naso.
Treason and adultery, therefore, has not met with a more shameful or
disgraceful punishment then the loss of the Nose; Lindschoten.
for the Bengalian law deprives them of their Noses, who are taken in the act
of Adultery, Io. Bohemus de ritibus gentium lib. 1.
and the Egyptian Law cut off the Woman's Nose, who was taken in Spontaneous
Adultery, with which disgrace, the countenance was deformed, suffering the
shameful loss of that part, which most adornes the Face. In some parts of
Muscovia, the second act of Theeverie, is punished with this disgraceful
Nasall mulct. Heracleonas, the Son of Heraclius and Martina, as the greatest
blemish their malice could inflict, was by the Senate and People of
Constantinople, deprived of his Nose: the like loss Leontius Caesar suffered
by Assinarius, and 3000 Coreans to their ignominy, had their Noses cut off in
Meacco a Town of Japan.

That admirable stratagem of Zopyrus, who cut off his own Nose, and the Abbas
Ebba, and those Chaste Virgins, The beauty, action and Utilitie of the Nose.
which were in our Kingdom at the time of the Incursion of the Danes, who cut
off their own Noses to preserve their Chastity, were both built upon this
concession, that the Nose any way mangled or cut off, gives the greatest
blemish to the Face, and proves most destructive to the enchanting beauty
thereof, which does much advance the Art of Taliacotius, and the new inarching
of Noses; and when we slit the Noses of Malefactors, we do it to brand them
with the most deforming note of infamy, and the reason and Sense holds good;
But the beauty of the Nose is to be counted as nothing, because the utility
thereof is so admirable, the beauty of whose use does much exceed and surpass
the pleasure of beholding it; Beauty being not intended as the first scope of
Nature, but as an additament and parergon of the main work: but what she is
most incumbent upon, and which she always beholds, are those things which
appertain to Action and utility. Now Action differs from utility, because in
construction and generation, the action of the part has precedence, but
utility is before it in point of dignity, true beauty is referred to the
success and goodness of utility, since utility is the first in the
construction of all parts. Ulmus de Fine Barbae Hum.
Ulmus teaches us what is the true beauty of a part, which is that they are
used to call the Physical or official pulchritude, for it proceeds from the
Office, use, and Utility, no otherwise but as a River flows from a Fountain.
Now if we enquire for the Elegancy of the Scapula of the Nose, and the flesh of
the Nostrils, and that beauty which so manifestly appears in the wings of the
Nose, you shall find them, if you join them with the action of them, and weigh
their construction together, Men with slit Noses.
for that will afford you the true standart, rule, or measure of judgment, and
discerning true beauty, which is Pulchritudo officii, vel officialis, the
beauty of office, or official elegancy. The Face has no peculiar action,
neither rightly or properly is it called a dissimilar part, but is rather a
congeries or heap of dissimilar parts, whereof every one has its proper
action, or else are servient to the Agents. The Eye sees, the Front is
destinated to its service, and so are the Nose and Ears. The Nostrils serve
for expiration and inspiration, and a more plentiful exufflation, and for a
significant indication of the affections of the mind.

The Indians Diverse have their Noses slit like broken winded Horses. It is an
ill Trade, that cannot be exercised without deforming the Body, that being a
badg of their profession, which is a penal mark of a Malefactor among us. We
read (as if Nature therein had mocked art) that in Brasill, about the Feast of
Easter Anno 1556, Lycost. de prodig. and ostent.
there was an Infant borne with his Nostrils so slit and open, that his brain
was easily discernable through his Nose.

Nose-squezers
Paul. Venet. lib. 10.
In the City Cingui, between Cathai and the Kingdom Cergath, they have a
little Nose. Purchase Pilgr. 3. lib. 10.
The Chinoyse do hold them for the finest women who have small Noses,
wherefore from their Childhood, they use all the art they can possible, to
prohibit the increase of the Noses of their female Children. And indeed,
generally their Noses are very little, and scarce standing forth. The People
being, Heiyn Geogra.
as another notes, in the composition of their Body short nosed, when they
make the portraiture of a deformed Man, they paint him with a long Nose.

Certainly the natural sagacitie of these people must somewhat abate; for as
they that want the Nose smell not, so a short Nose smells not so well as a long.

With us, and with most of Europe, a long Nose is held more beautiful,
especially in Men; Long Noses affected.
for, the Midwives as soon as children are born, use with their fingers to
extend the Nose, that it may be more fair and longer, Perchance.

Paroemia de Nasatorum peculio vulgo trita
Ad formam Nasi, cognoscitur hasta Baiardi.
Now the Nose according to the justice of Nature, should be no longer then the
Lip and Ear; and the third part of the Face in length, and the thirtieth part
of the length of the whole body, it should not exceed in length half that
distance which interposeth between the external Angle of both the Eyes;
therefore the length of the Nose should answer in a Sesquialtera proportion,
the length of the Eye, and the Diduction of the Mouth; nor should it extend in
length, beyond the measure of its circumference at the bottom. A long Nose
(indeed) may be some advantage to the Sense of smelling, as appears in the
Noses of Bloodhounds: yet for the sent of Man, that length is sufficient, which
consists with beauty, and may be reconciled with the proportions of Natures
symetrie, beyond which who endeavors to extend the Nose, renders himself
guilty of a great Transgression: as on the contrary they also do, who labor
to prohibit the Natural extendure of the Nose, upon any pretense of beauty
whatsoever.

In Cassena a Region of Aphrica, Cardon de subtle lib. 11. Leo Hist. of Africa
lib. 7. Hip. lib. de acre aquis and lo^is. Maginus Geograph. Africae.
near the Aethiopians, there are Men who are valde Nasuti, or endued with very
thick Noses: One that is ignorant of the Nature of things (says Cardan)
perchance will laugh at this relation, especially if he have not seen the
History of Hippocrates, Great Noses affected
wherein he treats of Macrocephali, or those with Sugar-loafe like Heads, the
cause whereof he there declares, to have been at first a Panthasticall
affectation of Art, as it was likely also in these of Cassena.

In Perviana also, a great Nose is in request and national.

Munster lib. 5. cap. 149.
The Inhabitants of the Island Zanzibar, have nostrils turned broad upwards,
and the women are deformed by reason of their great nostrils, and al it may be
upon the same score of invention.

Paulus Venet. lib. 3.
And if they use an artificial endeavor thereby, they introduce a disease upon
the instrument of Nature; for, the Nose is depraved as to its matter, and
therefore because of vitiated matter, the instrument it self is perverted, and
it is a disease by reason of magnitude, that is of quantity, for that quantity
it self is greater then is convenient for that instrument; for, quantity
follows immediately matter, and is adherent unto it, that it can scarce be
separated. I confess ingenious men have doubted, an detur aegritudo in
magnitudine; but if this greatness of Nose do (as it probably may) hurt or
hinder the operation of the Nose, it must be acknowleged a disease of the
fashions, Flat Noses and saddle Noses affected
and if this affectation amount not to a nasall disease, yet it is very
probable it may prove an obstacle to vision, and somewhat prejudice the Eye in
point of Prospect: and so consequently trespass against the natural
prorogative of that Sense.

The Huns, a most cruel Nation, Munster Cosmograh. lib. 3. cap. 3.
were wont to flat down the Noses of their Boys, least it should be a
hinderance to the putting on their Helmets.

The Country People of the Northern Islands be like the Tartars, flat Nosed.
Fox of the North-west Passage. Lyndschoten lib. 1. cap. 41.


They of Caffaria in the lower Aethiopia and Mosambique, have their Noses
broad, flat, and thick at the end.

The Matrons of Secota in Florida who are of form elegant enough, have plain
broad Noses. De Bry Hist. Indian.


The Aethiopians are Camoise nosed, Steph. Ritter. Cosmogr. pros^metrica.
the Epithet of Simi being by the ancient Poets bestowed upon them.

In Sumatra, Lodovic. Romans Patr. Navigat. 4. cap. 2.
they have a most broad saddle Nose, which is especially noted in the City
Malacha.

In the East Indies, and the Kingdom of China, Hist. Chinae pars 2. lib. 2.
cap. 6. Magin. Geographia.
the Inhabitants have all Camoyse or saddle Noses.

They of Guinea, their Noses are flat, Bohemus de Rit. Gentium. Purchase Pilgr.
which they make so when they are young; for they esteem a flat Nose a great
Ornament unto them, and it seems it does not amiss with them, as they order
their Bodies; for according to the proportion of Body, they beautify their
Faces. Another says, Helyn Geogra.
they account the principal part of beauty to consist in a flat, Shooing horn
Noses affected
Nose. I am informed of the truth of this relation by a Traveller that has
seen the practice.

Solinus and Comment Draugius Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
The Argyppaei are Camoise nosed, with a great Chin.

In America (contrary to us, who desire straight Noses) the Husband who
performs the office of a Midwife to his wife, Lindschoten lib. 2.
when he has received the child, and cut the Navill string asunder with his
teeth, he presses down the Nose with his thumb; for they esteem the beauty
of children to consist in the flatnesse of the Nose, even as they use to do in
France, with certain foisting Hounds, which are there in great request for the
flatnesse of their Noses.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9. Reeve in his Seraglio of the Grand Signiour
In the great Turks Court, flat Noses are in request, but it is for the foil
of their deformity, this fashion appearing most deformed among them, who affect
and have the contrary appearance: For there Negro Girls are esteemed most for
their uglines by the Sultanaes; therefore the Bashaw of Cairo (who for the most
part sends them all) is always diligent to get the most illfavoured, cole
black, flat nosed girls that can be had in Egypt, or the bordering Countries,
to send them for a present to the grand Signior, who bestows them upon his
women, who make the same use of them, as our Ladies do of illfavoured waiting
women, that is to serve as a foil to set off the splendor of their beauties.
Pliny lib. 11. Not. Hist.
Pliny notes, that the surname of Simones came from the first of the family
that had flat Noses, and they were called Silones, who were hooked and Camoise
nosed upwards. Little Noses affected.


The Brasilians, who are borne as fair as the common sort of Men, but coming
out of the womb, they are made deformed in squeezing of their Nose, which is
the chiefest part wherein consists the beauty of Man; That as in certain
countries (as you may reap in this Scene) they praise the long Noses, and in
others the Hawks Noses, so among those (as the Moors of Aphrica, who are all
of the same sort) it is a fair thing to be flat nosed, and to have large
expanded nostrils and a short Nose; In the description of Nova Francid. lib. 2
cap. 10.
And that you may see that I am not the only Descanter upon such
prevatications, take what the Relator makes his introduction to the Narrative
of this artifice: among all the forms of living and bodily creatures, (says
he) that of man is the fairest and most perfect, which was very decent, both
for the creature and Creator, seeing that man is placed in the world, to
command all that is here beneath; but although that Nature endeavors herein
always to do good, notwithstanding she is sometimes short and enforced in
her actions, and therefore it comes that we have so many monsters, and ugly
things, contrary to the ordinary rule of others, yea, even after that Nature
has done her office, we help by our arts, to render that which she has
made, ridiculous and misshapen. And verily who can sufficiently admire how this
affected deformity of a depressed saddle Nose, came first in fashion with
these Nations, and like a contagion infected so great a part of mankind; or how
so villainous an absurdity should in despite of Nature, be continued to this
day: surely the Grand Deformer the better to ride the abused Fantasies of these
people, The Nason of the prominencie of the Nose
has clapped his saddle upon their Faces, and made this a shooing-horne to draw
them on to other corporal vanities.

By a most remarkable providence, it was ordered by Nature, that the Nose
should be more prominent in one part, to be more apt thereby to give way a
little to any thing falling upon it, which so easily slides off: so eminent,
that it hides the Eyes as in a Cave and valley, as it were, because they abhor
the contract of all things; therefore to defend the Eye, being after a manner
like a shield, yet no way impedites vision: for if about the ridge, spine, or
back of the Nose, it had been broad, it would have remained as an obstacle to
vision, besides, that the breadth would have disfigured the Face, all which
inconveniences these Nose-levellers must needs in some sort incur: nay, by
this spreading their Noses contrary to the Majesticall intention of Nature,
they must somewhat prejudice the Nose, not only in those actions wherein it is
profitable for the bettering of our life, but to those wherein it is necessary
to life it self. For these Nations who by their Apish affectation become Simi
or Simones, they purchase only a disease; for, the Figure of the Nose is
perverted; Yet this simitie it self is not the disease, but the disease wants
a name, and is afterward called by the name of a Symptom. But this disease
has a lesion of operations, otherwise it were not a disease, but rather a
certain deformity, therefore the disease is, because the Nose is obstructed to
the hinderance of respiration, and that obstruction is a disease upon which
there follows a lesion of operations; for, all these Nations certainly for
want of a free respiration, so speak, that they can scarce be understood, and
they are said to speak in the Nose, The inconveniences of saddle Noses.
yet it seems it does not (as I suppose it might) somewhat hinder their
smelling, for it is said of the Brasilians and them of Peru, that they have the
smelling so good, that in smelling of the hand, they know if a man be a
Spaniard or a Frenchman. But because the disease wants a name, it ought
according to Montanus, to be nominated, from the cause, which is the Simitie it
self. Simity therefore is the cause, not the disease, and the disease is in
the evil figure, because that which ought not to be depressed, is made
depressed, and so makes it to be Morbus in figura or re figurata. And now who
can deny these Nations to be sick of the fashions? and if their design be to
gain beauty thereby, they are much out of the way, since the Nose is thereby
hurt in its form, because it is hurt in its adorning and beauty, which is
thereby blemished; and when its ornament and beauty is blemished, the very
form of it is hurt, and so consequently the instrument; Yet we ought to know,
that the imbellishment and beauty, does not consist in the softness and
whiteness of flesh (as fond Women rashly have entertained an opinion: But they
consist in a due conformation of parts and fit situation, to the end they may
commodiously and aptly bring forth their operations, because Ornament and
beauty tend to the operation of the parts, as Galen affirms. Since therefore
the very figure of the Nose is in beauty and ornament, which consists in a
conformation of parts, and a convenient situation; the beauty and Ornament
hurt, the form it self is hurt, and the instrument it self in respect of its
form is said to be hurt: when we speak of the figure of the Nose, we mean
the conformation it self, not the substantial form, but the conformation of
parts, which in latin is, aptly called Plasmatio, An Ape-like Nose condemned.
having respect to the nature of the thing, which conformation consists in its
proper isntrumental Member, in a due manner, with the figure it self, when
the Receptacles, passages, and superficies are not also depraved; nor do we
understand (as advertized before) the substantial form, which is in the very
matter forming it and giving it to be in act. Dr. Brown Pseudoxia epidem.
I know the beauty of the Nose is generally determined by opinion, and seems
(as one ingeniously speaks in this case of flat Noses, and other affected
figures thereof) to have no essence, that holds one notion with all, that
seeming beauteous unto one, which has no favor with another, and that unto
every one according as Custom has made it natural, or Sympathy and
conformity of minds, shall make it seem agreeable; Which various apprehensions
of Men and Nations, has made him think that no deviations can be expounded so
high to an undeniable deformity, without a manifest and confessed degree of
monstrositie; Yet it is granted, that in the natural body of Man, the
perfections of every part receive their exactness from the first Idea of the
Creator: but, herein, is a contrivance which seems to oppose against it, the
Fancy of an Artificer overruling the intention of Nature, which must
consequently evidence some deformity. To speak the truth, this Nose being
gentilitious and native to an Ape, can never become a Man's face: the Native
beauty of the Nose consisting rather in the elevation, then depression of it;
That Physique Axiom being firm, as stablished upon the truth of Natures
intention, Nasus homini altior ad decorem. Levit. 21.18:
A flat Nose being therefore excepted against in the Leviticall law, and
excluded any priestly approach unto the Altar, Whether a flat Nose can conferr
any beauty to a Face.
as accounted an unnatural blemish and deformity; One of the unclean signs
of the Leprosy being a dilatation and augmentation of the wings of the Nose,
and a Simitie of the nostrils, whereby the Face, whose beauty does not a little
consist in the Decent figure of the Nose, appears very filthy and dishonest.
And therefore we most justly abhor the Nose that is sunk into this Figure by
the Venerian rot, as the greatest blemish and mischief that spightfull,
disgraceful and disfiguring malady can inflict. Now that these Nose-moulders
many times prejudice nature in her operations, and blemish her perfections, is
too apparent. But let us see yet farther, whether they obtain their ends,
which is to advance the beauty of their Faces, the rather, since one Historian
imagines that some of them do. The figure of the Face generally seems to be
distinguished in these differences, either it is oblong, round, or broad; for,
a narrow face which is opposite unto a broad, is reduced to an oblong. So hence
these differences are reduced, either the Face is extended equally according to
its altitude and latitude, and so is an oblong Face: or is more exporrected
according to latitude then longitude, and is called a broad Face; it is easy
to imagine that the longitude, which we also call the altitude, is to be taken
from the Forehead to the Chin, the latitude on the contrary, from cheek to
cheek. Some bring in another rotunditie of Face, which is when it does swell,
and is prominent into the anterior part, to which roundnesse they oppose a
hollow, to wit, which is depressed. In a varied expression, we may say, a Face
this way round is that which is Unequal in the forepart, a Hollow-face is that
which in the same part is Concave. Wherein the beauty of the Nose consists.
Now besides that which is commonly called the figure of the Face: there is
another which is compounded of the figure of the several parts of the Face,
and of their dependence and respect they have among themselves, which Critiques
in beauty call the Form. And the front alone (as is observed) may be varied
above 576 ways, and therefore the Nose infinitely more, but many parts may be
varied in several ways and degrees and various complications among
themselves, from whence arises that infinite (almost) variety of humane
Forms. Now beauty resides in the Form; for if every part be rightly formed,
and rightly correspondent one unto another, the Face will be beautiful, if it
have withal a pleasing color. But the parts may all be beautiful, and yet
not well answer one another; as for example: A short, long, strait, crook't or
Aquiline Nose, little or great, if they be Graphically constituted, may be
beautiful; but the question will be, what figure of other parts is required to
make up the perfect harmony of a Face. A fair high Hawks Nose, rather agrees
with a fair plump Cheek, then with a fair thin Cheek: and on the contrary, a
beautiful Cheek but lean, does rather love a strait Nose, then an Aquiline.
The Persians therefore to make good the beauty, as well as the transcendent
dignity of their Noses, had need have unequal or full extant Faces, as indeed
for the most part they have. As for the Tartars and Chynoise, who affected a
flat Nose, it must needs be confessed, it is not unsuitable unto their broad
Faces; but how can the same Nose beautify a round Face, such as the Guineans
and they of Cassara, in the lower Aethiopia are said to have, The Natural
perfection of the Nose in man and Woman.
unless we will imagine such a rotundity, as makes a Concave or hollow Face,
with which a Camoise Nose may have some indifferent correspondency. Now since
both sexes are guilty of this violence offered unto nature, the better to
convince them of their error, we shall not think much to exhibit the
absolute form, both of a Man and Woman's Face, the natural perfection of a
Man's Face requires these conditions: A square Forehead, upon which those
forelocks of the Hair abide moderately elevated, his Eyebrows hard, great and
long, a good amiable charope Eye, not very concave nor prominent, somewhat
Lion-like, that little cloud that is said to appear above the Nose, being
nothing else but a certain rugged or scarce apparent Tumor, which declares a
kind of light contraction of the Forehead: A Nose thick, not acute, but rather
great then small, a Face great and not bony, a great Mouth, firm teeth, not
thin, of an indifferent size, and white, 32 in number, his upper jaws are
equal to the lower jaws, and neither exceed, nor are exceeded or put forth
beyond each other; for so Man would be deformed, but nature makes the Masculine
perfect, and what is perfect according to the natural state, all that is very
beautiful; such therefore ought to be the exact Symetry of the jaws, his
Ears not too big nor too little, well engraved, dearticulate, a Head of a
moderate magnitude, drawing nearer, yet to a greater then a less, and
venerable withal. To the absolute form of a Woman's Face, there goes a fair
white Forehead, marked with no wrinkles or lines, longer then that of Man's is,
and drawing to a roundnesse about the Temples, that it seems to represent a
Turkish bow inverted, The absolute perfections of a woman's face
wherein there appears not any tumor or gibbosity, or any cloud, no severity
or sadness, but a pleasant and modest cheerfulness, a Face round, pleasant
and elegant to behold. A little Mouth, somewhat but scarce opening, small white
teeth, somewhat short, even, in number just 28, not thin, nor too hard closed
together, somewhat full lips, Coral, imitating Vermilion, a little disjoined,
yet so as the teeth are scarce discovered, whilst she holds her peace or
laughs not, unmoved; that is such a woman that does not rest, nor bite, nor
suck her lips; these lips thus described add a wonderful grace and dignity to
a woman's visage: neither is the Nose to be omitted, the honor and Ornament of
the countenance, which represents the outward part of a Rose: of a mean size,
strait, clean, with a certain obtusenesse acute, but the holes of their
nostrils small. A round white pill'd or smooth Chin, the Candor whereof seems
to introduce into the beholders mind, a certain suspicion of a Rosy color,
but no tract at all, nor any perception of hairs is to be seen either in the
lips or Chin: A small short Purple Tongue, most certainly does best become a
woman, which yet is scarce or never seen, the tip scarce appearing whiles she
speaks: the Eyebrows ought to be black, subtle, disjoined, soft, and sweetly
arched. Somewhat black Eyes, declining to smallness, concave, rolling,
laughing, pleasant and shining. The Bals of the Cheeks round, altogether void
of hairs, fleshie, rosy, and resembling the red Sunshine Apples of Autumn.
Above these remain the Temples, which ought to be no less white then the
Forehead, and without suspicion of any bones, yet not swollen nor depressed, but
in a manner a little and scarce concave. Ears graven somewhat short, soft and
delicate, The too officious art of stroaking up the Nose of Infants noted.
aspersed with the dilucid color of Roses. The whole Head rather little then
great, more round then a man's, comely, erect, and elevated

These are the Natural beauties of the parts, belonging both to a Man and
Woman's Face: yet no Man may hereupon conclude that Face to be beautiful and
perfect in all its number, that has all these conditions, for it does not
truly follow. But as a Lute or Harp, is not therefore said to be Harmonically
and fitly made ready and prepared, because it has fair and good strings, or
because it is gilded, but because they concord with one another in Harmonicall
numbers, therefore it sounds well and is praised: so a Man or woman's Face,
unless the aforesaid parts thereof agree and concord aptly with one another,
is neither beautiful nor comely.

We in this Island are of an opinion, and practice somewhat contrary to these
Face-levellers, and do no way like of a shooing-horn-like Nose, neither do we
esteem such to be gratiosos. And therefore our Midwives and Nurses are a little
too forward to stretch out their hands to help Nature in this case. For
although all children are a little Camo^sed about the Nose, before the bridge
rises, being not properly but equivocally called saddle-Nosed, because they
have a power, and are to receive a Nose more perfect, appearing only Camoise;
because the natural heat which is the instrument of the virtue Formatrix, has
not yet perfected their Noses, nor elevated that Cartilage to its natural and
appointed magnitude, according to whose figure all appellations of the Nose are
referred. Not that nature always needs the officious and over diligent help
and art of Midwives and Nurses, An Aquiline or high hawks Nose where affected.
to to pinch up our Noses as they do, Jacob. Fontanus in Phisiogn. Arist.
as if nature were not able to perfect her own work. Jacob: Fontanus in his
comment upon the Physiognomy of Arist. taking notice of this pragmaticall
devise of Midwives, says, that because children by reason of their tender
bones, which are easily deprest, appear saddle-nosed; they laying hold of them
with their Thumb and forefinger, are wont to compresse the laterall parts of
the Nose, that this Simity of Children may be the sooner abolished: more for
beauty then for any commodity it brings to life, for they are sometimes so
compressed by them, that they become less commodious for the purging out of
the mucous excrements of the Brain. It is true, it belongs to the corrective
part of medicine, to look a little to this business, and to correct the lapse
of Nature, where a just occasion is, but not by over diligence to bring the
Nose into a worse condition then it would have been in, had they trusted the
ordinary providence of nature.

The Persians of old, very much esteemed a high aquiline or hawks Nose, as a
note of honor and magnanimity, which they affected in memory of Cyrus, who
had such a nose, and they would suffer none to reign over them but Princes
that had such imperial Noses; The manner of making Hawke-Noses.
nay, it is a custom at this day, to except against such that are not thus
nosed; wherefore those that have the nursery and education of the King of
Persia's children, and the Princes of the Royal Blood, use all the art they
can to make them Gryphos, or crooked-nosed like a Hawks bill; and they had no
other Nurses less honorifique then Eunuchs, whose chief command and office,
as foster-fathers; was to make the Nose as beautiful as might be, composing
and directing their members, from which employment they were all accounted
Grandees. These Nutritiall Eunuchs did conform the Nose, Mercurialis lib. de
Decorat.
as Mercurialis does probably conjecture, with leaden plates kept on by some
fastening contrived without, and for their intrinsicall operation, they used
little hollow pipes, thrust into the Caverns of their nostrils, by which their
tender Noses streitned and bound in such a mould, in process of time, were
formed according to their desire. Not far from this artifice, is that liberty
which is granted to the corrective part of Medicine, in correcting the ill
conformation of the nostrils, when in children they are either too large or
straight, the way of which correction, is to wrest the member to the opposite
part; that is, if they be too wide, to contract them gently with the finger,
and in case they be too close, often dilate them, or by putting some such
hollow pipes into the nostrils as Mercurialis thinks the Persian Nutritii used
in the affected arching of Persian Nose. This figure of the Nose, is now become
gentilitiall, and native to the Persians, A high Prominent Nose where affected
who to their high foreheads, have generally high hooked Noses: so truly is
that verified in the practice of Men.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. For if once the Grandees begin a
corporal fashion, the contagion soon spreads, and the meaner sort will
imitate them in the same practical Metamorphosis, although they pay for it.
So, Quicquid delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achivi.

The Romans of old loved a large and prominent nose, which was with them in
fashion as most imperial: and we use to call such an high and eminent Nose a
Roman Nose: and the Austrian Nose bears sway at this day in Germany.

Purchase Pilgr. 3. lib. 2.
The Indian women bore their Nostrils full of holes on both sides, wherein they
wear Jewels, which hang down unto their lips.

Idem Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
The People of the Island Arucetto, have holes in their Noses on each side,
wherein they wear Rings strange to behold.

The Nation called Curenda, Nose-Borers.
Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
up the River Parana, have little stones, which hang dangling in their Noses.

The Chiribichenses bore holes in their nostrils for an elegancy, and the
richer sort, Pet. Mart. decad. 8.
deck them with jewels of Gold, the common people, with diverse shells of
cockles and Sea Snailes. Purchase Pilgr.


A little from Gambra in Africa, Men and women, as an ensign of Nobility and
greatness, wear one great Ring, in a hole bored through the Nose, which they
put in and take out at pleasure. Idem Pilgr. 3. lib. 5.


It was a custom in Mexico to pierce the nostrils of their elected King: for
when Ticois the King of Mexico was chosen, they pierced his nostrils, and for
an Ornament, put an Emerald therein; and for this reason in the Mexican
Picture-Chronicles, this King is noted by his nostrils pierced.

The great Gaga Calando King of Gagas, Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
wears a piece of copper cross his Nose, two inches long, which is the least
part of his cruel bravery.

The Kings Wife of Cumana, De Bry. Hist. Ind.
has her nostrils bored, and a Ring hung therein, which in their language they
call Caricari. Nose-Jewels
Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.


The Inhabitants of the Cape of Lopo Gonsalves, wear rings in the middle parts
of their Noses; some thrust small horns of teeth through them, and wear them
so, which they think to be a great Ornament unto them. Lindschoten lib. 2.


The Guineans hold themselves fair with their Nasall Ornaments, some thrust
small horns or teeth through their Noses, and so wear them, all (as they
think) to beautify themselves. Hier. Giravae Cosmograph.


The Inhabitants of Florida, for the same purpose, bore their Nostrils.

Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
The Cueremagba's, (the Men) have a little hole in their Nose, into which, for
an Ornament they put a Parrots feather.

Idem eodem.
The People of Tiembus, wear on either nostrill, a blew starr, artificially
made of a blew and white stone.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
They of Barnagasso Kingdom, and Colo Brava, the Negro- slaves, have certain
marks on their Noses, made only for a bravery with a cold Iron, and they say
these marks are very beautiful unto them; my Author shows how they make them.

Idem eod. li. 10.
The women of Ormus, wear on their bored Noses, many jewels, and a long bar
of Gold upon one side of their Noses.

Isa. 3.21.
The Jewish women of old, had also Nose-jewels in request, as an ancient
Ornament, reckoned up by the prophet Isaiah, among other impliments of their
abominable pride.

They of St. Christophers, stick pins on their Noses, making their Noses serve
for pin-pillowes. The inhabitants of the province Quillacenca about Peru, wear
Iron rings in their Noses, This Nose ^^^very taxed
Purchase. Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
and jewels thereat, whence the province had its name, being hence called
Quillacenca; that is, the Iron-Nose Province.

The better sort of Egyptian women wear rings of Gold or Silver, Lithgowes
Travels.
through the hollow of their Noses, hanging rich Pearls and precious stones at
them, wherein the common People imitate their betters.

It is a strange thing to consider the various fantasies of Nations, touching
matters adorning the Body; for some think it more ornamentall to wear their
bracelets on their wrists, others say it is better to have them about their
ancles: some think it most comely to wear Rings and Jewels in the Ear, some
will have them about their privities, and others will not think they are
complete, unless they hang them upon their lips, Cheeks, or Noses, as those
Nations do, who are well ringed for rooting, and enjoy the statute beauty of
our swine. Surely their invention was much put to it, when they suffered their
Noses to be bored, to bring up this fashion, the patience of that Man was
something allied to their folly, who walking by a mark, at which some ill
Archers shot, and being shot through the Nose, told them plainly, that if they
shot there again, he would break their Arrow. The beauty of the Nose, consists
in the equality and polish't smoothness thereof, which is the Natural
Ornament of the part. Hence we see how uncomely it is, when enriched with
Rubies and the Pustels of compotation, which exposes such rich-faced and
carbuncle-nosed tospots to the mockery of all Men. Nose-Borers. taxed.
Nor less ridiculous is the golden Rings and precious Jewels, in the snout of
such swine; for, the extant bulk of those Nose-rings, and pendants wherewith
they overlaid their Noses; must some way hinder the sight; and divelish pride,
who has thus bored them through the Nose, and made more vents in Natures
conduit-pipe then she intended, she sure paies them wages, in rendering the
Nose less apt for the right forming of the voice, which must needs be less
articulate and explained, and the words somewhat tuned in the Nose. In the
curious Machini of speech, the Nose is added as a Recorder, to advance the
melodious echo of the sound, which these women think that Nature has not made
complete enough; therefore they will bore them full of Recorder stops as it
were, as if they should speak only in the recording tone of their Nose, which
invention is to the blemish and prejudice of Natures nasall operation, and must
needs rather mar, then any way improve the instrument.

SCENE VIII. Long Eared Nations.
Auricular fashions, or certain strange Inventions of People in new-moulding
their Ears.
ANcient writers speak of some Indians, whose Ears did reach unto the ground.
Pomponius speaking of these or some like them, says they call them Fanesios or
Satmalos: Strabo Geographia. lib. 15.
the Greeks as Strabo writes, call them (...), because they use their Ears for
a couch to sleep on.

Megasthenes an ancient Author, Solinus cap. 21.
and Solinus say, there are Islands, and a Nation called Fanesii, (I read it
some where Panotii) whose Ears are dilated to so effuse a magnitude, that they
cover the rest of their bodies with them, and have no other clothing, then as
they cloth their members with the membranes of their Ears. Men with Ears down
their Feet.
Pliny also makes report of such nations about Pontus (says he) there are
Scythian Islands, Pliny. lib. 4. cap. 13.
where there is a Nation of Fanesii, Munster Cosmograph. lib. 5. cap. 126.
who being otherwise naked, have Ears so larg, that they invelope their whole
bodies with them; Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2.
And in his seventh book he proves, that in the borders of India, not far from
Taprobana, there are men who cover themselves all over with their Ears.
Isidor. lib. 11. cap. 3.
Isidor affirms as much of them. The testimonies of these men are very ancient,
but there are not wanting store of later witnesses.

Eusebius. Nieremberg. Hist. Naturae
Petrus Simon, and Antonius Daca, as Eusebius Nierembergensis imformes us;
report of men that were lately found, whom they call Tulanuch^ (which name
signifies an Ear) such as the old world called Onotocitos, whose Ears are so
prolix that they hang down even unto the ground, and six Men may be hid under
one of them: these Men were discovered toward Califurnia. Great Eared Men.


Maximilianus Transilvanus reports, Maximil. Transil. apud Ramus, Tom. 1.
that there is an Island near the Molucca's, where the people have such vast
Ears. And Pigafetta assures us, that in Arucetto, which is an Island reckoned
among the Molucca's, there are such People as before mentioned, whose Ears
have so spacious and prodigious dimensions. Purchase says, Purchase Pilgr.
that in this Island Arucetto, are men and women, not past a cubite in height,
having Ears of such bigness, that they lie upon one, and cover them with the
other; so that although these things have been reported in fables, yet you may
find Authors whom it would not displease one to follow: Strabo indeed accounts
these relations fabulous, and he scoffs at Megasthenes, for writing of such
kind of Ears; Yet Mela says he had Authors for it, that were not to be
contemned. And as Kornmannus thinks, Kornmannus lib. de virorum mirac.
it is not disagreeable to truth, if you weigh the number and authority of
those writers; which will appear more credible by the modern relations of some
ocular witnesses, mentioned in this present Scene: that there should be whole
Nations that have Ears of so prodigious a magnitude, is a relation I doubt
will scarce credibly sink into the Ears of men; Thom Thomauis in hort^ mundi.
Gilbertus Chron. Skenckius lib. 1. observat.
yet we may safely afford the same Faith unto it, as to the records of
monstrous births, which have appeared with such Ears. Gilbertus in his
Chronicle attests, that a woman in a certain castle of Lumbardie called
Canossus, in the time of Pope Gregory, brought forth a little Infant, with such
great and large Ears, that they covered the little body of it. Large-Ear'd
Nations.
Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 11.
Pliny reports that the sirnames of Flacci, (families, and houses in Rome)
came first from their flaggie, long, and hanging Ears.

Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
In Guinea, upon the borders of Wiapoco, there is a Nation of Carabes, having
great Ears, of an extraordinary bigness, hard to be believed; they call the
people Marashewaccas, supposed to be made so by Art, and affected by them, as
an extraordinary garb of devised gallantry.

Sr. John Mandevils Travels cap. 62.
In an Island near the Island Dodyn, there are Men with Ears hanging unto their
shoulders. And in another Isle, are wild Men, with hanging Ears.

Hier. Giravae Cosmograph.
In the Province Cusco, in the land of Pervana, are those Auriti or great Eared
Men, vulgarly called Oriones, who are the richest and most Potent Men of the
whole Region, who always go poled, using all the Art possible to enlarge
their Ears.

Munster Cosmograph. lib. 5. cap. 149.
The Inhabitants of the Island Zanzibar have also great Ears.

Maximil. Transil. apud Ramus Tom. 1.
In the Island Gilon, numbered among the Moluca's there is a certain Nation,
whose Auricles are so great, that they hang down to their shoulders. Munster
Cosmograph. lib. 5. cap. 164.
When the Spaniards came to this Island, and found men with such long Ears,
wondering at them, they understood by the Inhabitants, that there was another
Island not far from thence, where Men had not only hanging Ears, but broad
and large Auricles, that when they saw it was useful to them, they could cover
their whole Heads with one of them: I could not here conceal that which the
Cosmographer was unwilling to omit, Great Ears the greatest beauty.
seeing it is witnessed by good Authors, and has nothing incredible therein,
but only with such who think it a note of wisdom, to seem very incredulous.
Pigafetta apud Ramus Tom. 1.


In certain Islands, not far remote from the Island of Thieves, their Ears
are so long that they cover their arms.

They of Botanter of the Mountains, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
have Ears of a span long, and it is held such a note of gallantry among them,
that those that have not their Ears long, they call them Apes.

In West- India, on the River Mariwini, Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
are People having great Ears, which they make so large by Art, with hanging
weights thereat, insomuch that they hang down to their shoulders; yet are
reported to be good natured People.

In Peru, the greatest Ears, are ever esteemed the fairest, which with all art
and industry, they are continually stretching out, Montaignes Essaies.
and a man (who yet lives) swears to have seen in a province of the East-
Indies, the people so careful to make them great, and so to load them with
heavy Jewels, Great Ears a sign of Nobitie.
that at great ease he could have thrust his arm through one of their
Eareholes.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
The Nairi and their wives have huge Ears; for they use for a bravery to make
great holes in their Ears, and so big and wide, that it is incredible: holding
this opinion, that the greater the holes be, the more Noble they esteem
themselves. Mr. Caesar Frederick a Traveller into those parts, had leave of one
of them to measure the circumference of one of them with a thread, and within
that circumference he put his arm up to the shoulders, clothed as it was, so
that in effect they are monstrous great: Thus they do make them when they are
little, for then they open the Ear, and hang a piece of lead or golden
thread, and within the opening in the hole, they put a certain leaf that they
have for that purpose, which makes the hole so great.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 10. De Bry. Hist. Ind. Herberts Travels lib. 3.
The Malabars, both men and women, the lappets of their Ears are open, and fo
broad and long, that they hang down to the shoulders, and the longer and wider
that they be, the more they are esteemed among them, and it is thought to be a
beauty in them, as that which makes them more notable, and honorable, and of
more goodly favor and personage, insomuch, as she is not accounted brave or
courtly, who cannot tear nor dilacerate her Ears wide enough for this
fashion, which they effect by hanging ponderous things in them.

Idem li. Ibidem.
They of the race of the Ghingalayes, which they say are the best kind of all
the Malabars, and are the guard of the King of Ceylon, Long Eared Gallants.
their Ears are very large, for the greater they are, the more honorable they
are accounted, some of them are a span long.

Some Nations of Farrupini, Idem.
toward the high land, called Craweanna, Pawmeeanna, Quikeanna, Peewattere,
Arameeso, Acawreanno, Acooreo, Tareepeeanno, Corecorickada, Peeauneado,
Coeeanno, Itsura and Waremisso; have holes through their Ears, of whom the
Indians report much of the greatness of their Ears.

The Surucusis wear their Ears with wide holes, Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
caused by art to grow into an incredible wideness, whereupon the Spaniards
call them Oreiones, or Men with great Ears, the Men had a round piece of wood
hanging at their Ears like a Calicut Die, a great favor and sign of
Nobility, and the first ensign of dignity and Knighthood, with some
neighboring Nations to them.

We read of the Tartars, Sebast. Franc. and Hornduffii exemplum quinti
praecepti. Munster Cosmograph. lib. 4. cap. 11.
in that dishonest victory they obtained against the Christians, by that base
stratagem of their poisoned Standards which waved in the Air, infected the
Christian Army, that they might be ascertained of the true number of the
slain, after they had pillaged the dead bodies, they cut off an Ear from
every one of them, with which they filled nine sacks or bushels full; had these
Men dealt so with as many slain of any of these large Eared Nations, they
would have doubled or trebled their measures.

The King of Calecut, Idem lib. eodem De Bry. descript. Indiae Orient. pars 9.
when the Hollanders came to see him, they observed his Ears so stretched with
the weight of gold and Jewels, Large Eared she gallants.
Idem ibidem De Bry. descript Ind. orient. pars 9.
and drawn out, that they reached down to the shoulders and armepits, for they
charge them with Gold and a sawcer set in the midst. The women, the richer and
more Noble and excellent they are, they have the longer Ears, adorned with
Rings. It is more familiar to the women then the Men, for the Hollanders
observed in men about an hundred Rings, such as ours are; but in the women
above two hundred, which with their weight, draw their Ears below their
shoulders.

Grimstone of their manners
The women there (as one observes) are not given to do any thing, but deck
themselves to seem more pleasing: so as when they go abroad, although they be
naked, yet they are laden with Gold and precious stones, hanging at their
Ears, Necks, Legs, Arms, and upon their Breasts.

Pigafetta apud Ramus Tom. 1.
In the City Cocchi, the Women think it a great comeliness to have their Ears
most shamefully bored; for in the lap which we pierce, they make a cleft
putting lead into it, which with its weight so extends it, that it hangs down
to the shoulders; the hole so big, that you may put your arm through it,
Horrid great Ears.
which deformation is so pleasing to their Eyes, that Men also are commonly
seen with their Ears so arraied.

The black People of the Cape Comori, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
have horrible great Ears, with many Rings set with Pearls and stones in them.

The Macuas not far from Mocambique wear their Ears bored round with many
holes, Idem eodem lib. 9.
in which they have pegs of wood, slender like knitting needles, a finger long,
which makes them look like hedge-hogs; this is part of their gallantry, for if
they are sad or crossed with any disaster, they leave all those holes open.

They of Madagascar, De Bry. pars 9.
have Ears bored through with large holes, so that you may put a finger
through them, in which they wear round pieces of wood.

Ears full of gilded nails.
Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The Gentiles of Indostan, their women have the flaps or neither part of their
Ears bored when they are young, See the like figure fol. 148.
which daily stretched and made wider by things kept in for that purpose, at
last becomes so large, that it will hold a ring as bigg as a little saucer,
made on the sides for the flesh to rest in; besides, round about their Ears
are holes made for Pendants, that when they please, they may wear rings in
them also.

Idem eodem lib. 9.
In Candou Islands one of the Islands accounted to Asia, they wear in their
Ears very rich Pendants according to their Wealth, but they wear them not
after the same fashion, as we do here; for, the mothers pierce the Ears of
their daughters when they are young, not only in the lap or fat of the Ear,
but all along the gristle, in many places, and put their threads of cotton to
increase and keep the holes, that they may put when they are greater, little
gilded nails, to the number of 24 in both Ears, the head of the nail is
commonly adorned with a precious stone or Pearl, also in the lap of the Ear
they have an Eare-ring, fashioned after their manner.

Idem eodem lib. 9.
Many of the Men and Women in the Cape of Lopo Gonsalves, wear Rings in their
Ears, whereof some weigh at least a pound, some have sticks thrust through
them of five or six fingers long.

Lindschoten lib. 2.
The Brasilean women, bore their Ears with so wide holes, that a man may thrust
his finger through, in them they hang certain long things, which reach unto
their Breasts, or shoulders like bloodhounds, or water spaniels Ears.
Auricular bravery.


The natural Inhabitants of Virginia, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9. Capt. Jo.
Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
in their Ears, have three great holes, that is in each three, wherein the
women commonly hang chains, bracelets, or copper; the Men, some of them, wear
in these holes, a small green or yellow colored Snake, near half a yard in
length, which crawling and lapping it self about their Necks, oftentimes will
familiarly kiss their lips, some a rat tied by the tail, and some the hand of
their enemy dried.

The inferior sort of Priests among them, can hardly be known from the common
People, but that they have not so many holes in their Ears to hang their
Jewels at.

In the country of Wingandacoa, Capt. Jo. Smyths Hist. of Virginia.
upon the continent of Virginia, the Queen and principal women in their Ears,
wear bracelets of Pearl hanging down to their middle, of the bigness of
great pease, the rest of the women have pendants of copper, and the Noble Men
five or six in an Ear.

The women of Cochin, Purchase. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
have horrible great Ears, with many Rings set with Pearl and stones in them.

A little from Gambra in Africa, Idem in his Pilgrimage.
there are found Men, who use it as a great bravery, to bore their Ears full
of holes, wearing therein, Rings of Gold, in rows or ranks.

In a certain Island in eight degrees, Idem. Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
as Sr. Francis Drake sailed to Nova Albion, the People have the nether part of
their Ears cut into a round circle, hanging down very low upon their cheeks,
wherein they hang things of a reasonable weight. Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.


The People on the southward of Tinda and Gambra, are reported to wear Iron
rings through their Ears.

Leo lib. 3. Hist. Africae.
The women of mount Beni Jesseten, do use to wear Iron rings upon their
fingers and Ears, for a great barvery.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
The women of Ormus wear in their Ears, many Rings of Gold set with Jewels,
and locks of Silver and Gold, insomuch, that the Ears with the weight of their
Jewels, be easily worn so wide, that a Man may thrust three of his fingers
into them.

De Bry descript. Ind.
In the City Cancer, not far from Goa, most of the Noble and great persons,
have their Ears bored with great holes, and wear in them 14 or 15 Rings, such
as we wear on our finger adorned with precious stones.

Lindschoten. lib. 1.
The Bramanes have most commonly round rings of Gold hanging at their Ears, as
the other Indians have.

Jo. Bohemus de ritibus gentium lib. 2.
The priests of the Panchaians, wear Earerings, besides their other womanish
golden Ornaments.

In Zeland they enrich their Ears with Gold and precious stones, Magin Geogr.
Hier Girava Cosmograph.
and the same auricular bravery is affected by those of Florida.

In Pegu they load their Ears with all sorts of Jewels, insomuch, Lodovic.
Romans Patr. lib. 6. cap. 16.
as their Ears with the weight of their Earerings, hang down a span long.

The King of Joga's subjects, Idem Navigat. 4. cap. 2.
all wear Earerings, and all manner of precious things in their Ears.

In Russia it is the custom of the Country, Johan. Bohem. de. ritibus
gentium. lib. 3.
for women to wear Pearls and Jewels in their Ears, it is held a beauty also
to males, while they are yet boys; this is also a vanity used among the more
amorous and effeminate sort of our gallants.

The Spanish women use to perforate the lappet of their Ear with a Gold or
Silver wire, Munster Cosmogr. lib. 2.
at which most commonly they hang some Jewel, which by the French is censured
as a barbarous thing.

The Egyptians used to bore their Ears to make them capable of such
Ornaments, and the two most precious Pearls which Cleopatra dissolved and
drunk as a luxurious expression of love to Mark Antonie, were pendants taken
from her Ears.

The Greeks bore holes in the Ears of their slaves, holding it for a badg of
bondage, Montaigne Essay lib. 2.
which was practiced also by the Jews.

The Roman Dames were much delighted with auricular bravery; for Pliny writes,
Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 12.
that they sought for Pearls from the bottom of the Red Sea, Auricular Luxury
and Emeralds from the bowels of the Earth; and then he adds, ad hoc excogitata
sunt Aurium vulnera, as if it had been nothing to wear them about their necks,
and in their Hair, unless they were also let into their bodies.

Cyprian dehorting the Xtian women from it, non inferantur Auribus vulnera.

Seneca de vita beata cap. 17.
Says Sceneca, why does thy wife wear in her Ears the revenews of a rich
family? And in another place.

Idem de benef. 7. 6.
I see their Pearls not fitted single to their Ears, which are now inured to
the bearing of weight, they are coupled together, and others are added to the
two first, the madness of our women had not sufficiently brought Men into
subjection, did not they hang two or three patrimonies at each Ear. And with
him Pliny accords. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 9.
Binos ac ternos auribus suspendere, foeminarum gloria est, to hang these by
couples or more in each Ear, is the pride of our women, and their luxury
(says he) has found out a name for this, Cymbals.
calling it Crotalia, as if they gloried in the sound and strike of the Pearls
one against another. Nay he goes further, affectantes jam and pauperes,
Lictorem faeminae in publico unionem esse dictantes, it is come to that pass,
that even the poor sort affect the same fashion, this being a common saying,
that a pearl is the woman's Sarjeant to wait upon her, when she shows her
self abroad. But their extreme folly herein, has Tertullian after his
African manner wittily expressed, Graciles aurium cutes Kalendarium expendunt.
The tender Libbets of their Ears, consume their Kalenders, that is, says the
learned Junius in his notes on that passage, universum domus censum, etc.

Indeed these are parts where jewels are easily seen, The Natural beauty of
the Ear
which Ladies have learned very well to observe, yet certainly the conceit
worked very strong in their head, who first pierced the skin to introduce a
fashion.

The first Men that have had piety in them, have made conscience of offering
any violence to Nature, and to pierce and dilacerate their Ears, for to hang
any precious things at it, for none is Lord of his own members to abuse them,
so says the Civilian Ulpian; but Men have taken more license then they ought,
and have defaced the workmanship of God in them, Ulpian.
to please their own fancies, and we need not so much wonder at Barbarous
Nations, but at civilized People, which have called other Nations barbarous,
and more especially of the Christians of this age. Although (indeed) there are
some Ladies among us, who more out of tenderness of Sense then Conscience,
save themselves this labor and pains, and instead of letting their Jewels
into their flesh, they make them more easy pendants by hanging them in a
string about their Ear as upon a pin.

Gallen, where he speaks of the beauty Nature invented in the outer Ear,
although he expresses such a scope of Nature, which was second in her
intention; yet he expounds not what that is in the Ear, which appertains to
that scope.

Hofman should think it is the lower particle of the Ear, which they call the
tip of the Ear; For, since this part is not Cartilagineous, as the rest of the
Helix or circumference, it cannot also perform that intention, so that it had
been in vain, unless it had been made for the other. And hence it may be to
increase the beauty, The use of the outward Ear.
Woman began to wear Jewels in it, as if they had taken their hint from
Nature, who seems (as Sr. Phillip Sydney says) to have made the tip, the
Jewel of the Ear, from whose softness came the adage, ima mollior auricula,
and to have taken a hint of perforation from the superior part of the tip,
which seems in a manner to be persorated as it were with an invisible hole,
which is called Cicada, or the Grasse-hopper, wherein the Athenians who were
natives of that country were wont to hang their golden Grasse-hoppers.

Many Anatomists (indeed) do doubt of the use of this lobe and of the office
of it, wherein the Essence of Instruments consists. Kyplerus Medic. contract.
lib. 1.
Kyplerus thinks it does neither help to the extension of the Auricle, or to
its better conjunction to the other parts, since the Cartilage can keep the
expansion of the Auricle firm enough, and withal it is on both sides connexed
well enough to the other parts; But it is not, says he, improbable that it
helps to a more direct and easy ingresse of sound into the Auricle, not
verily on both sides, but chiefly from the lower part. Admit what Natures
exquisite observer seems to imitate, that as curious artificers, when they have
made some rare instrument, are wont to add some by-worke for pleasure and
Ornament; so Nature both pleased to do in finishing up the admirable devise of
the Ear: Yet this is no warrant for the monstrous practices of these men, who
upon pretense of augmenting the beauty of the Ear, so shamefully load it with
Jewels and other materials, and use such force of Art to tear and dilacerate
the most tender particle thereof, stretching itto so prodigious a magnitude,
that Critics might hence derive (...), The (...) proportion of the Ear.
quod deturpare vel abscindere diceres. That whereas the Ears of Man are not
so great as Horses or Asses Ears, and that for beauty and Ornament they were
made less, and because his Head was to be covered with a hat, he erect figure
of man also supplying the magnitude of his Ears; these Men in the contumelious
despite of Nature, and the exact justice of her proportions and Symitry, that
allows not the height of the Ear to exceed the length of the Nose, and
latitude of the mouth, and the largest circumference of the Ear and mouth; but
to duplicate the Analogy, will have Ears larger then hounds, or any other
Animal, insomuch, as that of Lucretius might be applied unto them; Humanum
genus est avidum nimis auricularum.

Nay by this artifice they seem to introduce the form or sign of the Leprosy
upon themselves, and to look somewhat like Elephants, in this frantique
Elephantick bravery: For in the disease called Elephantiasis, according to
some, the name is borrowed from the defedation of the Ear, representing that
of an Elephants, and which demonstrates this affectation, wherein the Fins of
the Ears in their circumference, and the Auricle or lappet also grow to an
unusual thickness, or otherwise swell and grow broad, representing by that
appearance, as was beforesaid, an elephant.

Verily when I consider what a pack of large-Ear'd Hell Hounds we have
discovered, who although Heathens, yet most of them having good Natural parts,
I cannot think but there must be more then the ordinary vanity incident to
mankind involved in this horrid affectation of great Ears, Small Ears where
affected
and that the grand Deformer has not only tempted these Nations to scoff at
the natural proportion of their Ears, as being too Ape-like, and so under
pretense to enlarge the beauty of the Ear, to destroy the Native elegancy
thereof; but has had a secret envy at this part, as being the portall to the
Sense of discipline, and the port of salvation.

We of this Nation, and some of our neighbors affect a small Ear, standing
close to the Head. Which springs from the conceit of our Mothers, who because
they have overheard from the discourse of some Philosophers, that great Ears
are a note of loquacy and folly, they presently apply themselves to prevent
this signification in all their children, not a little to the prejudice of the
action of the Ear. For, our Ears are naturally extant and look forward,
because we hear better when we turn our Faces to the sound, our Ears so
better encountering with the sound; and the prominency of our Ears serve also
for a defense to cast off the sweat and filth, and the furfuracerous excrements
of the Temples and the upper part of the Ear, least they should slide into the
auditory passage; all which commodities our mickle-wise Mothers defraud us of
by their nice dislike of Lugs, and as they call them in reproach, Prickeares.
For, our Ears, were it not for the fillets and ligatures, that with their
assent Midwives and Nurses use to bind them flat unto the Head, and flat lying
upon our sides, whereby they are depressed, would stand out better, receive
sounds, and our hearing would be more exact; for let any one with his finger,
drive his Ear off more outward from his Head, as by the testimony of Galen;
Hadrian the Emp'ror, The inconvenience of small Ears.
and Arrian to The Consul.
their advantage were wont to do, he shall hear far better then if his Ear had
remained depressed, and for this cause, the Ears were made Cartilagineous and
consistent, that they might exist and remain prominent; Varolius Anatomi. lib.
1.
whereby as Varolius the famous Anatomist observes, the vanity of Man appears,
who often for Ornament and beauty occasions no small hurt and damage to
Nature, and her operations; as in this device, where the beauty supposed to be
hereby acquired, proves very injurous to Nature; For, the Ear the bigger it
is, by so much Audition is made better: therefore our Mothers err, who so
fondly dislike Asses Ears as they call them: and the same reason there is of
their situation; for they which stand further off the Head are more
commodious; therefore they err, says Hofman, Hofman Instit. lib. 4.
when they bind them with fillets so hard, that they seem as it were glued to
the Head. And this among others, may serve to shame and disprove them who
quarrel with Nature for her little respect and care to Man: For Nature has
been no way wanting to man, but Man on the contrary has been wanting to
Nature, and either ignorantly or wilfully has deprived himself of many
benefits which she intended him.

The Portugals lately discovered an Island in the midway as they sailed to
Calecut, where the figure of Stars called Cynosura, cannot be seen, wherein
they found Men who had Asses Ears. Their women are like them, but that they
have lesser Ears.

Columbus says, Columb. Anac. lib. 13.
he had observed in Men Ears like unto Bruits, and Chronicles have recorded
such monstrous productions of Ears, Auricular monstrosities
differing from the humane form of that Organ.

Lycost. Chron. de prodig. ostent.
A woman of Cracovia in a village near the the suburbs called Niger, in the
twelfth of the Calends of November Anno 1494, Scenckius observat. lib. 1.
brought forth a monster, all other parts resembling the humane figure, Lycost.
in Append. ostent. prodig. Scenckius observat. de Auribus. Purchase Pilgr. 1.
lib. 1. Idem Pilgr.
but with a Hares Ears and Neck.

In certain places of Arabia, there are monsters, who among other monstrosities
have very large double and round Ears.

The Inhabitants of the Island Jamuli, the holes of their Ears are much wider
then ours.

We read of Nations who have no Ears at all (and yet which is strange) they
hear most exactly.

Lycost. Chron. de prodig. and ostent. Scenckius observat. lib. 1.
That Infants have been born thus maimed, chronicles report. For, the 4 of
December, anno 1556 at Basile, there was a male Infant born without Ears,
having only two holes, which yet were so closed that he could not hear with
them.

In Hassia there was an Infant born without Ears.

Whether the malice of the enemy of mankind, working upon the vain
imagination of man, has blown into the heads of these or any other Nations,
not yet heard of, a conceit of the uncomelinesse of the outer Ear, and to
purchase a false beauty by their deprivation; Lest I should be counted too
great an Accuser, and to prosecute an over-driven information, shall remain
with me as a doubt Dormant: I shall only bemoane their sad condition, who are
deprived of these Fins of the Ear, which nature intended for an Ornament,
dilating them like vans or wings on each side of the Head, the mutilation of
which part was ever accounted a great deformity, and has therefore been
inflicted as a punishment upon malefactors. (...)a great mischief.
Hence we read that Amonius the Monk under Gratian and Valentinean, by
cutting off his own Ear, obtained by that deformity, not to be made a Bishop
against his will, whereupon he was surnamed (...). And therefore that Art is
commendable which undertakes to repair the loss, and conceal the deformity,
which has befell those, who either originally want these Auricles, or by some
mischance have been deprived of them, a remedy whereof by a counterfaith
appearance, you may find in Paraeus. Paraeus in Chirurg. lib. 22. cap. 7.
Not to mention what a defense the Auricles are to the other parts of the Ear;
for although the outer Ear was not framed by God, to defend the brain from
outward injuries, yet the anfractuous cavity and prominency thereof is of great
advantage to the repercussion of sounds. Hence those men whose Ears are cut
away, do receive sounds and articulate voices, after an obtuse, dull, or
confused manner, like the fall of water, or chirping of Grassehoppers, insomuch
that the other Ear which is not vitiated, is notwithstanding impaired, unless
that which is wounded be quite stopped up. The Scythians therefore and those who
live in cold Northerly countries, who have often their ears rotted off with
cold, whereby their hearing is much impaired: to amend that default, they
fasten about the hole some hollow shell, imagine it to be of a great Cockle or
Scallop, wherein the Air is concluded, gathered, and directed unto the Head.
Yet it is not to be passed over in silence what Cardan interpreting some
passage of Ptolomie about Hermaphrodites, says, Ptolom. de Astrooru^ judie.
lib. 3.
that the Nativities of monstrous men, are like to those who are not nourished,
for monsters are very seldom nourished, but if they be nourished (because they
have not the form of man) they very seldom live, Monsters why short lived.
yet some of them live, which are but a little changed from the humane Nature,
as Haly says, that he had seen some to do, who were born without Ears, and
others likewise who were born without hands or feet: but the more they receed
from the humane Idea, the more difficult it is for them to live and be
nourished; for they which only fall short or redound in number, little
differing from the humane form, daily experience teaches us, that they live
many years.

SCENE IX. Cruel cheek-gallantry.
Artificial Scars accounted marks of Gallantry, imprinted on the Cheeks of
diverse Nations.
THe Cafres on the River Loranga, and those of Mosambique, Purchase Pilgr. 2.
lib. 9.
bore holes in their Cheeks for a gallantry.

Some Nations of Marriwini, Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 8.
toward the highland of India, have holes bored through their Cheeks as a
prime piece of bravery.

They of Macuas not far from Mozambique, Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
bore holes in both their Cheeks, from the tips of their Ears, almost to their
mouth, with three or four holes on each side, each big enough to hold a finger,
through which their gums are seen with their teeth, Cheek borers.
their spittle slabbering forth, for which and the more gallantry, they wear a
bung of wood one in each hole, and he which can have them of lead, is a
complete Gallant, for that metal is much esteemed.

In Peru they make holes in their Cheeks in which they put Turquoises and
Emeralds, Grimston of their manners.
this is also part of the Brasileans cruel bravery. Lindschoten. lib. 2.


Leo description of Africa.
Those who are called by the people of Congo Giachi, Pigafetta in his Relation
of Congo.
but by themselves Agag, have more terrible and presumptuous countenances,
making lines above the lips upon their Cheeks, with certain Iron instruments.

The Roman dames of old were wont to tear and scratch their cheeks in grief
(which in some part of America, Cheek-markers condemned.
Hieron. Bez. Hist. Novi. orb.
Plin. Not. Hist.
they do in sign of joy) insomuch, as the Senate taking notice thereof, made
an edict against it, commanding that no woman should in time to come, rent or
scratch their Cheeks, in grief and sorrow, because the Cheeks are the seat of
modesty and shame. What would those grave fathers have done, if such a fashion
had been taken up amongst them, as had made a shameful inrode or thorough
passage in the seat of mirth and modesty? surely in their zeal to natural
modesty, they would not have thought them worthy to live: It seems these men
would have more mouth, if they could, and rather then fail, they would spoil
one to make many, which in despite of Natures continency so to do,
disfiguring the Face, which is the picture of the Face divine, is an injury no
reason can ever excuse, no charity pardon; Verily these Nations oppose the
purpose of God, of dignifying the body of man, who by those fond ways of
transgression, put Gods Organ out of tune, that discompose, wound, tear and
brand their bodies, with such a fantastical violence. No man ever hated his
own body, and yet no outward Enemy is able to abuse their bodies, as their
own phantasticalnesse. They pretend indeed (all of them) to study most of all
bodily handsomeness, Incissions on the cheek of old forbidden.
to be gallant, comely, gracious and acceptable; and yet they most shamefully
deforme and destroy it and make that loathsome, which all their care was to
make amiable. Now as for these bodily inscisions, such as anciently the Picts
did make, and these savages do yet make at this day, they have been anciently
very expressly forbidden in the Law of God given by Moses. For it is not
lawful for us, to disfigure the Image and the form that God has given unto
us, by making so many idle-holes to the solution of the natural continuitie of
the whole skin. Upon consideration of this and other horrid abuses of the
parts, I have sometimes thought how Galen would have looked if (during the
composure of that Divine Hymn de usu partium, which he made to the honor of
man's Creator, and to the setting forth his ineffable wisdom in the admiral
contrivance of so stupendous a structure) he had had a Corallary of these
practical abuses of the parts presented unto him; Certainly the Noble
Pergamite would have swollen big with indignation, and out of Zeal to Nature,
have thundered loud against these her wretched antagonists, which would have
proved a passion very well becoming his Pen.

SCENE X. Wide Mouths affected.
Mouth Fashions and Orall Monstrosities.
THe Canibals of Port-Famine in the Country of Africa, Purchase Pilgrimage.
have wide Mouths from Ear to Ear, which is somewhat proportionable to them,
who are men degenerated into the nature of ravening Woolves.

The People of the Province of Zanzibar have a great Mouth. Mericus Vespatius
Navig.


The Matrons of Secota in Florida have wide Mouths, Purchase Pilgrimage.
which is the qualification also (as I take it) of the Persian dames.

In Cumana, Idem.
a wide Mouth is most in fashion at Court, the beauty of the petty Queens much
consisting therein

Wide Mouths were in fashion.
Idem.
In Turkey, the women are accounted most beautiful, that have widest Mouths.
And you may be sure they use art to have them so; for, things in fashion women
will be sure to have, this being a maxim in our practical metamorphosis, that
what ever irregularity of beauty grows once fashionable, Art is called in to
assist affectation, and to force Nature into it.

The magnitude of the Mouth, always answers the strength of the teeth: For,
those creatures that have great opening of the Mouth, as the Lion and the
Woolfe, have robust teeth, among which for the most part the Acute excel; but
who have little mouths, as man, they have teeth less strong, amongst which the
broad teeth or Grinders, for the most part are more valid. For, as all they
greedily devour, and with great gobbets, because they have a hot stomach, and
are always in perpetual motion; so man, with care and small morsels, which he
also diligently chaweth with his grinders, by reason of the debility of his
stomach. Those Physiognomers therefore are in an error, who from a large
Mouth, great robust and thick teeth, teach us to pronounce of the fortitude of
a man: For, the mouth was not given to man to fight with, as to a dog and Lion,
that from the like mouth they should infer the like disposition. The natural
proportion of the Mouth.
Man had a mouth given him for the better preparing his meat for his stomach,
for breathing, and for speech; for which a little mouth was held sufficient.
For women then (in whom a little Mouth was ever held most commendable, and that
by reason of, I know not what Analogy is wont to be deduced thence) to affect
commendation of beauty from a wide Mouth, is very strange, and much derogating
from the honesty of Nature, and her ordinary justice: for, the deduction or
longitude of the Mouth, should but equal the longitude of the Eye, which
extends from the outward angle to the Lachrymall; so that the longitude of the
Mouth is duple to the ninth part of the longitude of the Face, and the Nose
should bear a sesquialtera proportion unto it, and the wid'th of the Mouth
should be but as much again as the bottom of the Nose near the Mouth, the
circumference of it double, and the deduction of it treble, to the longitude of
the Nose: so that the whole longitude of the Face, should bear a sesquialtera
proportion to the compass of the Mouth, or to the space contained between the
corners of the Eye, for this space should equal the compass (also) of the
Mouth, and the circumference of the Ear ought to be unison; The first joint
(likewise) toward the hand in the middle finger, should be as much as the
Mouth, if you measure the bow of the lip with a thread; for if you measure it
right in the longitude of the empty Mouth, that part of the finger would exceed
it. But for women to affect to be sparrow mouthed, is as great a Solaecisme, as
the reason of that impotent sex can well be guilty of: For whereas they make
account to gain beauty thereby, they rather suffer damage by a Mouth so
heavenly wide; Monstrous conformations of Mouths.
for the latitude and amplitude of the Mouth appertains to the inspiration of
greater quantity of air, and if with that amplitude of Mouth there be
conjoined the signs of a coldish heart (which for the most part is the
feminine temper) it will necessarily follow, that the heart strings of these
women must be very much perfrigerated, by reason of the inward defect of heat,
and the advenient perfrigeration of inspired air.

Mela lib. 4. cap. 3.
Beyond Egypt, and the deserts of the Macrobians, there are monstrous Men, that
have monstrous Mouths, and some with concreate lips.

Solinus. cap. 32.
Solinus says, that some of the Aethiopians have Labia Concreta, or conjoined
lips, with a hole only in the middle.

Pliny lib. 6 cap. 30.
Pliny speaks of some Nations that have but one hole in their Face.

Petr. Apian. Cosmograph 2. pars cap. 3.
In Asia, where there are found Men of manifold shapes, and wonderful Effigies,
and monstrous kind of Men; about the head of the River Ganges in India, there
are a Nation called Astomi, that have no Mouth, living only by breathing and
Odours.

Mandevil^ Travels, cap, 6^.
They of the Island called Dodyn in the Indies and the adjacent Isles, have flat
Mouths without lips, and there are dwarfes that have no Mouth, but a round
little hole, through which they eat their meat with a pipe, have no tongue, nor
speak, but they blow and whistle, and so make signs unto one another.

Simonides.
Simonides reports, that the Attique and Argive women, had Labia fastigiata,
high copped lips, form whence they were called Phoxichili, the Latins (I
think) call such Chilones. Lips hanging down a cubit.
Aloisius Cadamust. Kornmannus de vivorum mirac.


There is a Nation in Aethiopia, named Azanaghi, who have their lower lip
hanging down very low, who are fain to season it with salt, lest it should
putrify with the infection of the air, salt being there a great commodity,
because of the necessity of its use upon this occasion, their perpendent lips
hang down above a cubite low, and therefore that Nation is reported to be dumb,
and this Nation wanting a beard, do nourish such a pendent lip.

The People of Gambra, not far from Jay, Munster Cosmograph. lib. 6. cap. 50.
are deformed, their neither lip hanging down to their Breast: and therefore
their teeth appear, which are greater then ours, and they have two here and
there more eminent then the rest, and is apt inwardly to putrify, of which
deformity being conscious, they trade with their neighbors the Arabicks,
without sight or conference, leaving their commodities in a certain place, for
which they have Gold in exchange, their upper lip being little as ours.

This History is so remarkable, that it deserves to have all the circumstances
annexed unto it: take therefore what Mr. Jobson in the the discourse of his
golden trade sets down concerning this Nation, Monstrous great lips.
Mr Jobson. discovery of the River Gambra.
and the trade of the Barbary Moore with them; It is certain (says he) that
when they come up into the Country, where they have their chiefest trade, they
do observe one set time and day, to be at a certain place, whereas houses are
appointed for them, wherein they find no body, nor have the sight of any
persons. At this place they do unlade their commodities, and laying their salt
in several heaps, and likewise setting their beads, bracelets, and any other
commodities in parcels together, they depart, and remain away for a whole day,
in which day, comes the people they trade withal, and to each several, lays
down a proportion of gold, as he values it, and leaving both the gold and the
commodities, goes his ways: the Merchant returning again, as he accepts of
the bargain, takes away the gold and lets the commodity remain, or if he
finds there is too little left, divides his commodity into another part; for
which he will have more at the unknown peoples return, they take to themselves
where they see the gold is gone, and either lay more gold, or take away what
was laid before, and remains in suspense: So that at the Merchants third time,
his bargain is finished; for either he finds more gold, or the first taken
away, and his commodity left, and thus it is said, they have a just manner of
trading and never see one another, to which is added, that the reason why these
people will not be seen, is, for that they are naturally born with their lower
lip of that greatness, it turns again and covers the great part of their
bosom, and remains with that rawnesse on the side that hangs down, that
through occasion of the Suns extreme heat, it is still subject to
putrefaction; so as they have no means to preserve themselves, but by
continual casting salt upon it, and this is the reason salt is so precious
amongst them, their Country being so far up in the Land, naturally yields none.

In an Island belonging to the great King of Dodyn, are foul men, Sr John
Mandevils Travels cap. 62.
that have their lips about their mouth so great, that when they sleep in the
Sun, they cover all their faces with their lips. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 6. cap.
30. Schenkius observat. de labiis.


They report that in the Inland parts of the East, there are Nations that have
no upper lip. Schenkius speaks of an honest matron, who had from her nativitie,
her upper lip so curt and short, that it scarce sufficed to cover her upper
teeth, not without a deformed aspect.

It is observed that all of the house of Austria, have a sweet fullness of the
lower lip. The Austrian Lip being at this day, therefore by good right, in high
esteem. Lod. Romans Patr. Navig 4. cap. 2.


The Sultan of Cambaia, has his upper lip so large and prominent, that he can
bind his head with them, as well as women do with their hair.

The Island Mozambique, Lod. Rom Pa. Navigat. lib. 7.
the men and women have lips two fingers thick.

In Casena a Region of Africa near Aethiopia, there are men who have prominent
Lips of a monstrous shape and thickness, Cardan de subtle. lib. 11.
which Cardan seems to impute to the prevarication of art; Prodigious Lips.
and a fashion received as comely among them; Leo Hist. Africae. lib. 7.
for he reckons four causes of these seeming wonders, Magin. Geogr: Africae.
or prodigious shapes of men, Religion, Propagation, Diet and Art; the latter
whereof we have just cause to accuse of a ridiculous activity, which must
needs redound to the prejudice of Nature in her operations, yet they have more
partners in this folly; for the Tartars are all illfavoured and thick Lipp'd.
They of Caffara black as pitch: the Egyptian Moors and the Aethiopians have
all thick lips, and the Indians love those who have such lips.

A certain namelesse Poet speaking of the Aethiopians, thus writes, Quem nisi
vox hominem Labris emissa sonaret,
Terrerent visos horrida Labra viros.


Have not these men hands to take their meat with, that they should thus
labor, as if they meant to gather it up with their Lips as the Beasts? unless
it were to sweep a manger, they can have no use of such Lips; for it must
necessarily be a means to hinder their speech by thickning their lips,
Deformed misplaced mouths.
as experience teaches in those who either by Nature or by accident have
thick, swollen, blabber lips, causing them to speak in their mouth, uttering
their words very baldly and indistinctly, and assuredly the same or worse must
befall these artificial Labions, for their Lips must needs hang in their
light, and their words stick in the birth, when such unwealdy Pourers out of
speech occasion a hinderance to their delivery. Trincavellus lib. 5. cap. 11.
de cur. human. Corp. Morb.


It has been the infelicity of many Men and women among us, and in other
countries, to have the upper Lip, not whole and entire, but cloven and parted
in the midst, such as we call hare-Lips, Mizaldus Memorabib. Cent. 3. Aphoris.
77. Olaus Magnus Epit. Hist. de Gent septentrion. lib. 18. cap. 8.
which happens when women great with child unexpectedly spy a hare, or are
crossed by one, long for such meat, eat of it, or a hare suddenly leaps on
their head; for then usually they bring forth Infants, with their upper lips
bifid and cloven in two parts, perpetually detaining this Lip divided between
their Mouth and nostrils, which daily experience does confirm, unless
forthwith from the beginning they use that means, which the Physical
Corrector has prescribed for the reducing of this deformity, Paraeus de Genae
vulneribus. Schenkius observat de labiis See our Hist. of the Acephalor. Scen.
1.
the manner of whose operation, you may find in Paraeus, Schenckius, and
Moccius the Physician.

We read of monstrous Nations, whereof some have their mouths in their
shoulders, and some that have them in their breast.

Lip-gallantry.
SCENE XI. Lip-gallantry, or certain Labiall fashions invented by diverse
Nations.
THe Giachi, their Ornament, is to have their Lips branded with red hot Irons,
especially their upper Lips, and so make streakes and lines in them.
Lindschoten.


Montaignes Essaies.
The Indians have their nether Lips in great circlets, beset with precious
stones, which cover all their chins, deeming it an essential grace to show
their teeth to the roots. Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.


The Macuas not far from Macambique, among other notes of their gallantry,
have holes in their Lips, in the upper of which they put little pegs of wood,
as big as a hens quill; of a finger long, sticking right out like a nail, in
the lower Lip they wear a leaden bung, so close and heavy that the Lip falls to
the beard, showing their gums and filed teeth, that they seem divils: this is
their gallantry, or rather loathsome bravery; for when they are sad they leave
these holes open, and many others of their own making.

The effigies of the King of Quoniambec, Aldrovandus menstr. Hist. fol. 108.
which Aldrovandus exhibits, has some alliance to this affectation.

In that town which was governed by Quitalbitor under Muteczuma, Peter Mart.
Decad. 4.
King of that Province of the West- Indies, the men bore whatsoever space
remains between the uppermost part of the nether Lip and the roots of the
teeth of the lower chap; and as we set Precious stones in Gold to wear upon
our fingers, so in the hole of the Lip, they wear a broad plate within,
fastened to another on the outside of the Lip, and the Jewel they hang thereat,
is as great as a silver Caroline Dollar, and as thick as a man's finger; The
Relator says, he does not remember, that ever he saw so filthy and ugly a
sight, yet they think nothing more fine and comely under the circle of the
Moon.

Purchase Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
Those Canibals who are called Pories, have three great holes in their Face,
one in the under Lip, and one on either side of the mouth, and in every hole
stands a fair green stone.

Idam Pilgr. 4. lib. 6.
In Dominica the Women have their lips bored as an especial note of bravery.

Purchase Pil. 4. lib. 6.
The women of Surucusis, have Crystal of a sky color hanging at their Lips.

Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
The Inhabitants of Malhada, have the nether Lip bored, and within the same
they carry a piece of a thin cane, about half a finger thick.

The Farrupi Marriwini, Idem eodem. lib. 8.
toward the highland of India, have also holes through their nether Lips.

The people on the southward of Tinda and Gambra, Idem eodem lib. 8.
are reported to wear iron rings through their Lips.

The ancient Ethiopian Women who practiced Arms and went to wars, Grimstone
of their manners. Strabo Geogr. lib. 17. Jo. Bohem. de rit. gent.
made holes in their lips, whereinto they put hoopes of brass. Lythgoughs
Travels.


The better sort of Aegiptian women wear rings of gold or silver through both
ends of their mouths, and in their under Lip, hanging rich Pearls and precious
stones to them; They think themselves not worthy to live, unless they wear
their badges: wherein the baser sort counterfeit these betters.

The Inhabitants of St. Croix of the Mount, Leo Aph. Hist.
pierce their nether Lip, at which they hang something which they think is
very handsome.

In Pegu, the men make holes in their Lips, Grimstone of their manners.
in which they put Turquoises and Emeralds.

The Mosambiques and the Caffares, Lindschoten lib. 1.
some have holes both above and under their Lips, sometimes besides their mouth
through the cheeks, wherein they thrust small bones, which they esteem a
beautifying.

Munster Cosmograph lib. 6. cap. 55.
The Inhabitants of the Cape of Good-Hope, have their lower lip bored, and in
the hole they put little stones, that their Lip seems beset with gems.

In Perviana also they wear jewels in their Lips.

A little from Gambra in Africa, as an ensign of Nobility and greatness, the
men and women wear rings in their Lips, which when they eat their meat, they
take away, putting them in and out at pleasure.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
The men and women at the Cape of Lopo Gonsalves, wear rings in their Lips;
some thrust small horns or teeth through the holes and wear them so, which
they think to be a great Ornament unto them. Others bore a hole in their
nether Lip, and play with their tongues in the hole, so that they seem to
have two mouths, and this is the least part of their cruel bravery.

Purchase in his Pilgrimage.
The Brasilians have their Lips bored, wherein they wear stones so big and
long, that they reach to their breast, which makes them show filthy fine, which
yet as another notes, is not practiced by the women. They bore holes in their
boys under-Lips, wherein they stick sharp bone, as white as Ivory, which they
take out and put in as often as they will, Lindschoten lib. 2.
and being older they take away the bones, and instead thereof wear great
Jasper stones, being a kind of bastard Emraulds, inwardly flat with a thick
end, because they shall not fall out when they take out the stones; they play
with their tongue in the hole, which is most ugly to behold, for that they seem
to have two mouths one over the other.

Maginus says, Maginus Geograph. Ameriae.
that the Brasileans as a pleasant fantasy, wherein they take singular
delight, have from their tender age, long stones of no value inserted in their
lower lip only, some in their whole face, a cruel sight to behold.

The selfsame fashion is in request among the Margajates of Brasil, Lind.
lib. 2.
yet not practiced by the women.

These Nations have generally richer faces then our Drunkards, although (it may
be) they cost as much the setting on, and it is general almost with these
Barbarians, that they had rather wear stones then clothes upon their bodies.
The Lips were ordained for the cover of the mouth, given us to defend the
teeth, and cavity of the mouth, while they shut it from cold and external
injuries, for their office is first to have the custody of the teeth. For since
the teeth and their nerves are cold, The inconvenience of Lip-gallantry
they would be much hurt, if they were exposed to the cold air, and not
defended by the counterskarfe of the lips, a benefit of Nature, which these
Nations seem to reject. Their second use is by their softness to temper the
hardness of the teeth, for they are thin and flexible, that they might be
rendered more apt for motion, and more habile for the letting out and
intercision of air, and they distinguish the refracted voice between the
teeth, and purges air that is to be drawn into the inward parts, and insomuch
as they cover the mouth: they also add much Ornament unto the face, whence they
who have lost their Lips, that the gums are seen, prove deformed; and for a
Nation to affect such a deformity, is a strange solicisme, committed against
the honesty and justice of Nature. They help to retain spittle in the mouth,
lest it should continually flow out, as it happens in decrepit men and
children, whose Lips are soft and resolved: as also they help the rejection of
spittle; both which actions are frustrated and destroyed by the defacing
fashion of the bored Lips, so shamefully worn by some of the recited Nations.
They were given for the pouring out of speech, and forming of the voice, which
must needs be hindered by their practice, which with rings and Jewels play at
such losing loadum with their Lips: they are given to all creatures, for the
commodity of eating and drinking, which these by their filthy finenesse
somewhat impeach; and therefore some of them are so well advised, as to yield
to the necessity of Nature, and to unloade their Lips when they eat.

These natural uses of the mouth, Absurd opinions about the Mouth.
some other Nations seem not to understand, or else are wilfully ignorant of
that freedom, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 6. Leo in his description of Africa.
which the law of Nature affords in the use of it. For the Numidians, of the
better sort, cover their heads with a piece of black cloth, part whereof like
a visard or mask, reaches down over their faces, covering all their
countenance except their eyes; so often as they put meat into their mouths they
remove the said mask; which being done, they forthwith cover the mouth again,
alleging this fond reason: For (say they) as it is unseemly for a man after
he has received meat into his stomach, to vomit it out of his mouth again and
cast it upon the earth; so it is as undecent a part, to eat meat with a man's
mouth uncovered: with whom it seems the covering of the mouth is observed with
equal modesty, as the covering of the feet by the Jews: had Nature expected
any such complement, she would have made a flap or cover for the mouth, which
the fondness of these men seems to have desired, neither would she have
seated the mouth in so eminent, open, and conspicuous a place.

But this is nothing so derogating from the honesty of Nature, as the fond
conceit of the Azanegi, Munster Cosmograph lib. 6. cap. 50,
who cover their mouths, being as much ashamed to discover them, as their
privities: Aloys Cadamust. Navigat. lib. 1. cap. 10
therefore they carry about their mouth, right as a shameful part, because
forsooth the mouth, as a sink, always sends forth some evil savor, neither
do they uncover it, unless when they eat.

The Guineans take their meat torn in pieces with the three midmost fingers;
and gaping, Purchase Pilg. 2. lib. 6.
cast it so right into their mouths, The Mouth mis-fed.
that they never fail, or cast it besides: a thing much wondered at by some
Travelers that observed them.

Had Nature made the hands too short to reach their mouths, they might have
pleaded necessity for this pitch-cat-like feeding: but the hands, as Anatomists
well observe, were so placed, and endowed with such a length, that they might
equally reach the mouth on either side. Answerable to which absurdity is the
custom of the people of Cando^ Island, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
who use finger-spoones, using no other for any liquid thing, nor rice, nor
honey, but take them with their fingers, which they do so neatly and nimbly,
without losing any thing; for they account it the greatest incivilitie in the
world, to let any thing fall in eating.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 6.
In Fesse also and Barbary, finger-spoons are in fashion.

Grimstone of their manners.
They of Goa also, eat their pottage with their hands, mocking at the use of
spoons, as if they were uncivil.

Indeed the people of Numidia, eat out of their fist, and the hand the natural
dish out of which they drink their milk, as a most fit instrument framed by
nature for that end. Whence Diogenes of old, perceiving one to drink water out
of his hand, threw away his dish; a good honest frugall invention, no way
contradictorie to the intention of Nature, for they advance it up to the Lips.
But although Nature may seem to have intended the hand for a dish; yet there is
more doubt to be made, whether she intended the fingers for spoons to that
dish, and to have allotted five spoons to every dish. Where the Lip and Cup
never meet.
But it is plain by the full length and position of the hand, (contrary to the
Grobian law) that Nature never intended the hand to be as a forke to pitch meat
as unchopt hay into the mouth.

They of Goa, and other of the Malabars, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
drink out of a copper Can with a spout, whereby they let the water fall down
into their mouths, and never touch the pot with their Lips, for that they
abhor.

They of Goa use for their drinking, Grimstone of their manners.
certain thin vessels made of black earth, the which are pierced in the neck,
they call them Gargoleites; Lindschoten lib. 1. cap. 31.
for that he that drinks lifts up the vessel, and not touching it with his
Lips, receives the water by those little holes, the which does gozle and make a
pleasing noise. They hold this manner of drinking more civil, to the end they
defile not the cup with their mouths, which are sometimes unclean. They that
come newly out of Portugal, and will drink after this manner, spill much
water upon their clothes, for that they know not how to use the cup: they call
such men Reynolze in mockage, You may find this pleasant relation very largely
and handsomely represented in Lindschotens Travels.

I remember I saw a porter (whom I had employed) drink up a flagon of beer
with his hand held very high from his lips, without ever so much as gulping for
the matter. Which I taking notice of, he told me he had been among the
Malabars, where if he should have gulped or have drunk any otherwise he might
have had his throat cut.

Cardan remembers, The affairs of the Mouth mistaken.
that when he was a boy, he saw a certain German (a Colonel) who was wont to
drink down wine with an unmoved throat; Cardan de variet. l. 8. c. 11.
But he rangeth it among other very admirable properties of some men. But it
seems our Malabars think that Nature gave us not lips to drink with, as
Anatomists inform us, neither would our proverb, many things happen between
the cup and Lip, be ever endenized among them, who never let the cup and Lip
meet.

The Tovopinambaultians, when they drink they never eat, and when they eat they
never drink, and they wonder at our custom who eat and drink together by
turns: And if any should compare them in this to horses, the answer was made
by a witty fellow, that there is a difference; for the Barbarians need not to
be led to water, since there was no fear, that they should be constrained to
break their halters. Frenchmen, who never drink, but they eat, would make an
excellent medly with these men at a Banquet or Potation. Surely these
Tovopinambaultians adhere to the old assertion, a popular tenent in our days,
exploded by the learned Enquirer into common errors; that there are different
passages for meat and drink, the meat or dry aliment descending by one the
drink, or moistning vehicle by the other: which contradicts experience, and
the Theorie of Anatomy and the use of parts; for at the throat there are two
cavities or conducting parts, the one the Oesophagus gullet, or feeding
channel, seated next the spine, a part official unto nutrition, the other (by
which is conceived the drink does pass) is the weazon rough artery or
windpipe, a part inservient to the voice, and respiration; for thereby the air
descends into the lungs, The use of the Windpipe.
and is communicated unto the heart. Again, besides these parts destined to
diverse offices, there is a peculiar provision for the windpipe, that is a
Cartilagineous flap upon the opening of the Larinx or throat, which has an
open cavitie for the admission of the air; but least thereby either meat or
drink should descend, providence has placed the Epiglottis, Ligula, or flap,
like an Ivy leaf, which always closes when we swallow, or when the meat and
drink passes over it into the gullet, lest any should slide into the rough
artery, or some crumb (as we use to say) should go awry. And the contrivance
of Natures artifice in this flap is very remarkable; which being rigid and
erect by Nature, by reason of its firmer and stricter connection in the hollow
of the bone Hyoides, it is always detained erect by the intervening of a
thicker ligament, by reason of the necessity of respiration, wherein our life
consists, whereby the pipe of the rough artery remains open, lest the heart
should be suffocated, notwithstanding being flexible, that it might perfectly
shut the chinks upon which it is recalled, when we swallow our meat and drink,
by whose weight it is depressed, lest any thing during the time of eating and
drinking should fall into the weazon, having swallowed them, presently like a
spring it is lifted up, and returns to its posture: so that if we speak in
the very act of eating or drinking, that will be enforced to open, to let out
the matter of speech, which is the breath, and so exposed; If any meat or drink
imprudently fall into the Artery, it straightwaies strangles or excites a
cough, until by the force of the breath it be ejected, because that thing
descending, hinders respiration, and so consequently speech; The inconveniences
of eating without dtinking.
wherefore Nature necessarily rises up to the expulsion of it. And this is the
reason why a man cannot drink and breathe at the same time, and that if we
laugh while we drink, the drink flies out at the nostrils, and why; when the
water enters the weazon, men are suddenly drowned. Verily these men answer not
the intention of Nature, neither cherish their body so well as otherwise they
might. And they had need feed very warily and silently (as they do) for meat
being in its own Nature corpulent, compact and gross, and sometimes devoured
in greater gobbets then is expedient, sometimes being harder as not well
chawed, sometimes gluttinous and clammy, and therefore apt to stick in the
gullet; for many times the meat when it is not well shread is detained in its
passage: And to remove downward this detained Bolus, we stand in need of drink;
and therefore drink may not be only esteemed the Vehicle of aliment through the
most narrow regions of the veins, but its Vehiculum in all places; and not
only through the whole gullet, but also where the meat descends from the
gullet into the stomach, by the benefit of this liquid vehicle it is carried
through the whole bottom of the ventricle, and runs out also to the right side.
On the other side the gullet is soft and not open, as the rough artery is, but
easily falls upon it self, and stays the descent of meat, which otherwise, it
was convenient should descend as soon as may be, as well for the compression
of the adjacent parts, as the stomach, lest it should delay the concoction of
the meat. And although Nature not thinking fit to commit this necessary action,
to the weight only of the meat, whereby it is moved of it self, would have it
moved of another: and notwithstanding that the gullet moves the meat into the
stomach by natural instruments, that is by straight Fibers not only attracting
it, How Deglutition is performed.
but thrusting and pressing it down by transverse Fibers; yet she has
ordained withal a muscle (to wit an instrument of the soul, which by a
voluntary motion drives and thrusts down the meat into the stomach) and this
muscule is seated at the beginning of the gullet, having a transverse or
orbicular position and laid over the gullet, it comprehends it and draws it
together; and by constringing, thrusts the meat forcibly into the stomach,
pressing it down and driving it forward. Therefore when the meat, thrust from
the mouth to the beginning of the gullet, and straightened in and compressed by
the transverse muscule, and being constrained to pass by the gullet, and
forthwith attracted by the right Fibers, and by a convenience of quality of
the ventricle, and driven forward, and in a manner compressed or altogether
compressed by the transverse Fibers, comes straight into the stomach; the
action of the gullet, that is deglutition, is performed and consummated, the
action being animal and partly Natural. And that this stronger motion is
required in the top of the gullet, the Larinx is the cause, which being of a
thick body cartilagineous and rigid, and placed at the beginning of the gullet,
it had altogether hindered the ingresse of meat into the gullet, unless Nature
had here constituted a muscule, the opifex of deglutition; neither would this
muscule suffice, by reason of the thick and hard body of the Larinx, opposed
unto the gate of the gullet, unless the Larinx at the instant of deglutition
should recurve it self upward, and unlocke the compressed mouth of the
stomach; for it appears, that when the meat does recurve the Larinx side-way
to the Epiglottis, Drinking without gulping.
and shuts the chink, prohibiting the breath to issue out, then that the chink
may be opened, and respiration made, the Larinx as it were compelled, ascends
upwards, and so the gullet gapes: neither does it ascend only upwards, but it
is moved and deduced outward and forward, and draws together with it the
gullet forward and outward, thereby to draw back and free it from the
compressure of the spine, and open it in its orifice, and so the meat easily
enters into it, and in the ingresse the transverse muscule rises up to its
work. Yet as Brasavola notes, Brasav. com. ad lib. Hip. de rat. vict. in morb.
acut.
there are many that drink without the moving of Transglutition; but that which
they drink descends as if it were poured into a tankard, as the nurse of his
eldest son Renatus was wont to do. In this case they need no mandent member.
But he says this is rare and besides Nature; as it is besides Nature to have
any action vitiated, for that happens but rarely to men.

These are the only men who seem able to deny that the gullet or inner pipe of
the Neck, the meat-pipe or viand-pipe has any public action, and that it is
the way and passage only, and does nothing but as it is pervious and hallowed
along, therein it affords a way and passage to the meat. But action is a
motive action, which is brought forth of it self, and it is not an action, or
to do, to be a way, but only a use, which is in all that do nothing. If the
gullet should act, its action would altogether consist about meat and drink;
but if it carry the unconfected meat, it works nothing upon the meat, and
therefore there is no action of the throat: Yet in the judgment of the best
Anatomists, it has a public action, Words and meat not to be mixed.
which altogether respects meat and drink: and it is a way, inasmuch as it is
hollowed, but unless it should act that way (in sooth) would be unprofitable
and vain: Yet we must confess, that drink perchance by reason of its thin
and fluxile substance, would flow downwards; although it is well known, that
matter is not traduced thorough the body, as it were by stone-gutters, but it
dispensed and moved by faculties. Now although these men cherish not Nature so
well as otherwise they might, yet the silence which they observe in eating, is
very admirable and suitable to the cautionary provision of Nature; for they
defer their conference until some other time: We (says the Relator) who
violate their custom by mixing words with our meat, were laughed at by them;
and indeed by their Symposiack silence they better secure themselves in this
point then we do: For although eating and speaking be both common actions of
the mouth, yet Nature cannot mind all things together, but would have us hoc
agere; and therefore the method of the diverb is good: First stridor Dentium,
then altum Silentium, and last rumor Gentium; Which in Festivals adjournes
discourse, until the belly be full, at what time men are at better leisure,
and may more securely venture upon table talk. The observation of which
Natural rule, might have saved Anacreons life, who endangering himself this
way, died by the seed of a Grape.

In Candou Island, the people have a fashion, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
that while they eat, none dare spit or co^^^^ but they must rise and go
forth, contrary (...) practical rule of the Grobians, and indeed (...) what
against the freedom and liberty of Nature, although indeed these actions are
somewhat importune and unwelcome guests at Feasts.

The Maldive.


SCENE XII. Beard-haters.
Beard-haters, or the opinion and practice of diverse Nations, concerning the
natural Ensign of Manhood appearing about the mouth.
THe Maldives shave their upper and lower lip, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
and all parts about the mouth, because they would not for any thing in the
world, being eating and drinking, to touch a hair, being the greatest
nastinesse and filthiness in the world; for, finding one hair in a platter of
meat, they will not touch it, but remain rather without eating, giving it to
the birds and other creatures. So strict are they in their neat superstition.

These Men by their practice seem to be angry, that Nature has planted hair
about the Mouth, a thing very derogatorie to the honor of Nature, with whom
Scaliger (when his memory failed him) seems to assent, supposing that by reason
of their position and corporiety besetting the upper Lip, and clothing the
mouth, they lie between the mouth and holes of the Nostrils, Cavils against the
Beard.
and prove troublesome to the Nose and Mouth; too nicely, withal, observing
that the increase of these hairs placed about the mouth, hanging down very
long, (being as a hedge about the mouth) did hinder the ingresse, and egresse
of those things for whose sake Nature had formed the mouth, whose Office was
commestion, or assumption of solid aliment, the potation of the same aliment,
but liquid, expuition, and locution, and sometimes respiration; to the which
Offices the Lips could not be prompt and ready, besieged with such long and
propendent Mustachoes, as the Senses teach us; for although we endeavor to
prevent these Mustacho-haires while we eat, yet they descend, and entering
together with the meat into the mouth are bitten with the teeth, whose pieces
we are compelled, either to spit out, or sometimes imprudently to devour: and
if we drink, these hairs swim in our drink, moystened with whose sprinkling
dew they drop down upon the beard of the Chin, and Clothes, which is an
unseemly sight; wherefore to prevent these inconveniences, we are feign to wipe
them: in spetting, they interrupt the excrement; for, that which is ejected
bespatters and spaules them, which is an odious sight not to be endured. How
they hinder and disturb elocution every man cannot so readily perceive, they
only are able to judge, who can distinguish the least difference of voices.
Their gravity and weight may also offend the upper Lip, and render it unfit for
a more easy motion.

These are the ways which some have conceived they might possibly be offensive
and noxious to the uses of common life, which is acomplaint and cavilation
analogicall to that of Plinies of the nakedness of man, and as vain as his.
They are no more offensive than other hairs, Cavils against the Beard answered.
which if not regulated by our practique Intellect, their increase may chance
to prove somewhat troublesome; neither were they without reason placed about
the mouth, and therefore to cut all away, is as unseemely as to shave the Crest
of a Lion, being placed there for certain uses and ends. And as for their
offensive and unprofitable length, Nature would have these particles (for so
hair may be called) their fashion and more ample quantity to be regulated at
ones pleasure and arbitrament. Wherefore she called man's understanding or the
humane Intellect as a companion to trim and keep this Fabrique for her service;
by this necessity promoting his care and regard of himself. But that he should
shave or pull up the quick-set hedge, Nature never meant he should, and it were
but an ill-favored piece of husbandry so to do: prune it he may for the
majesty and honesty af Nature, which does not only shine bright in the
Organicall parts, but in all the accidents of the body.

The Tartars shave their upper Lips, Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 1.
and war with the Persians for not doing so.

These men offer a great indignity and despite to Nature, to deprive the upper
Lip of its natural Ornament, which among all the parts which constitute the
beard is justly thought to be of greatest dignity; The honor of the Beard
maintained.
Superior even according to that regular proposition of Nature or Physical
Axiom, which is, that they are most according to Nature, which if not always,
yet at least do often happen; and if we consult with Sense, and will not be
refractory to its information and judgment, we shall find, that if men have
any Beard they have some on the upper lip, there being rarely, if any, to be
found that do not sprout, although the other barball parts be bare, and ample
testimonies hereof we have from the common sense of men, which is not to be
neglected when it seconds the truth of Nature; such men being looked upon as
monsters who are destitute by Nature of the Beard in the upper Lip and Chin,
and have some under their Chin, and upon their Cheeks. These are rare in
mankind, and with the tyranny of no Rasor can you ever extort or fright out of
the mind of men that ingrafted admiration wherewith they prosecute such men who
are utterly void of hair upon the Region of their upper Lip. All other Nations
who shave the other Barball parts of the face refrain from this, because
reason it self seems to persuade this verity, that this renowned part is not
to be violated, neither does that Edict of the Ephori any whit contradict this,
who upon the entrance into their Office forbad the Lacedaemonians to nourish
their Mustachoes; for they had a respect to a Symbolicall intent. Indeed some
there are, (so prone alas are men to run into Errors) that dare to make this
criminous proposition against very Nature, that the hairs which grow on the
upper Lip, which the Greeks call Mustachoes, are so unprofitable that they
hinder the use of life, a calumny pronounced against the majesty of Nature,
which not to retort, (...)Mustachoes.
were by an execrable impiety to desert the Divine Providence, and foulely to
apostate from his ineffable wisdom, whereas we ought not to cavil at prudent
Nature, which is the ordinary power of God, but should rather deplore and
bewail our condition, and accuse our own sloth, which is so unfit to find out
and investigate her counsels. He that will allow this scandal and slander of
Nature to be true, must confess that evil is quid postivum; for the hairs of
the Mustachoes are existent. More thankful to Nature is the ingenious
Montaigne in his Essaies in his private acknowledgment, Montaignes Essaies.
where speaking of one who was wont to find fault with Nature, that she had not
made provision for a sweet bag to hang under our Noses; he explodes the Cavil,
alleging that his Mustachoes served him to that purpose, in retaining the
sent of his perfumed Gloves, or any other sweet wherewith he had touched them,
which verily is a considerable use that may be made of this part. I knew a
Gentleman of good worth, who being almost Edentulus, and his cheeks sinking in
by reason of the decay of his Teeth, wore his Mustachoes thick and standing up,
to conceal that Lapse of his Visage.

The ancient Britons shaved all their beard away save that growing on the upper
Lip, Junius de Com.
which was ever attributed to their Barbarism.

Shaving the Chin condemned.
The Persians allow no part of the body hair, the upper Lip excepted, Herberts
Travels.
which grows very long and thick, they turn it downwards, the oil Dowac but
thrice applied annihilates the excrement ever after.

Grimstone of their manners.
The Hungarians shave their Beards and leave nothing but the Mustachoes, the
which are sometimes very long.

The Turks wear only great Whiskers on the upper Lip, which is the Military
cut, shaving away all the hair off their chins, which they do, as I suppose, by
the same Artifice the Persians use.

Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 6 Tom. 1.
The Arabians shave their Beards, save only on the upper Lip, which they let
grow still: and yet some there be of them that suffer their Beards to grow long
and never cut them.

Shaving the Chin is justly to be accounted a note of Effeminacy, flagitious,
as appears by Eunuchs, who are not so effeminate in anything, then that they
are smooth and produce not a Beard, the sign of virility, and therein not men;
to whom they may be likened who expose themselves to be shaved, not without
cause are such called, in reproach, women. For what greater evidence can be
given of Effeminacy than to (...) transformed into the appearance of a woman,
Shaving condemned.
and to be seen with a smooth skin like a woman, a shameful metamorphosis! Our
Ancestors reputed it piacular and monstrous in habit, only to resemble women,
how much more ignominious is it, in smoothness of Face to resemble that
impotent Sex? A ridiculous fashion to be looked upon with scoffs, and noted
with infamy, for which prank Clisthenes is branded in the Proverb, Clisthenis
rasura; who to seem young ridiculously suffered himself every day to be
shaved. A thing first thought on in the time of Alexander when he was
effeminated with the Persian luxury. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
It was a long time ere the world began to entertain Barbers, but it was late
first ere they were in any request at Rome. The first that entered into Italy
came out of Cicily, and it was in the 454 year after the Foundation of Rome;
Brought in they were by P. Ticinius Mena, as Varro does report, for before-time
they never cut their hair. The first that was shaven every day was Scipio
Africanus: and after him comes Augustus the Emperor, who evermore used the
Rasor. And verily the Turks, who shave their slaves, do justly scoff at such
Christians, who cut, or naturally want a beard, as suffering themselves to be
abused against Nature. The Inne-keepers of Fez are justly therefore detested
among the honester part of the Citizens, Johannes Leo Hist. of Africa.
who go apparelled like women, and shave their Beards, and are so delighted to
imitate women, that they will not only counterfeit their speech, but will also
sit down and spin. With a Rasor then to go so deep as to leave no impression of
hair upon the Chin, as if we would with the same Iron invade the roots, but
that we fear wounds and deforming skars of the skin, is to turn Rebel, and
to show a willingness to evert the Law of Nature. Shaving the Chin a dishonor
to Nature.
Hence Diogenes very knowingly, seeing one with a smooth shaved Chin, have thou
whereof to accuse Nature for making thee a man and not a woman? the Beard is a
singular gift of God, which who shaves away, he aims at nothing than to become
less man. An Act not only of indecency, but of injustice, and ingratitude
against God and Nature, repugnant to Scripture, wherein we are forbidden not to
corrupt the upper and lower honor of the Beard, Levit. 19.27. Rabbi Moses cum
notis Dionis. voso.
or shave it; upon which place Rabbi Moses Maimonides has made very subtle
and precise glosses. But we, not only leaping in the Face of Nature, but
resisting God (in manner of the Giants) are bold to establish a practical Law
against the first Decree; insomuch as we may be likened unto the Rhodians and
Bizantines, and put in the same form with them, who when they were forbidden
by a Law that no man should be shaved, all of them began against the Law to
shave their Chins, and a Mulct moreover imposed upon all Barbers that had
Razors, yet that detered them not, but they all used Razors. So we against the
Edicts of God, the Oracles of the Prophets, the Placits of Counsels, and the
judgment of Learned men, hold fast the foolish Custom of shaving, and will
sooner forbid our selves fire and water than execute Commands contrary to our
Custom, like wicked Outlaws, despising the fulmination of Divine anger. More
conformable to the Law of Nature were they of old, when in Greece to shave the
Beard was held for a great punishment. In many places the punishment of
Fornication was, that the Fornicator should have his Beard chopped off openly
with a keen Axe, and so to be sent away, which to him was a mark of infamy.
Thenet. Cosmograph.
Thenet in his Cosmography says, Cutting off Beards where a punishment.
at this day in the Isle of Candy it is a kind of punishment to cut a man's
Beard. Paradin. hist. of Savoy, lib. 2. cap. 155.
Paradine writes, that certain young Gentlemen who followed the Earl of
Savoy, were so served for forcing a Damsel, and the Father made Declaration
that he was well satisfied. The Beglerbegs and Bassas of the Sultan wore very
long Beards: If the Sultan were displeased with any man he caused his beard to
be cut for a punishment and shame; as Emyr Seleyman served Chassan Captain of
the Janissaries, which Chassan esteemed so great a shame unto him, that he
handled the matter so, that Emyr Seleyman was entrapped and strangled. To which
we may add the merry History mentioned by Nicephorus in his Chronicle, Niceph.
in his Chronicle.
of Baldwin Prince of Edessa, pawning of his Beard for a great Sum of money,
and his Father Gabriel, Prince of Mitilene, redeeming the extreme ignominy his
Son was like to receive by the loss of his Beard, furnishing him with money.

The Natural Inhabitants of Virginia, Capt. Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
whose hair is generally black, the men wear half their Beards shaven, the
other half long, for Barbers they use their women, who with two shells will
grate away the hair of any fashion they please.

Eradicaters of Beards.
Jormand. in li. cer. Getticarum
The Huns have their Cheeks, to wit, all the parts where the hair breaks out
cut with an Iron by their Mothers while they yet suck, on purpose to make them
grow old without a Beard, which is a natural ornament that they, it seems,
abhor; and hence they were made to live without a Beard, because their Faces,
plowed with Irons, did consume the timely grace of hairs in skars.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
The Bramas, not far from Pegu, if they see a man with a Beard they wonder at
him, for they with Pinsors pull out their hair as soon as it appears.

Herberts Travels, lib. 3.
In Pegu (also) they wear no Beards, and they cut and pluck their flesh to
become braver than other Nations.

The Tovopinambaultians use also to eradicate the hair of their Beards.

De Bry Lindschoten lib. 1. Cap. 20.
They of Java have most thin Beards by plucking out most of the hairs as fast
as they grow out, so that there you shall see no man, although old and ancient,
to have a Beard. The like do the Celebes in an Island of Ethiopia, pulling out
their Beards even unto the neck, where they nourish two prominent tufts hanging
down like Goats. Beard-rooters,


The Chiribichenses are Beardlesse, Pet. Martyr, Decad. 8.
and if a hair come forth they pluck it out one from another with certain
little Pinsers; they call our men wild Beasts, for that they endeavor to
preserve their Beards.

The Inhabitants of the Cape of good Hope eradicate their Beards, Munster
Cosmograph lib. 6. cap. 55.
painting their Chins with diverse colors, white, black, red, and skie-coloured.

The Brasilians, In the description of Nova Francia, lib. 2. cap. 10.
and the natural Inhabitants of Caneda, or New France, the Beard of the Chin,
which is generally black, and the producing cause cause thereof they take away;
and the Sagamos, for the most part have but little Memmerton, has more than
all the others, and notwithstanding it is not thick as it is commonly with
Frenchmen. And although these people wear no beards on their Chins, (at the
least for the most part) yet for the inferior parts they hinder not the
growing, and increasing hairs there. It is said, the women have some there
also, according as they be curious; the Frenchmen made them believe that the
French women have Beards on their Chins, and have left them in that good
opinion, so that they were very desirous to see some of them.

In Florida the men pull out their Beards, Hier. Giravae. Cosmograph.
that they may appear more beautiful.

In the Province of Mexico the men are Beardless, Idem eadem.
not that Nature has denied them the growth of a Beard, but because they have
a Conceit, that they are more comely when the hair of their Beards are
eradicated.

Thin Beards affected.
Idem eadem.
In some of the other Provinces of New Spain, although by Nature they have
thick long black hair, yet they pluck out their Beard, anointing their Chin
with a certain Liquor, which prohibits the re-encrease of the Beard.

Peter Mart. Decad. 7.
The Chiroranes are beardlesse, whether by Nature, or by Art, applying some kind
of Medicine, or whether they pluck off the hair, like the People of
Tenustitan, it remains doubtful; However it be, they are delightful to show
themselves smooth, which affectation smells of the Art of Salvius Otho, who
herein was allied unto them, who because he would never have a Beard used
depilatories.

Helyn China.
The Chinoyse also have very thin Beards, consisting not of above twenty or
thirty hairs, a thing wonderful to behold, and when they would describe a
deformed man, they paint him with a thick Beard. Grimstone of their manners.
It is true, that there are some that have the Beard well fashioned, and a
pleasing aspect or countenance, but the number of these is small in regard of
the rest; and some think that these men came from some strange Country in old
time, and did mingle with the Chinois, when it was lawful for them to go out
of the Realm.

Pet. Martyr, Decad. 6.
The Barbarians about the Haven of St Vincent are Beardlesse, and in great fear
of Bearded men, upon which occasion Gonsalves used a pretty policy of twenty
five beardlesse youths, by reason of their tender years, he made bearded men,
by the poling of their heads, the hair being orderly composed, to the end that
the number of bearded might appear the more to terrify them if they should be
assailed by war, Beardlesse Nations.
as afterward it fell out.

The Cathaians and the Cumanans, Lindschotens Travels. lib. 2.
most of them are by Nature beardlesse.

The People of Carthai Tartano wear their Beards also thin.

Some of the Broad-faced Tartars are Beardlesse, except that in the upper Lip,
Munst. Cosmog Jo. Bohem. de rit. gent. lib. 2.
and on the Chin they have a few volatile hairs.

In Sumatra, the men, Diario nautico Ba^tavorum.
although they have great Eyebrows, have but little Beard, insomuch that the
hairs under their mouth may be numbered.

In the Kingdom of Mancy in great India, Sr Jo. Mandevils Travels Cap. 63.
there men have Beards as it were Cats.

In Elizabeth's Island, Capt. Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
toward the North of Virginia, the men have no Beards, but counterfeits, as
they did think our men's also were, for which they would have changed with some
of our men that had great Beards.

What a Generation of scoffers of Nature have we here, who with their Pincers
fight against her! sit Companions for the Apostate Julian, who styled himself
Mysogopon, as much as to say, as the hater of a Beard. Sure the Beard was
formed and given to man for some end, (...) of the Beard maintained.
the place, and dignity of the place, the time it appears, and the species of
it shows an ornament. For the place, no man can deny the face to be one of the
outward parts of the body which has an honest appearance; if the Face have
dignity, and a degree superlative as it were of dignity, and there are some
Orders, This may justly be accounted the most honest of the honest parts, and
worthiest, since there are the chiefest Organs of the Senses, the Instruments
of the reasonable soul; and that in the face, as in a Glass, the ineffable
majesty of the whole man does shine. In which the Beard has the chiefest
place, being planted in the part thereof, which the Ancients styled the Temple
of Goodness and Honesty. The time of its appearance, denotes its use, it is
inchoate, and begins to come forth at a certain definite and specifique time,
(for man is not at once an Individuum and a specifique Individuum) the
libration of which moments of time is chiefly conspicuous to God, and confirmed
by his Counsel, which dispensation of time is not without a mystery, to which
all things created are subjected. I would we could understand the fullness
thereof; but certainly for some specifiqe end. From the species, or the kind of
hair, may another Argument be taken of their real worth: All other hairs, we
see, have their use and end, and can Nature be so forgetful of her own
institutions as to fail in this particular? Superficial Philosophers do much
please themselves with this Division, saying, that of those which are in the
body, some are the true parts of it, and others are not, to wit, such as
proceed from the necessity of matter, of which kind are the hairs, an
excrement and not a part, and if a part altogether an excrementitious
materiarie, and of no use: The use of the Beard.
to which account the Beard must be reduced which is all hair, a Doctrine
popular and altogether erroneous; for, the Beard is an existent part of the
body and most necessary, and its necessity is from its use and office it has
in the body, not from the matter, or as they say, necessity. Nature, which is
the ordinary power of God, and the lively image of his wisdom, works always
for an end; more especially; and most nobly does she do it in the body of man,
the most noble of all Creatures. Some say, the Beard was intended for a manly
ornament; for, man shows more venerable, especially if by age his hairs be
every where fairly and super abundantly circumfused, which Nature usually
does, leaving no part unpolished, or unlaboured, or without Rythme, and
elegancy, as work enchased in the hil^s of Swords, which sometimes appears,
but is sometimes obscured by the very splendour of utility; Which conceit does
not well please Platerus; for, says he, Plat. in quaest. Phys. quaest. 8.
if it was produced for an Elegancy, why do women then want it, in adorning
whom. Nature seems to have been most studious, and yet she would have them
beardlesse, which if it sometimes but lightly manifest it self in them, makes
them most ugly; others conceive one use of the Beard was for a muniment, and to
cover the Barball parts on which they grow; but why the man's Chin rather than
the woman's should be covered, Hofman confesses he sees not. Yet Zonardus is
of opinion, that the Beard was not only intended for an ornament, but for an
operiment and Adjutor to the Maxillae, because with their villosity they defend
the Maxillary Nerves from being hurt by the too great frigidity of the air,
which granted, would much aggravate their Crime who shave these parts. The
Beard the sign of a man.
But Ulmus, who has sufficiently vindicated the honesty of Nature in this
matter, in his learned book, entitled, De fine Barbae Humanae, (I would he had
gone through the work!) or that I had seen his Tract, De recta Hominis
figura, (if he lived to write it) He, I say, is of opinion, that the proper end
of the Beard is differing from those abovenamed, and that it serves not for
ornament, nor age, nor Sex, nor for a covering, nor for purgament, but for
another end, to wit, serve to the Office of the Humane soul. And that Nature
gave to mankind a Beard, that it might remain as an Index in the Face, of the
Masculine generative faculty; and of that either crumpent and progredient, or
consumed, at least, next to consumption. Plater. in quaest. Phys. quaest. 8.
Of the same judgment is Platerus, who has a little dilated his thoughts upon
this Subject. For men then to labor to extirpate so honest and necessary a
work as the Beard is, is a practical blasphemy most inexpiable against Nature,
and God the Author of Nature, whose work the Beard is: The Beard being the
sign of a man, by which he appears a man, for it is more ancient than Eve,
and the sign of a better Nature; to violate then that which is a sign of virile
Nature, is an impiety against the Law of Nature. And since it is confessed that
man is the Image of God, and the Beard the form of a man, certainly, so many
of us as acknowledge, and profess to represent this Image of the Protoplastes
God, without the high crime of impiety cannot leave off, or eradicate our
Beard, or with Depilatories burn up and depopulate the Genitall matter thereof,
but we must renounce that, and account it for a sport so fondly to evirate our
selves: An act not only done against the reclamation of the Law of Nature, but
repugnant to the consent of the Learned of all Nations, who with one mouth
pronounce a Beard comely, for a grave, constant, just, and honest man. Nay,
Lovers of a Beard.
even the Turks, ( whom we account even but Barbarians) herein do more homage
to Nature, who if a man have a fair long Beard they reverence him, and only he
is a wise man, and an honorable Personage: but if they have no Beard at all,
if they be young, they call them Bardasses, that is, Sodomiticall Boys;
Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 8.
but if they be men grown and have no Beards, they call them Fools, and men of
no credit, and some of them refuse to buy and sell with such and say they have
no wit, and that they will not believe them: And therefore they wear their
Beard at full length, Idem eadem.
the mark of their affected gravity and token of freedom. Therefore the Aghas
of the Great Turk, who are most commonly, Graves description of the Grand
Sign. Court.
five and thirty, or forty years of age before they are sent abroad, because
they come out of the Seraglio with their Beards shaven, they are fain to stay
within doors for some days to let them grow, that they may be fit to come
amongst other great men, and as soon as their Beards are grown they go abroad
and begin their visits.

Such Beard-haters as are before spoken of, Barclay's ship of Fools.
are by Barclay clapped aboard the Ship of Fools.

Tempore quae fuerant ignominiosa vetusto,
Atque scelesta nimis, jam nostra aetate probantur
A multis, Ritusque novi servantur honor.
Laudis erat quondam barbatos esse parents,
Atque supercilium mento gestare pudico.
Socratis exemplo Barbam nutrire solebant
Cultores sophiae, quorum sapientia mundum
Deseruit, Celsas Jovis and conscendit ad arces.
Long Beards affected.
Sed nunc irrepsit morum corrupta libido
Manavitque nefas, and vitae subdolus usus;
Ecce pudet mul^os Barbam nutrire severam,
Sed vellunt toto Excre^os de corpore pilos:
Ut servare cutem molleus, corpusque supinum
Possint, and stultum casus ductare per omnes.
There are some Nations that are mad in nourishing their Beards; Bocat. de Flu.
Gargaro.
for in the Islands in the River Gargarus, which the Itchnophagi inhabit, they
wear their beards down unto their knees.

Spigel. Hum. Annat. lib. 8.
A little too indulgent of a Beard are the Germans, who affect a prolix Beard,
insomuch as some of them have been seen to have had their Beards so long, that
they would reach unto their feet, which they have worn trussed up in their
Bosoms.

Steph. Ritter. Cosmogr. pros.
These seem to be descended of the Long O Bards, a people of Germany, which were
so called a longis bardis, that is, their Bipennine and long Beards; and your
European Galatians seem to have the same extraction; Jo. Bohem. de rit. gent.
lib. 3.
for the Noblemen among them, although they shave their Cheeks, yet they so
nourish the Beard that they cover their bodies, whereby it happens, that when
any one eats, Formal Beards affected.
his Beard is replinished with food, and when they drink, the drink seems to
be carried down as by a Channel.

Strange affectations of old had the Graecians in the formality of a Beard, it
being reputed the solemn sign of a Philosopher, and some have been, and are
so affected with the cut of their Beards, that there have been Cases invented
to preserve their formality. Guzman (I remember) plays upon a formal Doctor
for such a practical absurdity, girding at the cut of his Beard; for he says,
that the fashion of his Beard was just for all the world like those upon your
Flemmish Jugs, and that a nights he puts it in a press, made of two thin
Trenchers, scrued wonderfully close, that no Gitterne can be closer shut up in
its Case, that it may come forth the next morning with even corners, bearing in
gross the form of a broom, narrow above, and broad beneath, his Mustachoes
Ruler-wise, straight and level as a line, and all the other hairs as just and
as even as a privet hedge newly cut, answering each other in a uniforme manner,
having the point thereof in form of a Quadrant drawn neatly out, that it might
make the fairer and larger show. For such a goodly Beard, accompanied with a
Roman Bonnet, (like your Breifs and your Larg's in a singing man's book,) does
grace his lesser and grosser notes. As if this were sufficient to make him be
held a great Scholar, as if this fair outside were a qualification for him.

In the Province of Heez, Grimstone of their manners. Mag. Cosmogr.
which is under the Dominion of the the Emperor of Morocco, they that are not
married dare not wear a Beard, but when they are married they suffer it to
grow; and as Leo in his description of the people of Hea, Beard-Diers.
Leo Hist. Africa.
says, there you may easily discern which of them is married, and who is not,
for an unmarried must always keep his Beard shaven, which after he be once
married he suffers to grow in length. A conceited restraint, yet grounded it
may be upon this concession, that the Beard is the ensign of manhood, and
reverend gravity, and therefore best became the honorable estate of marriage.

Strabo Geogr. l. 15. ex O^es.
In Cathea the men for an ornament die their Beards with many and diverse
colors, and many of the Indians do it, for the Region bears admirable colors
for the tincture of their hairs and garments, and these people being frugall
in other things, are given too much to adorning themselves.

Nor is the Art of falsifying the natural hue of the beard wholly unknown to
this more civilized part of the world; especially to old Leachers, who knowing
gray hairs in the Beard to be a manifest sign of a decay of the generative
faculty, and an approaching impotency incident to Age, vainly endeavor to
obliterate the natural signification thereof. For, there are some grown so
foolish, (and indeed are accounted no better) who being now grown old,
decrepid, and unable for any kind of use or exercise, and this their weakness
being notorious, and well known to all the world, and this their rotten
building ready to fall; yet are they willing to deceive themselves, and every
body else, (if they could) contrary to all truth and reason, by dying the
hairs of their beards and heads, as if any man were so ignorant, and did not
know, that there are none of these changeable colored beards, but at every
motion of the Sun, The vanity of Died Beards.
and every cast of the eye they present a different color, and never a one
perfect, much like unto those in the necks of your Doves and Pigeons: for in
every hair of these old Coxcombs you shall meet with three diverse and sundry
colors; white at the roots, yellow in the middle, and black at the point, like
unto one of your Parrats feathers. Thus man according to the story of Guzman
(as man) lives but his own 30 years, and then he inherits the Asses 20 years,
from 50 to 70 living like a dog, and from 70 to 90 plays the Ape,
counterfeiting the defects of Nature, and using of tricks and toys and I know
not what foolish and fantastical devices. And hence it is that we often see
in those that come to this age (for all they be so old) they would feign seem
young, tricking themselves up so neatly, and so sprucely, ^etting it (like
young Gallants) up and down the streets in gay clothes, visiting this Lady,
making love to that Mistress, and undertake I know not what impossibilities,
that they may be accounted jolly stout Gentlemen, representing that which
indeed they are not, even just for all the world as the Ape does, who is never
quiet, nor thinks himself well pleased but when in his actions he is imitating
man, though he can never come to be a man. It is a terrible thing, and not to
be endured, that men will, in despite, as it were, of time, (which discovers
all deceits) and ought likewise to put them out of this their error, will
apply themselves to run a course contrary to the truth, and that with their
tinctures, play strings, lees, and slibber-slabbers, should play, as it were,
with a Juglers box, to cozen others, and discredit themselves.

Old Fools that would seem young.
As if by these Artifices, they could eat the more, sleep the sounder, live
the longer, or be troubled with the fewer infirmities and diseases, or by this
course they take, the teeth which they have shed should come again, or could
keep those from falling from them which are yet remaining; or as if by this
means they could repair their feeble limbs, recover their natural heat,
quicken anew their old and frozen blood; or as if thereby they did think they
had the power in their own hands to make themselves what they list, and as
lusty as they list. In a word, as if they were ignorant what the world talks
of them, when as they themselves talk of nothing else, then which is the
better lie, and which the better dye, which either this or that other man
makes. O thou unfortunate, miserable, and wretched old age, thou sacred Temple,
thou sanctuary of safety, thou stop to the desperate carreere of this life,
thou Inn of rest to our weary bones; How is it that thou art so much abhorred
in this life, being that thou art the Haven which all men desire to attain
unto? How is it that they who respect thee afar off, when they come nearer unto
thee stick not to profane thee? How is it that thou being the vessel of
prudence, thou art derided as foolish? How is it that thou that art honor it
self, respect and reverence, art by those that are thy best friends reputed
infamous? How is it that thou being the treasury of knowledge, art despised and
contemned? Either there is some great defect in thee, or some evil disposition
in them, whereof the latter is most certain. They came unto thee wanting the
ballast of grave counsel, and sound advise, like a Ship without sand or
gravel in the keele of her to keep her steady, through lack whereof the Bark
goes rouling and tottering to and fro, because their shallow brains want that
due weight and counterpoise that should ballace their understanding, Bearded
women.
and keep it straight and upright.

Woman by Nature is smooth and delicate; Epictetus ca. 1. lib. 3.
and if she have many hairs she is a Monster, as Epictetus says, and the
Proverb abominates her, Mulier barbata lapidibus eminus salutanda. yet such
Monsters have appeared in the World.

Schenckius saw such a one at Paris, Schenkius lib. observat. Barbae.
with a black Mustacho of a just magnitude, whose Chin was also indifferent
hairy.

It is reported, Wolfius.
that in the Nurcery of Albert Duke of Bavaria, there is a woman with a large
black beard.

There was a Bearded Virgin, Kornman. lib. de mirac vivorum.
whose name was Antonia Helena, borne in the Archbishopric of Liege about
eighteen years of age, brought up by the Arch-Dutchess Marie the widow,
whose Image, cut in Brass, Kornmannus had, and he had heard it affirmed for a
truth by honest friends who had seen her. Aldr. Monst. Hist.
And that Effigies of a German woman which Aldrovandus says, is shown in the
public Library of Bononia, of one who heretofore, passing through Bononia,
had a Beard two Palms long, may possibly be the same Monster. And that women
through discontinuance of the Company of men, and defect of their Courses, have
grown Bearded, and passed into a virile appearance, not without danger of their
health and life. Hippocrates has two remarkable stories. Hip. par. 8. l. 6.
Epid. aphor. 45, and 46. Alex. Benedict. li. 26. c. 4. de curand. mor.
And Alexander Benedict saw an Example of the same accident when he was in
Greece. But what is more wonderful, there is a Mountain of Ethiopia, near
the Red sea, where women live with prolix beards. Kornman. li. de Mirac.
vivorum.
In Brasile, Caneda, and Nova Francia, the women are said to have some kind of
Beard under their Chins.

SCENE XIII. Red Teeth affected.
Dentall Fashions, or Tooth Rites.
THe people of Molalia in the East Indies account red Teeth a great beauty,
Purchase Pilgr. 1. lib. 4.
and therefore they color their Teeth red with Beetle, and other things which
they continually chew in their Mouth.

They of the Isle of Candou, accounted Asiatiques, Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
hold red Teeth a great bravery, which they color so with chewing of Beetle
and Arecka.

They of the Island Ciphanghu and Sumbdit, Idem Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
which from their Nature are called Latronum, or the Island of Thieves, color
their Teeth red and black, which they esteem a comely thing.

The men in Cumana make great means to make their Teeth black, Lindscot. l. 2.
and such as have them white they esteem women, because they take no pains to
make them black, which they do with Hay or Gay, and the principal women take a
pride in black Teeth.

Black Teeth affected.
In the Island La Trinidade, Lindscot. li. 2.
they use a kind of salve to make their teeth black, like those of Cumana,
which is made in this manner. They take shells wherein Pearls are found, with
the leaves of the Tree called Axis, which they burn together, and being burnt
they put a little water into it, wherewith the white looks like Chalk, with
the which salve they make their Teeth as black as Coals, and therewith
preserve them from ach.

Purch. Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
In a certain Island which Sir Francis Drake discovered as he sailed in eight
Degrees from Nova Albion, the people affect black Teeth as a singular beauty;
and their Teeth are as black as pitch, they renew them often by eating of an
herb, with a kind of powder, which they carry about them in a Cane for that
purpose.

De Bry hist. Ind. Orient. part. 9.
In the Kingdom of Goer their Teeth are as black as Pitch, which they so
extremely affect, that the blacker they are the more beautiful they are
accounted.

Idem.
The King of Calecut has black teeth, as all the Nations his Subjects have by
the perpetual chawing of Beta: and the blacker ones teeth is they esteem him
worthy of greater honor. White Teeth where a reproach.


They of Java, men and women, Idem part 3.
use to champe Arecka mixed with Chalk, which renders their mouth of a purple
color, and their teeth grow black, which they now and then polish with the
affriction of a certain herb, which must needs make them show like polisht
Ebony.

In Sumatra they (also) perpetually champe in their mouth Beetle mixed with
Chalk. Diario Nautico Batavorum.


The Cherebichenses, Pet. Mart. Decad. 8.
the Inhabitants of Chiribichi, the neighboring Country to the Province of
Paria, which are Caribes, from the tenth or twelfth year of their age, when
now they begin to be troubled with the tickling provocations of Venery, they
carry leaves of Trees, to the quantity of Nuts, all the day in either Cheek,
and take them not out but when they receive meat or drink: the teeth grow black
with that Medicine, even to the foulness of a quenched or dead Coal; they
call our men, women, or children in reproach, because they delight in white
Teeth; their Teeth continue to the end of their lives, and they are never
pained with the Toothache, nor do they ever rot; ('It Is well they have some
benefit by their affectation, which very seldom happens unto any of our
Artificial Changelings.) They take great care of these Trees, which they call
Hay, by reason that for the leaves thereof they get whatever wares or
Commodities they like, so fashionable a thing is black Teeth, and in such
request.

The Portugal and Mesticho women who live at Goa, Grimston of their manners.
do continually eat the leaves of Beetle with Garlic, and an herb called
Areque; the women do continually chaw of these three things like unto beasts,
Nations hating white Teeth.
and do swallow down the juice and spit out the rest, which is the cause that
their Teeth grow black and red, which amaze them that have not been accustomed
to see them. These fashions come from the Indians, and these women are
persuaded that they are thereby preserved from a stinking breath, and from the
toothache, and the pain in the stomach, so that they would rather lose their
lives than these herbs; insomuch, that like oxen or kine, they are so used to
chew the Cud, that wheresoever they go or stand, they must always have of
these leaves carried with them, Lindscot. li. 1. cap. 31.
and the women-slaves do go always chawing, and are so used thereunto, that
they verily think that without it they cannot live, for their common work is
to sit all day when their Husbands are out of doors behind a Mat, always
chawing the herb Beetle, and they go in their houses with a dish of it in
their hand, being their daily chawing work.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
They in Pegu, and in all the Countries of Ava, Longiamnes, Siam, and the
Bramas, have their Teeth black, both men and women, for they say, a Dog has
his Teeth white, therefore they will black theirs, as scorning to imitate a
Canine Candor.

Helyn Geogr.
The women of Vlna, the chief City of Oristom, or Orissa in India (if Helyn
remember aright) in a foolish pride black their Teeth, because Dogs teeth
(forsooth) are white.

Lindscot. li. 1. cap. 26.
In Japan (as among all Nations it is a good sight to see men with white Teeth)
it is esteemed there the filthiest thing in the world, who seek by all means
they may to make their Teeth black, White Teeth vindicated.
for that the white causes their grief, and the black makes them glad,

In Cariajan, the chief City of Cathai, Helyn Geogr.
the women use to gild their Teeth.

The external uperficies of the Teeth, by Nature, is white, terse, and
polished; and this their native candor proves them to be bones. This hue they
always retain, unless by neglect, age, or diseases, they become red, black,
and rotten; white Teeth being so justly accounted a precious and natural
beauty, that they are hence called the sale-piece. For men then to affect the
blemish of age, and the color of decaying sickness, and rottenesse in their
Teeth for a fashion, is a very strange way of prevarication.

More careful of preserving the beauty of the Teeth are the women of Sumatra,
who have Teeth so white that India affords none more beautiful.

And they of Guinea, De Bry Hist. Ind. Orient.
who have Teeth white and shining like precious Ivory, which they preserve from
all foulness, by rubbing and cleansing them now and then with certain woods,
which they have peculiarly for this very purpose, by which friction they
retain a luster like unto the most beautiful polished Ivory.

In Curiana likewise the women make their Teeth white with an herb, Lindscot.
li. 2.
that all the day they chew in their mouths, which having chewed they spit out
again, and wash their mouths.

Had Nature afforded these Nations any such water as that Martial speaks of,
which would make the Teeth of men white in like manner as it whitens Ivory,
Nations that file their Teeth as sharp as needles.
they would acknowledge themselves extraordinarily beholding unto her. However
commendable as serviceable to the ends of Nature are Dentifrices, which the Art
Cosmetique affords for preserving the Native whiteness and integrity of the
Teeth.

Purch. Pilgr. 1. lib. 4.
They of Sierra-Leona in the East Indies, file their Teeth very sharp.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The Macuas also file their Teeth above and below as sharp as Needles.

Idem eodem.
The black people of Caffares, of the Land of Mosombique, and all the Coast of
Ethiopia, and within the Land, to the Cape of Bona Speranza, (some among them)
file their Teeth as sharp as needles.

Alex. Benedict. in proem. li. 6. de curand. morb:
Alexander Benedictus refused to buy an Ethiopian slave, because, as it were
with an unhappy Omen, he had all his Teeth saw-like as Dogs have.

The Teeth are in men of three kinds, sharp, as the Fore Teeth, broad, as the
Back Teeth, which we call the Molar Teeth, or Grinders, and pointed Teeth, or
Canine. These men, contrary to the Law of Nature, seem to affect to have all
their Teeth pointed or Canine; and the saw-like Teeth of devouring Fishes,
Serpents, and Dogs, or would appear as dangerous with their Teeth as those
Creatures who have them framed like saws, and closing one between another,
Pretended ends fot filing of Teeth.
to the no little danger of the Tongue if it should chance to fall between
them, breaking off the continuity of the range of Teeth; Unless we can imagine
in excuse of this their unnatural boldness, that their Language should
require such a use off the File; for there are those who have caused their
Teeth to be filed or shaved after a certain manner, that they might be more
apt to the pronunciation of certain Tongues, which Hofman remembers to have
been reported of M. John Hammers, in times past, professor of the Hebrew Tongue
in the Academy of Ieina, whence it appears, that the hard and strong substance
of the Teeth is not such as some have imagined, that it is impossible to subdue
it by the force of Iron.

But Cardan acquaints us with another natural end that they pretend unto in
this business; for, Cardan lib. de subtle. 12.
the equal structure of the Teeth, as it is most profitable to speech, so it
is less commodious for cutting; for, Dogs and Wolves have their Teeth
unequal, and disposed in manner of a Saw, and these adhere and close better
with one another, and they retain not so much the relics of meat: Therefore,
says he, certain people of India, who have not so much regard to the handsome
explication of their minds by speech, that they may more commodiously make use
of their Teeth, they file them sharp, to make them indented one within another
saw-like, for they stick faster in the root when they join not together at the
top. Scaliger exercitas. Cardan.
Scaliger in his exercitation upon this part of Cardan, says, that in the
Island Tendaia, the young men cause their teeth to be cut even to the roots;
for by this means they say their Teeth become firmer and thicker; Where they
pull out Teeth in a bravery.
the same thing happens also to Plants; for, trees grow thicker whose tops are
cut off. These Nations degenerate from the principles of Humanity into ravening
Wolves. Who would have more dog-teeth than Nature allows, endeavoring by this
fond Artifice to have Teeth stronger than Nature intended man, upon a just
account lose more than they can gain by the Device; for, having perverted the
curious Machin of Speech, by altering of the Instruments thereof, they must
surely speak in the Teeth, and have but a lisping, or snarling Elocution,
which is an improvement with a mischief.

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
The women of Gagas pull out four of their Teeth, two above, and two below,
for a bravery; and those that have not their Teeth out are loathsome to them,
and shall neither eat nor drink with them.

Hieron. Bez. Hist. nov. orb.
In Guanchavalichia, a Region of the new World, they are wont to pull five or
six Teeth out of their jaw; and being asked the reason why they did so, they
replied, they did it Elegantiae causa, for a bravery and most fashionable
elegancy.

Pancerol. de novo orb. tit. 1.
The Guancavilcae in Peru are all Edentuli, or without Teeth; for they have a
custom to pull out all their Teeth, which they offer to their Idols, Teeth,
intended for an ornament.
affirming that they ought to offer to them the best things.

One would think these Nations accounted teeth to be no parts of the Body, or
very impertinent and unnecessary; whereas they are justly enrolled among the
number of the parts of a Human Body, since the definition of parts appertains
to them, and likewise their use and office, for they belong to the integrity of
the Body, and they attain a proper office and use in the same; nay, the
preternaturall absence of the Teeth is accounted among the Diseases of Number,
their natural number being thirty, at the least twenty eight; So that the
Teeth were intended by Nature to serve for an ornament, and a certain beauty
and furniture unto the Mouth; for it would have been a foul deformity in man
to have lived without Teeth, as they say Phericrates the Poet did, Valla de
Corp. part.
who was edentulus, and had no Teeth at all: For, in whom they fall out, or are
lost by age, or some disease, it makes the Mouth look like a decayed Harp that
is unstrung, more especially the fore-teeth being lost proves a more apparent
blemish and damage, because they were set in the first and most conspicuous
place, since there was more necessity of them for the forming of the voice,
whence Infants speak not before their mouths are replenished with Teeth. But
the fore-teeth more especially serve for the forming of certain Letters,
whence those who are edentuli cannot pronounce C. U. G. T. R. wherein the
enlarged tongue must bear against the fore-teeth, the loss of which hinders
the explanation of the voice, that speech must necessarily thereupon be the
slower, and less plain and easy; neither are there wanting examples among us
of those whose speech has been very much impaired by the amission of their
Fore-teeth; Hofman thinks, Want of Teeth a blemish
that therefore the Romans were wont to bind them fast with gold wire: And our
Master Operatours are sometimes useful to prevent this blemish and
inconvenience. Artificial Teeth has been an ancient invention, for we read
that the Romans used Artificial Teeth in defect of Natural; Mart. lib. 5.
Epig. 43.
Thais habet nigros, niveos Lecania Dentes,
Quae ratio est? emptos haec habet, illa suos.
And again to Laelia,
Dentibus atque comis (nec te pudet) uteris emptis,
Quid facies? oculus Laelia non emitur.
And because great account is to be made of the Teeth, both for the necessity
of eating and speaking; Hence the Art Cosmetique, although it be a part of
Medicine, that makes little to the necessity of life, yet it conduces to the
conveniences of a better life, deservedly, and by good right, does now and
then engage Physicians, not only to repair and patch up a decayed and lost
beauty, but to preserve that which is enjoyed, and the Obligation lies more
strong upon them where the party has attained to almost all the degrees of
beauty, it being more pity then, she should have any blemish in the mouth;
whereby it too plainly appears what affront they offer to Nature, who account
her useful ornaments to be loathsome, and what benefits of hers they renounce
for the mischief of a ridiculous Fashion. Neither is it to be omitted, that it
is a high transgression against the Moral Law of Nature, by which the Teeth
were ordained to be as a Palisado, or Quickset hedge, to restrain the
licentious liberty of the Tongue. For Tibsheares to cashiere the Shearers, for
women (who have more need of such a monumentall restraint, (...) and
inconvenience.
in contumelious despite of Natures Law to break the hedge, and make so foul
a gap in it,) argues not only malice and folly, but a wilful resolution to
assume to themselves more than a natural liberty of speech, and to let loose
the reins to all extravagant excursions of the Tongue. But this is not the
least prejudice that these foolish Nations occasion to Nature and her
operations; for, the order of Nature is inverted, and her Method broken hereby;
for, the fore-teeth or shredders were placed first, because more acute, and for
the necessity there is of them for dividing the meat, called therefore Dentes,
quasi edentes, their first and primary use being for eating, the Incisorii or
fore-teeth, and the Canine or Eye-teeth being placed before the Grinders, cause
those things that are to be ground very small, ought first to be divided into
small particles, which is done by them, that afterward these lesser particles
may be ground into the smallest by the Grinders; which thing is so much the
more admirable that Nature has observed this in all Creatures.

And that it might be the better done, Nature has set the upper and lower
teeth exactly right one against another, which is so much the more admirable by
how much the difference is considerable between the upper and lower Iaw, whence
it comes to pass that the meat coming between them is most commodiously
prepared, that the Chylus is thereupon better transmitted from the Stomach;
for, the mincing of the meat into less particles is profitable unto this end,
that the heat of the stomach does the better concoct it; hence they who chaw
not well, or through too much have pass over the triple order of manducation
are ill nourished, as it happens in old men, and those who are edentuli. Hither
tends the Proverb, Senibus mandibulam Scipionis loco esse. Some wiler than
others in Tooth-Rites.
In reference unto which, Physiognomers pronounce such to be short lived who
have few Teeth, for, such prepare ill; whence the first concoction hurt, the
second is necessarily impaired. Behold here the folly and madness of these
Nations, who impoverish their mouths to enrich their fancies, and discard so
good servants out of the Mill of life, which should grind the Grist for the
better maintenance and nourishment of the Body; entertaining a defect for a
fashion, and that which some have decreed for a punishment, and justly
accounted a great Blemish. For,

Purchase Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The Kings of Queteve were wont anciently to drink poison at the loss of their
fore-teeth, saying that a King ought to have no defect: Yet a late King
proclaimed it through his Kingdom, that he had lost one of his fore-teeth
which was fallen out, that they might not be ignorant when they see him want
it; and would not do so, but wait his natural death, holding his life
necessary for to conserve his estate against his enemies, and so left that
pattern to Posterity.

Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
The people of the Province of Huancavilca, who had killed those Masters which
his Father Tupac Inca Yunangiu had sent to instruct them, the Inca using his
natural clemency, and to make good his Title, Huacchacuijac the Benefactor of
the poor, he so far remitted this fault-deserving death, that each Captain
and Chief should lose two teeth in the upper Jaw, and as many in the lower,
both they and their descendents, in memory of not satisfying their promise made
to his Father; whereupon the whole Nation would needs participate, both men and
women, Artificial Teeth preferred before the natural.
in that Tooth-losse, and did likewise use this Tooth-rite to their Sons and
Daughters, as if it had been a favor. So that what was intended for
punishment, grew thereupon to be a fashion.

And this I suppose to be the original of the Custom or Tooth-rite, mentioned
before in this Scene of the Guancavilcae in Peru, although it be variously
reported, and it may be, a little mistaken.

In Java Island there are few to be found that have their native Teeth: For the
most of them, Schenckius li. observat. de Dentibus.
both men and women, either cause them to be pulled out, or filed down with a
File, and others to be set in their place, of Gold, or Silver, Steel, or Iron,
made to succeed in their rooms.

Had these men such a fountain as there is in Persia, which makes their Teeth
fall out that drink of it, they would be well contented, which since they have
not, Tooth-drawers, and Tooth-setting Chirurgions would have a good Trade
there, where men and women are so ungrateful and villanously bent against the
goodness of Nature, as to prefer Artificial Teeth before the Natural;
Aesculapius was the first who in case of necessity and pain, invented the
drawing out of aching Teeth, and therefore had a leaden Daviser consecrated unto
him. But these people, out of wantonness and a foolish bravery, put themselves
to loss and pain; the Teeth, especially the Eye-Teeth, being bred with pain,
and not pulled out without pain and danger. And if they cut or file them down,
they expose themselves to as great a mischief, by reason of that hollow part
of the Teeth which is sensible, into which the soft Nerves enter, as it fared
with a certain Monk at Patavia, Renovation of Teeth.
who when he came to have a tooth (which was longer than the rest) cut, to cure
the deformity it brought, fell straight way into a convulsion, and Epilepticall
fits, and in the part of the Tooth cut off there appeared the footsteps of a
Nerve: more thankful to Nature, and more retentive of her benefits are they of
Fez; where when a Child begins to have his Teeth grow his Parents make a feast
for other Children, and they term this feast Dentilla, which is a proper Latin
word. And when rotten Teeth are drawn out, it is convenient to think of some
way of artificial reparation.

Paraeus heard it reported by a credible person, that he saw a Lady of the
prime Nobility, who instead of a rotten Tooth she drew, made a sound Tooth,
drawn from one her waiting maid at the same time, to be substituted and
inserted, which Tooth in process of time, as it were taking root, grew so
firm, as that she could chaw upon it as upon any of the rest, but he had this
but upon heresay. And the Teeth are so necessary to the welfare of the body of
man, that Nature to some especial Favorites, has afforded a renovation of
Teeth in their old age, nay even of their very Grinders, very many examples of
which indulgency you may find in Schenckius, Lord Bacon.
and Aldrovandus, and of the Countess of Desmond, it is reported, that she did
dentire twice or thrice, casting her old Teeth and others coming in their
place, which is one instance that gives some likelihood of that great design
of restoring Teeth in age, which yet has not been known to have been provoked
by Art; Lord Bacons Not. Hist. Cent. 8.
yet my Lord Bacon makes a Quere, whether children may not have some wash or
something to make their Teeth better and stronger; Coral is in use as an help
to the Teeth of Children. Golden Teeth


In the Province of Cardandam, under the great Can Tarters Jurisdiction, the
men and women cover their Teeth with thin Plates of Gold, which they so fit
unto them, that the Teeth themselves seem as it were to be set in Plate.

Had Nature furnished these Nations with a set of such golden Teeth as the
Silesian Boy had, which answered the Touch, and so exercised the wits of the
Physicians of that Age, she had fitted their Fancies to a hair, and had
prevented this artificial endeavor; though (indeed) that proved but a trick
of Art.

To be born with Teeth, or in extreme old age to have Teeth renew again, (of
both which there are many examples) are rather miracles in Nature than
Monstrosities, but the redundant force of Nature is more remarkable in those
who have had a double row of Teeth, Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6. Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 11. cap. 38. Colsius lib. 4. cap. 3. G. Bauhin. de observe. propriis.
Colum. lib. 1. Anat. cap. 10. Plin li. 7. c. 16. Val. Max li. 1. de mirac. ca.
8. Solin. cap. 9. Fulg lib. 1. c. 6. Plut. in Pyrrho.
as Direpsima the Daughter of Mithridates had, Timarchus the Son of Mestor,
Cyprius, and a boy of Lutesia, who had all a double course of Teeth. Jon Chius
attributes to Hercules a trebble set of Teeth, which is not so wonderful,
since Columbus reports of a Boy of his, called Phoebus, whose mouth was so
stored. Some also have had one entire whole bone, that took up all the Gumbe
instead of a row of distinct Teeth, as a Son of Prusias King of Bythinians, who
had such a bone in his upper Iaw; Pyrrhus King of the Epirotans had such a
continued bone, marked, as it were, with certain lines, whereby the
interpunction of Teeth were designed out. Many more examples might be added,
but these may suffice.

Double-tongued Nations.
SCENE XIV. Devices of certain Nations practiced upon their Tongues.
Purchase Pilgr. 1. lib. 2. Geor. Graudius Comment. in Solinum. Joh. Bohem. de
moribus, Gent. lib. 3. Kornman. lib. de mirac. viv. Schenckius observat. lib.
1. Gemma lib. 1. cap. 7. Cosmogr.
IN the Island of Jambuli, the Inhabitants who exceed us four Cubits in
stature; their Tongue has somewhat peculiar by Nature or Art; for they have a
cloven Tongue, and which is divided in the bottom, so that it seems double
from the root: so they use diverse speeches, and do not only speak with the
voice of men, but imitate the singing of Birds. But that which seems most
notable, they speak at one time perfectly to two men, both answering and
discoursing; The Tongue double by Nature.
for with one part of their tongue they speak to one, and with the other part
to the other.

The Tongue of man is not (indeed) double, trisulke, or bisulke, as in some
Creatures, but simple, and one only, and that verily according to a moral
intention of Nature: Yet some may wonder how since all the Organs of the Senses
are framed double by Nature, in the Taste she should order but one only, and a
simple Instrument, and that to good purpose; but although to sense it seem
one, and a simple Instrument, yet to a diligent Anatomist it will appear to be
double: Galen said the Tongue is double, which he proves by this Argument, that
it has double Vessels; for, neither the Veins, nor Arteries, nor Nerves of the
right side go into the left side of it, and so e contrario. And we see that one
side of the Tongue is struck with the Palsy sometimes, the other side being
unhurt. The same disposition also there is of the Muscles, to which we may add
the white Median or middle line of separation, which intersects the Tongue
throughout, or if you had rather, scores it out; so that the Tongue as all
other Senses is double. The cause why it was better for men that the Tongue
should be such, he says to be, for that by this means it proves more
commodious for mastication and speech. Which if it be true (as Hofman thinks it
to be most true) without all peradventure (says he) we must encourage those
Fables which Diodorus Siculus makes Narration of, Diod. Siculus lib. 3.
that there are men somewhere who have really a double Tongue, with which they
better perform the linguall offices than we do with one, which is the less
incredible, Jo. Franci Hildesii Med, Camenicen^ obser.
since we read of the Infant of a certain Nobleman which had a double tongue,
divided according to latitude; and of another who had eleven tongues, One with
eleven Tongues.
Albert. Mag. Comment. ad li. 2. Phys. 1. Arist.
eleven mouths, and two and twenty incomplete lips. Whether this Duplicity of
Tongue be in them Lusus Naturae, or a mere device of Art, you may see my
Authors doubts. They that shall seriously ponder the strange Inventions
mentioned in this Book, may perchance incline to the latter as most probable,
at leastwise if Anatomists will allow of the possibility of the thing, and then
it may pass for an audacious improvement of the Body. Such a stratagem of
improvement the pragmaticall invention of man has proved effectual in the
Tongues of other Creatures, it being a common practice to slit the Tongues of
Pies, Stares, Jayes, and Daws, whom we would teach to speak, to enable them
the better to imitate the articulation of our speech. Yet for the honor of
Nature, we must question whether this device be not somewhat destructive to the
numericall perfection of the Body, since that praesupposition in Philosophy is
most true, That Nature neither abounds in superfluous things, nor is defective
in necessaries; for she does nothing in vain, nor creates any thing
diminished, unless she be hindered by matter. Now since this device pretends to
double the provision of Nature by addition of a supernumerary particle,
although it be quid natural, the Instrument is probably hurt in its
operations, the number of parts requisite to the composition of the Instrument
is depraved, either (as we speak) by minoration or majoration. And if this
multiplication of Tongues out of the substance of the Body there should be
added to the number of the parts, it must prove superfluous; and how shall such
an attempt be answered to Him who made all things in number, measure, and in
weight.

Hofman, says he, The cutting of the Bridle of childrens Tongues condemned.
has heard of Dr Aquapendent, that in certain places of Italy the Midwives
were persuaded that the bridle of the Tongue had need of cutting in all
Infants, therefore they wore the Nail of their right Thumb long, but
conformed into the rising edge of a penknife, wherewith suddenly as soon as
the Infants are borne they break that ligament or bond.

Most of them all, so served, have become Stutterers, and many have dyed,
inflammation arising from that Action. Kypler.
Kyplerus condemns this tearing of it thus with the fingers, as certain rash
women are wont to do, since through the pain there follows a flux of humors,
inflammation, and other mischiefs, and when it is necessary to be cut, he would
have it done by Chirurgicall operation with a pair of Sizers. Casserius also
takes notice of this custom of unskilful Midwives, foolishly believing, that
unless they should do so, the Infant would remain mute. Bauhinus inveighs
against this pernicious custom of ignorant Midwives, that they indifferently
cut that which they call the bridle-string of the Tongue, to wit, that strong
and membranous Ligament which was ordained for the strength and stability of
the Tongue, and the insertion of its proper Muscles. Camerarius says, this
opinion is pernicious, and not to be endured. And Fabricius Hildanus,
Columbus, and others cry out against it. There is indeed a most strong
Ligament, membranous and broad, placed under the middle of the body of the
lower part of the Tongue, by whose aid the softness of the Tongue
under-propped it is more easily rolled about and produced; to the end of this
about the tip of the Tongue there is a little cord or Ligament grows, The use
of the Tongues bridle.
which they call the Bridle of the Tongue; and the Tongue has a Ligament for
two causes: First, for the firmament of its Basis; for if it had been without
this, the Muscles in their action (or their contraction to their principle) had
had nothing to rely upon; and so it would have come to pass, that the Tongue
would be convolved, as it were, into a Globe; secondly, that the tip of it
might be easily moved every way; for, unless that were, there would be much of
the voice lost in dearticulation; and as Casserius notes, it restraines the
Tongue from being drawn back beyond measure by the over-streining of the
anterior Muscles, to which it is a helper; and it hinders the Tongue from being
put forth too monstrously and indecently, and from being too exorbitantly led
to any one side. But that it should always need the Midwives nail, or groat,
or the Surgeons Penknife, lest it should prove an impediment to sucking, or
to future speech, and without which enlargement it could not be freely rolled
or moved every way, is a most dangerous conceit. Certainly these Midwives (as
women are great friends to loquacity, join in opinion with these Authors, who
therein playing the Rhetoricians) opine that Nature imposed this bridle upon
man; lest he should prove too talkative, which moral use holds not; for there
are some (as Kypler notes) that are too talkative, who have this Bridle short
enough, and there are some not so full of prattle, although this bond be loose
enough to give them scope; for, Loquacity or Taciturnity depends upon a higher
principle, and therefore their blind zeal in this business is the more
reprovable.

Camerarius thinks, that this never-enough condemned custom grounded hereupon,
might possibly be introduced into the Midwives practice, A Caution for cutting.
from the suggestion of some Physicians, who pretended this bond in all Infants
does so strictly tie the Tongue to its root, insomuch as without resection of
the same, speech would become lame and imperfect; and thereupon without any
necessity, the Midwives in many Nations began to dilacerate and break it
indifferently in all Infants. But since neither Parrots nor Pies stand in need
of any disruption of this Bond to utter their voice such as it is, it would
seem a wonder if Sagacious Nature should faulter only in the forming of that
part which was ordained to serve speech proper to Mankind. Neither without
reason did Galen, even in this particular, admire the providence of Nature,
that had in such exact Symetry ordered the Tongue, that it was neither too
short, nor too long for the Offices it was to perform.

But let us distinguish, and grant, that it sometimes so falls out, that even as
in other parts of the Body, so also in this little Bond, Nature fails and
offends, as it were, in excess, upon which occasion section is not
unprofitable, but it is to be esteemed necessary: But that Nature, the tender
mother of all things, does always in all Children commit this error, the best
of the Learned constantly deny, some of them witnessing (as before) that by
omitting that Ruption, or rather more truly Corruption, according to their
advice, the Children have notwithstanding spoke very perfectly: and on the
contrary, by the same foolish institution of Midwives others to have died,
inflammation being raised by the rude hand of unskilful women, which has
caused pain and hindered their sucking; therefore when we suspect either a
slownesse, or depravation of the Tongue, we ought to defer the dissection
until the appointed time of speech, Chirurgions, not Midwives work.
for then this may more commodiously be done by a skillful Surgeon, who may
do it with Caution, lest when he cut this little Cord, he do not also cut the
hard Nerves of motion, to wit, the seventh Conjugation, placed in the lower
part of the Tongue.

SCENE XV. Platter Faces where affected
Face-moulders, Face-takers, Stigmatizers, and Painters.
THe Chiribichensian women use to boulster the Necks of their Infants with two
pillowes, the one before, Pet. Martyr. Decad. 8.
the other behind, and bind them hard, even until their Eyes start: for, a
smooth plain Face pleases them, Platter-faces being there in great request.

There is lately found out in Pervacus, Korn. de mirat. vivorum ex Petr. Hisp.
in Sylva p. 5. c. 35. Jonst. Thaumatographia ex eodem.
a certain Province of the new World, named Caraqui, men that want an Occiput
and Sinciput, with a most broad face; for as soon as their children are born,
they shut in their heads, behind and before, in boards, so that the whole Face
may become plain and dilated, as also the Occiput it self, with the whole
head, Broad flat Faces.
is made broad and thin.

Lindscot. lib. 1. cap. 20.
In Java Major they have flat Faces, and broad thick Cheeks.

Scaliger de subtle. ad Cardan exerc. 167. Leo hist. de Africa. l. 7.
Scaliger says, that in the Island Java they have very broad Faces, as
likewise the Circassians.

In the Region of Zanfara they have extreme black broad visages.

Discovery of Norembega.
The Inhabitants of Norembega are disfigured in nothing, saving that they have
somewhat broad Visages, and yet not all of them.

Sir John Mandevils Travels.
In an Island near the great Island Dodyn, there are men that have flat Faces
without Noses, and without Eyes, but they have two small round holes instead of
Eyes, and they have flat mouths without Lips. And in that Isle are men also
that have their Faces all flat without Eyes, without Mouth, and without Nose,
but they have their Eyes and their Mouth behind on their shoulders.

These Faces cannot be commensurate, because the Members thereof are forced out
of their natural proportion, and so necessarily exclude that natural beauty,
which is wont chiefly to be found in the Face. For, so much as it is from the
middle of the brows to the end of the Nose, so much it ought to be from the end
of the Nose to the Chin, and the same space should fall from the middle of the
Brows to the exterior angle of the Eye, as falls from the aforesaid Angle to the
beginning of the Ear. The latitude of the Forehead, the length of the Nose,
and the magnitude of the Mouth, should be the same; also the semicircle of the
Eye, and of the Cheeks the same, as the altitude of the extremity of the Nose
ought to be half as much as the Longitude of it, which proportion is most
notoriously demolished in these Platter-Faces. Platter faces condemned.
Insomuch as considering these strange attempts made upon the natural
endowments of the Face, one would think that some men felt within themselves
an instinct of opposing Nature, and that they took more delight to overcome
than to follow her, the delight would be less, the profit greater, if they did
it for profit rather than pleasure: they cannot but know that their happiness
does consist in the overcoming of these unreasonable and fantastical
affectations; but equivocating therein, and either for want of understanding,
or through a wilful misunderstanding, whereas they should strive against their
own inward, they oppose their outward, Nature. Thus man transported with vain
imaginations, where he finds Hills, he sets himself to make Plains; where
Plains, he raises Hills; in pleasant places he seeks horrid ones, and brings
pleasantness into places of horror and shameful obscurity; he seconds that
which he ought to withstand, and that which he should follow he opposes; and
when he thinks he triumphs over his subdued and depraved body, his own corrupt
Nature triumphs over him. This is a stratagem of the Enemy of our Nature, to
set us at odds with our natural endowments: and that he may remain quiet
within, he causes us to strive abroad, like to a cunning politic Tyrant, who
having a valiant and fierce Subject within his City, by whom he fears to have
violence or opposition offered him, if he can find no other remedy, he sends
him into the field to fight with the Enemy, to the end that venting his
violence and phantasticalnesse abroad, he may have plenary power to Tyrannize
at home at his pleasure. God is angry with us, that we should at the same time
reform that which he himself had framed, A long thin Face where affected.
and conform our selves to that which we had deformed. The beauty of the Face
of man is much advanced and heightened by the Cavities and Eminencies thereof;
that as the greater world is called Cosmus, from the beauty thereof, the
inequality of the Center thereof contributing much to the beauty and
delightsomenesse of it: so in this Map or little world of beauty in the face,
the inequality affords the prospect and delight. These Face-moulders then, who
affect a platter-Face, not only in their endeavor, overthrow the lawful
proportion of the Face, but demolish the most apparent eminency and extant
majesty thereof.

Joan. de Laet descript. India, occident. lib. 18. cap. 4.
The women of Cumana, who are easily delivered, and who diligently bring up
their Children, because they account it a comely and beautiful thing to have a
long Face, and thin Cheeks, they gently compresse the Heads of their Infants
between two little Pillows, to extend them.

Purch. Pilgr. 3.
In some of the Provinces of China they have square faces.

In the Province of Old-Port, mentioned in the first Scene of this
Metamorphosis, fol. 14. you shall find a Generation of men affecting a square
head, Square Fcces where affected
which they purchased to themselves by Art. Now the Face follows the proportion
of the Head, and we having discovered the endeavors of some, for a square
head, may justly subject that these Chinoise owe their square Face more to Art
than Nature.

The natural and comely face of man, agreeable to proportion, and according to
Humane Nature, is, that the longitude thereof, in a youthful and fair body,
should be the tenth part of the whole body according to longitude; to this
longitude there must a convenient latitude answer: For, so much as is from the
middle of the Eye-brow to the end of the exterior Angle where the eye ends, so
much it is thence to the hole of the Ear: wherefore the Latitude of the Face
compared with the Longitude, which begins from the root of the hair above the
Forehead, and is produced even unto the end of the Chin, should be in a
sesquitertia proportion, to wit, as four to three. But if you only contemplate
the Diameters of Longitude and Latitude of a man's Face, you shall find a
sesquialtera proportion, and the longitude to latitude shall be as three to
two, which thus you shall understand; Let there fall a perpendicular line from
the first root of the hair above the Forehead, Men with Dogs Faces.
which shall descend to the end of the Chin; afterward draw another line,
which beginning at the end of both Temples, penetrating through the middle of
the head, shall cut the former line in right angles; that line which is drawn
from the top to the bottom of the Chin, shall be in a sesquialtera proportion
to that which is carried from the right hand to the left, cutting it in right
angles; so that it is the best and most natural proportion that the Longitude
of the Face should to its Latitude appear in a sesquialtera proportion. Now it
is an observation worth the inserting, that the Chin is correspondent to the
Symetry of the other members of the Body; but that which seems the greater
marvel, is, that the formal appearance of the face is generically reposed in
the Chin alone; for if that be square, long, or round, so the Face of it self
answers, insomuch as the Chin is that which makes the final judgment of the
Face of man. Now if these be Face-Moulders, as it is much to be suspected they
are, it may be they have some artifice to dilate the Chin, thereby profaning
the Symetry of Nature, and striving by Art to force and pervert the Face from
its just proportion, bringing the Latitude thereof either to equal, or exceed
the Longitude, while they, to the great dishonor of Nature, affect a square
Geometrical Face.

Petrus Simon in his expedition, which Johannes Alvarez Maldonatus made from
Guzco, to discover new Countries, found Giants of five else high, with a kind
of a Dogs Countenance.

In the Island Penguin, there were discovered men with Visards on their Faces,
resembling a Dogs Aspect, Cynopros^pi.
or else they really had such Dogs Heads. This is certain, that there are
certain Nations placed between the Equinoctial and Tropic^ of Capricorn,
The Author of the Treasury of Times.
on that side which is called America, who have been discovered within the
space of these fourscore years, and somewhat more, who are Cynoprosopi, or
men having a form or figure near in resemblance to the head and shape of a
Dogs Face, to wit, of those little pretty flat-nosed Dogs which Ladies keep for
pleasure in their Chambers; yet not naturally, but Artificially. For these
People, from the time of of all antiquity, did always hold it for a singular
beauty to them to have their Noses flatted or fallen down. And this is the
reason, that when their Children are newly borne, The Artifice of Dogs Faces
condemned.
and have their bones very tender, the Fathers and Mothers never fail to
quash, or flat down that part of the Face which is between the Eyes and the
Mouth, as the like has been done to little Dogs. And to speak truly, being
thus dealt withal, they differ very little in their looks from the resemblance
of Dogs, but they meddle not with their Ears, to make them pointed, or hanging
down, as commonly is used to those Creatures; yet true it is, that when they
are grown to manly stature, they bore, or pierce holes through their Ears,
(even as is done here among us) to hang therein fine colored stones, or else
the bones of certain Fishes. Now that they howl or bark as Dogs do, it is
utterly false, for they speak a Language disertly, briefly, and properly
accented; which is supposed to be the Greek Tongue. They are people of goodly
stature, and sightly presence, all saving the Face, which much resembles a
flat-nosed Dog, and is done by Artifice, as is already said. They maintain war
against a neighboring people, whom they call Margaias, that have the very same
manners, behavior of life, and Dogs-Face, like theirs; The Author of the
Treasury of Times reports to have seen a dozen of these Dog-Faced men at Roven,
which the Normans brought home with them. Vincent. Spec. Naturae.
And Vincentius says, that there was one of these Cynoprosopi brought to Lewis
of France in his time.

Certainly these Nations have a great conceit of their inventions, who contemn
the ordinary guizes of Nature, making themselves extravagant, and as the
Antipodes to mankind; Carbonado'd Faces.
They being none of the best who abandon Nature to follow their own
unreasonable imaginations. We naturally have much aversion from persons
misshapen and deformed, though it have not befallen them through their own
default: How then can we look without detestation upon them, who purchase these
defects by a voluntary depravation: These so change the face of the Universe,
that they may pass for monsters, for beasts, but not for men; so that it
hereby appears most true, that there is nothing so changeable in total
Nature, or so hard to be known, as man.

The Mothers of the Huns cut the Cheeks of their Male-children while they yet
suck, Jormand. in lib. rer. Get.
being cruel to them in their Cradles, that they might learn to suffer wounds
even in their Infancy, and should wax old without a Beard. They have a black
and writhed face, a cruel aspect, and a mouth on purpose made most ugly, that
you would take them to be the Aeriall offspring of Devils.

The Gemogleans, in a bravery, Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
stick Feathers in their flesh, even in the Face, somewhat near to their right
Eye, and when they have thus by gathering up the skin of their Temples made
holes in them, Cruel Gallantry.
and thrust Feathers into them, they wear them so to their no small trouble,
until the place putrify; some, when the old breaks out, cutting new holes
close to the broken. But the mad and cruel Gallantry of the Turks is
excellently described by Monsieur de Busheque. Monsieur de Busheque in his
discovery of his Embassy into Turkey. Ep. 4
Coming (says he) unto Buda, the Basha sent some of his household servants to
meet us, with many Heralds and Officers; but among the rest, a fair Troop of
young men on horseback, remarkable for the Novelty of their Order. They had
their heads bare and shaven, upon which they had made a long bloody flash, and
thrust diverse feathers of Birds within the wound: But instead of shrinking at
it, they went lifting up their heads with a laughing countenance; before me
marched some footmen, one of them had his arms naked, and hanging down on his
sides; both which arms above the elbow were thrust quite through with a Knife,
that stuck fast in them. Another was naked from his head to the Navell, having
the skin of his back so jagged up and down in two places athwart, which he had
made to pass, an hatched of arms, Hash'd Faces.
which he did carry in Scarfe-wise, as we would do a curtle axe. I saw another
of them who had fixed upon the crown of his head a horseshooe with many Nails,
and of so long continuance, that the nails were so fixed and fast in the
flesh, that they stirred not. We entered into Buda in this Pomp, and were
brought into the Basha's house, with whom I treated of my Affairs. All this
youthly company, little caring for their wounds, were in the lower Court of the
house; and as I was looking on them, the Basha asked of me what I thought of
it: All well, said I, except that these men do with the skin of their bodies
that which I would not do with my Coat, for I would seek to keep it whole. The
Basha laughed, and we took our leave.

The Moors of Angola in Africa, Purch. Pilgr. 4.
do cut long streakes in their Faces, that reach from the top of their Eye to
their Chin.

The Anchicos, Cap. Jo. Smiths Travels.
a valiant Nation in Africa, mark their faces with sundry slashes from their
Infancy.

The Jaos mark themselves to be known from Hackcluyt^ Voyages, vol. 2
other People, Face-Branders
with the tooth of a small beast, like a Rat. They race their Faces, some their
Bodies after diverse forms, as if it were with the scratch of a pin, the print
of which rasure can never be done away again during life.

Sir John Mandevils Travels. cap. 55.
In the Isle called Somober, the which is a good Isle, there the men and women
that are of the Nobility are marked in the Visage with a hot Iron, that they
may be known from others; for, they think themselves the worthiest of the
world.

Pigafetta his reports of the Kingdom of Congo. Draudius Comment. in Solin.
Centon.
The Anzich have this foolish custom, both men and women, as well of the
Nobility as of the Commonalty, even from their childhood, to mark their Faces
with sundry slashes made with a knife.

Fox of the Northwest passages.
In Groanland, the women herein only differ from the men, that they have blew
streakes down the Cheeks, and about the Eyes. Some of them race Cheeks,
Chins, and Faces, whereupon they lay a color like dark azure. In that part of
Groanland, which is called, the women's Island, the women are marked in the Face
with diverse black streakes or lines, the skin having been raised with some
sharp Instrument when they were young, and black color put therein, so grown
in, that by no means it can be got forth.

Purch. Pilgr. 4. lib 6.
In Tiembus, the women are deformed with torn faces, and always bloody, which
is their beauty.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
The men and women, both, who dwell at the Cape of Lopo Gonsalves, use to make a
streake or two in their Faces, Torn Faces where a great beauty.
wherein they put pieces of Elxen bones as thick as a Dollar, with a stalk
that shuts the hole, which being thrust in, comes out at the Nose, and over
their mouths; which as it is a note of Gallantry, so it also serves their
turns well, and to good purpose, when they are sick and fallen into a swound,
and that men cannot open their hands by force, then they take that bone and
crush the sap of some green herb through it, wherewith they come to themselves
again.

The Inhabitants of Tuppanbasse near Brasil, Idem Pilgr. 6. lib. 4.
how many men these Salvages kill, so many holes they will have in their
Visage, beginning first in their nether Lip, then in their Cheeks, thirdly,
in both their Eyebrows, and lastly, in their Ears, and this is their cruel
Gallantry.

The Alexins, or Abexijns, Idem eodem, lib. 10.
that are Christians after their manner, for they are of Prester John's Land,
Lindscot. lib. 1. cap. 40.
have on their Faces four burnt marks in manner of a Cross, one over their
Nose in the midst of their forehead between both their Eyes, one in each of
their Cheeks, one between their Eyes and their Ears, and one in their
nether Lip down to their Chin, Baptism by Fire.
and this is their Baptism when they are made Christians, which they use in
stead of water.

The Virginian women pounce and raze their Faces and whole Bodies with a sharp
iron, Purch. Pilgr. 6. lib. 9.
which makes a stamp in curious knots, and draws the proportions of Fowls,
Fishes, or Beasts; then with painting of sundry lively colors they rub it into
the stamp, which will never be taken away, because it is dried into the flesh.

Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
The Egyptian Moors, both men and women, for love of each other, distaine their
Chins into knots, and flowers of blew, made by the pricking of the skin with
needles, and rubbing it over with ink and the juice of an herb.

What strange kind of Butchery do these Nations exercise, Stigmatizers.
and what needless pain they put themselves unto to maintain their cruel
bravery! Nay, which is yet stranger, they seem to love this unnatural and
bloody Gallantry so well, that they hate their own flesh and blood, whereof
they freely sacrifice to their fantastical imaginations. This, in the Poets
style, is to nullify a Face. And to speak in the spirit of old BEN; What is
the cause? They think sure in disgrace
Of Beauty so to nullify a Face,
That Heaven should make no more, or should amiss
Make all hereafter, when they have ruined this.
Thus stigmatized, you need not doubt I tro,
Whether their Faces be their own or no.
Thus the more sacred and honest part of the Body is profaned by their wicked
inventions. Can either Gentility or Christianity be forgiven such an error?
surely no. This abominable folly and madness was reproved in the Hebrews, who
as these do in pride and bravery, so they did scotch their Faces in time of
mourning, which was usual among them of great antiquity, by reason whereof the
same was forbidden them by the Law of God in Leviticus; Jer. 41.2, 3. Lev. 19.5.
You shall not cut your flesh for the Dead, nor make any mark of a print upon
you, I am the Lord. Deuteronomy. 14.1.
And again in Deutrinomy, You are the children of the Lord your God, you shall
not cut your selves. Which was also forbidden by the Romans in the Laws of the
twelve Tables. Pet. Mart. Decad. 3.


They in the Golden Region of Coiba-Dites are more excusable than these mad and
cruel Gallants; Painter-stainers.
for, they spare their own flesh, and mark their slaves in the flesh after a
strange manner, making holes in their Faces, and sprinkling a powder thereon;
they moisten the pounced place with a certain black, or red juice, whose
substance is of such tenacity and claminesse, that it will never wear away.

Grimston of their manners.
The Arabian women before they go unto their husbands, either on the marriage
day, or any other time, to lie with them, paint their Faces, Breasts, Arms,
and Hands, with a certain azured color, thinking that they are very hansome
after this manner, and they hold this Custom from the Arabians which first
entered into Africa, and these learned it from the Africans; yet at this day the
town of Barbery, inhabited by them of the Country, do not imitate this custom,
but their wives love to maintain their natural Complexion. It is true, that
they have sometimes a certain black painting, made of the smoke of Galls and
Saffron, with the which they make little spots upon their Cheeks, and they
paint their Eyebrows of a Triangular form, and they lay some upon their Chin,
which resembles an Olive leaf: And this being commended by the Arabian Poets
in their amorous Songs, there is not any African of great note, but will carry
it in a great bravery. But you must understand, that these women dare not wear
this painting above two or three days, nor show themselves before their
Kinsmen in this equipage, for that it savours something of a whore: They only
give the sight and content thereof unto their husbands to incite them to love,
Women-Painters.
for that these women desire the sport much, and they think that their beauty
receives a great grace by this painting.

In Leo's description of Africa, the Relation runs thus: Their Damsels that are
unmarried do usually paint their Faces, Breasts, Arms, Hands, and Fingers,
with a kind of counterfeit color, which is accounted a most decent custom
among them. But this Fashion was first brought in by those Arabians, which were
called Africans, what time they began first of all to inhabit that Region, for
before then, they never used any false or glosing colors.

The women of Barbary use not this fond kind of painting, but contenting
themselves only with their natural hue, they regard not such fained ornaments;
howbeit sometimes they will temper a certain color with Hens dung and
Saffron, wherewithal they paint a little round spot in the balls of their
Cheeks, about the breadth of a French Crown; likewise between their Eyebrows
they make a Triangle, and paint upon their Chins a patch like unto an Olive
leaf. Some of them also do paint their Eyebrows, and this Custom is very
highly esteemed of by the Arabian Poets, and Gentlemen of that Country. Howbeit
they will not use these Fantastical ornaments above two or three days
together, all which time they will not be seen to any of their friends, except
it be their Husbands and Children; for these paintings seem to be great
allurements to lust, whereby the said women think themselves more trim and
beautiful. Men painted.


The Author of the Treasury of Times. Grimston of their manners.
In Fez the women use to deck and adorn the Bride, by trimming her hair,
rubbing her Cheeks, and painting them red, and her hands and feet black with a
certain tincture, which continues but a while.

Grimston of the estate of the Turk in Africa.
They that live in the Province of Bugia in Africa, have an ancient custom to
paint a black Cross upon their Jaw-bones.

Grimst. of the estate of China. Magin. Geograph. Lord Bacon Not. Hist. Cent.
8. Exper. 739.
The women in China use painting and ointments; And it is practiced by the men,
for the Chinese, as my Lord Bacon notes, who are of an ill complexion, (being
olivaster) paint their Cheeks scarlet, especially their King and Grandees.

Grimston of their manners. Jo. Bohem. l. 2. de rit. gent.
The ancient Scythian women rubbed their naked bodies against some sharp and
rough stone; having then powered water upon them, and their flesh being swollen by
this means, they rubbed their bodies with the wood of Cypress, Cedar, and
Incense: they did also use certain ointments for the Face made of the like
Drugs, by means whereof they smell sweet, then having the day following taken
away these Plasters, they seemed more beautiful and pleasing.

In Norembega, all of them, as well men as women, paint their Faces.

Grimston of their manners. Magin. Geogra. Americae. Purch. Pilgr. 1. lib. 4.
Lindscot, li. 2.
The natural Inhabitants of Jucata paint their Faces and Bodies black.

The Native Socotorans paint their Faces with yellow and black spots, loathsome
to behold.

The Brasilean women paint their Faces with all kind of Colors, which their
Neighbors and other women do for them. Face-stainers.
In the middle of their Cheeks they make a round circle, drawing lines from it
of diverse colors, until their Faces be full, not leaving so much undone as
their Eyelids.

The Virginian women adorn themselves with paintings; some have their Face,
Breasts, Hands, Capt. Smiths Hist. of Virginia.
and Legs, cunningly embroidered with diverse works, as Beasts, Serpents,
artificially wrought into their flesh with black spots; their Heads and
Shoulders are painted red with the root Pocone, brayed to powder mixed with
oil, which Scarlet-like color makes an exceeding handsome show, and is used
by the Kings Concubines; this they hold in Summer to preserve them from the
heat, and in Winter from the cold: Many other forms of painting they use, but
he is the most Gallant that is the most monstrous to behold. Their Children, of
whom they are easily delivered, and yet love them dearly, to make them hardy,
in the coldest mornings they make them wash in the Rivers, and by painting and
ointments so tann their skins, that after a year or two no weather will hurt
them, when they enter into battle they paint and disguise themselves in the
fiercest manner they can devise. After their ordinary burials are ended, the
women, having painted all their Faces with black coal and oil, do sit 24
hours in their houses mourning and lamenting by turns, with such yelling and
howling as may express their great passions; the Faces of all their Priests
are painted as ugly as they can devise. Sometimes the men appear half black,
and half red, Face-grimers.
but all their Eyes painted white, and some red strokes, like Mustachoes,
along their Cheeks. Some of them paint their Eyes red, having white strokes
over their black Faces, so that they look more like devils than men. Captain
Smith about Onawniament encountered with Ambushcadoes of such Savages so
strangely painted, grimed, and disguised, shouting, yelling, and crying, as so
many spirits from Hell could not have showed more terrible.

Johan. Bohem. de moribus genesis lib. 3.
Somewhat allied to this barbarous way of Disguise is the Custom of the
Germans, who are said once a year to run mad, covering their Faces with
Vizards, belying their Sex and Age, some of them willing rather to represent
Satyrs or Devils, paint themselves with Vermilion or Ink, deforming themselves
with such nefarious habits; others running naked play the Lupercalls: from whom
my Author thinks this annual Custom of raving was first derived, who naked,
and with their faces defiled in blood, wandering through the City, were wont to
strike every one they met, with thongs of leather.

The Author of the Description of Nova Francia, lib. 2.
The Souriquois do paint their Faces all with black, which makes them seem
very hideous, but this is their mourning Visage.

Ramutius narration of Nova Francia.
The women of New France, about the Port of the holy Cross, for the death of
their Husbands, wear a certain black weed all the days of their life,
besmearing all their Faces with coal dust and grease mingled together, almost
half a quarter of an Intch thick, and by that they are known to be Widows.

Painting being Universal, Face-daubers.
The Author of the Description of Nova Francia. lib. ^.
and without exception among the West Indians; for if any of them makes Love,
he shall be painted with red, or blue, color, and his Mistress also. If they be
glad at any thing they will do the like generally, which is their expression of
jolly bravery. But when they are sad, or plot some Treason, then they overcast
all their Face with black, and are hideously deformed.

In Persia the women's pale color is made sanguine by adulterate complexion,
Herberts Travels.
and their round cheeks are fat and painted. The common women's cheeks are of a
delicate dye, (but Art, not Nature causes it.)

The Grecian women, for the most part, Sandys Travels, lib. 1.
are brown of complexion, but exceedingly well favored; they cover not their
Faces, (the Virgins excepted) unless it be with painting, using all the
supplement of a sophisticated beauty: And not without cause; for when they grow
old the most grow contemptible, being put to the drudgery of the house, and
many times to wait on their Children.

The Spanish women when they are married, Howel, Epist. Famil.
they have a privilege to wear high Shoes, and to paint, which is generally
practiced there; and the Queen uses it her self; which brings on a great
decay in the natural Face: For it is observed, that women in England look as
youthful at fifty as some there at twenty five. This, says Munster, Munst.
Cosm. lib. 2.
is to be reproved in your Spanish women, that they now and then deforme their
face with washes of Vermilion and Ceruse, because they have less native color
than your French women; and indeed other nations learnt from them the use of
Spanish paper.

The Ladies of Italy (not to speak of the Curtezans) to seem fairer than the
rest, take a pride to besmeare and paint themselves. Artificial Fair Ones.


A Geographer, speaking of Venice, says, that it is thought no one City again
is able to compare with that City for the number of gorgeous Dames: as for
their beauty of face, though they be fair indeed, I would not willingly
commend them, because there is in a manner none, old or young, unpainted.

It is observed, that the Roman Dames had infinite little boxes, filled with
loathsome trash of sundry kind of colors and compositions, for the hiding of
their deformities, the very sight and smell whereof was able to turn a man's
stomach.

Ovid. de medic. fac.
Pixides invenies, and rerum mill colores,
Non semel hinc stomacho nausea facta meo.
And for the face used so much slibber-sauce, such daubing and painting, that a
man could not well tell -- facies dicatur an ulcus?
May it a Face or a Botch be ^all'd?


Johan. Bohem. de moribus genesis lib. 3.
The ancient English stained their Faces with Woad, which is of a blew or sky
color, that they might appear more horrid to their enemies in fight.

Our English Ladies, who seem to have borrowed some of their Cosmeticall
conceits from Barbarous Nations, Spotted Faces affected.
are seldom known to be contented with a Face of Gods making; for they are
either adding, detracting, or altering continually, having many Fucusses in
readiness for the same purpose. Sometimes they think they have too much
color, then they use Art to make them look pale and fair. Now they have too
little color, then Spanish paper, Red Leather, or other Cosmeticall Rubriques
must be had. Yet for all this, it may be, the skins of their Faces do not
please them; off they go with Mercury water, and so they remain like peeld
Ewes, until their Faces have recovered a new Epidermis.

Our Ladies here have lately entertained a vain Custom of spotting their
Faces, out of an affectation of a Mole to set off their beauty, such as Venus
had, and it is well if one black patch will serve to make their Faces
remarkable; for some fill their Visages full of them, varied into all manner of
shapes and figures.

This is as odious, and as senseless an affectation as ever was used by any
barbarous Nation in the World; And I doubt our Ladies that use them are not
well advised of the effect they work: for these spots in Fair Faces advantage
not beauty as they suppose, Black patches no advantage to Beauty.
because contraries compared and placed near one another, show their luster
more plainly; but because it gives envy satisfaction, which takes pleasure in
defects, or by reason it takes away that astonishment, which instead of
delighting confounds; not that Imperfection can make perfect, or that the
defect can increase beauty, and therewith delight; for these spots in a
beautiful Face add not grace to a Visage, nor increase delight: they
entertain it because they extinguish and then renew it. Our natural power is
limited to a certain measure; when the continued presence of the delightful
object does exceed, the delight ceases, and to the extreme of what it can
contribute it delights no longer; he that will renew his pleasure must begin
with pain, and go out of the natural state to return into it; Let him look
upon the spots, then return to behold the beauty of the face. And it may be
some of the more subtle Heads, whose heaving phansies fill their Faces full of
such artificial mole-hils, are aware that men desire to find defect in those
things that are pleasing to them, and that he rejoices that he has found it,
peradventure seeming unto him that he has gotten command over her that has
it, and that he may reap the delight of pardoning, without feeling the damage
of being offended. If Nature then, as the politic Marquess of Malvezzi
thinks may be she does, sets us in the way to seek defects, to bring us,
through the knowledge of those who have the defect, to the knowing of him that
has none; The best improvement of this folly is to make these Creatures serve
for Instruments, to bring us to seek out the Creator; not only by what is
perfect in them, but also by that which naturally wants perfection, Painting in
a man odio us.
or is charged with artificial defects arising out of an evil affectation,
and not as if they were totally perfect, who openly profess to study
imperfections, simply fawn upon, and adore them, as if we believed they were
absolutely perfect. And the like sober use may the discreeter sort of Ladies,
who are not guilty of this spotting vanity, make use of, when they behold the
like prodigious affectation in the Faces of effeminate Gallants, a bareheaded
Sect of amorous Idolaters, who of late have begun to vye patches and
beauty-spots, nay, painting, with the most tender and fantastical Ladies, and
to return by Art their queasie pain upon women, to the great reproach of
Nature, and high dishonor and abasement of the glory of man's perfection.
Painting is bad both in a foul and fair woman, but worst of all in a man; for
if it be the received opinion of some Physicians, that the using of Complexion,
and such like slibber-slabbers, is a weakness and infirmity in it self, who
can say whether such men as use them be sound or no? it being a great
dishonesty, and an unseemely sight to see a man painted, who perchance had a
reasonable good natural complexion of his own, that when he has by nature
those colors proper to him, he should besoot his face with the same paintings,
or make such slight reckoning of those fair pledges of Natures goodness, and
embrace such counterfeit stuff, to the ill example of others; so that his
face, which he thinks does so much commend him, should be made of ointments,
greasy ingredients, and slabber-sawces, or done by certain powders,
Oxe-galls, Lees, Latherings, and other such sluttish and beastly confections.
For besides that, they are effeminate actions, fitting only wanton wenches, and
light huswives, Painting an old Trade.
they give occasion to men to murmur against them, and breed a suspicion of
baseness in the vilest degree, when they shall see them thus daubed over with
Clay, and wholly composed of those things that are only permitted unto women,
who because they have not sufficient beauty of themselves, borrow it from
paintings and varnishings, to the great cost both of their health and purses.
Verily these are they who do something worth the spite of envious and foul
diseases, and invite the hand of God to strike them with deformity. But as for
painting, it is no marvel if the Ladies of our time do paint themselves, for
of a long time, and in many places that trade has had beginning. This
generation of Daubers having ever sought quarrels with Nature and forced Art,
her false servant, into Balance with her, setting more by their false face
than they do by their true; so that these Face-takers seem to be out of love
with themselves, and to hate their Natural Face, exterminating or out-lawing
their own Face to put on another, whose curiosity was handsomely taxed by an
Ancient with this Dilemma; If women be naturally fair, Nature suffices them,
and there is no reason that Art should plead against Nature, or painting
against the truth: if they be foul by Nature, the painting which they lay upon
them bewrays their fouleness the more. Plautus asks a foolish woman,
wherefore she corrupted with Fucusses and artificial waters so fair a thing
as the Face is, assuring her, that she could not possibly exercise those Arts
so warily but that they will appear, and continually subminister an occasion
of judging; For the Latitant effect is supposed greater than indeed it is,
which had not been so much suspected had she not painted her self. The Vanity
of Painting.
Pythagoras therefore, in honor of Nature, forbad women to paint themselves,
ordaining that they should be content with their natural Beauty. Ere long
these adulterate Colors will moulder, and then the old maple face appears,
which is sufficiently laughed at by all, besides the harm the paint has done;
for, that Face which was bad enough is hereby made worse, there being a
venomous quality in the paint which wrinkleth the Face before its time, it dims
the Eyes, and blacks the Teeth; with false colors they spoil their Face, and
gain naught but contempt and hatred of their Husbands. Have ye not seen (says
a reverend wit) a complete beauty made worse by an artificial addition, Doctor
Done Sermon. 70.
because they have not thought it well enough before? you see it every day, and
every where. If Saint Paul himself were here, whom for his Eloquence the
Lystrians called Mercury, he could not persuade them to leave their Mercury, it
will not easily be left; for how many of them that take it outwardly at first,
come at last to take it inwardly. Solomon's caution therefore, Be not over
righteous, may be applied to this sense, Be not over Fair. The great advancer
of Learning therefore, where he speaks of Cosmetique Medicaments, or the Art
of Decoration, says, that this adulterate decoration by Painting and Ceruse is
well worthy the imperfections which attend it, being neither fine enough to
deceive, nor handsome enough to please, nor safe and wholesome to use. And this
attempt is not only inconvenient, but very vain and ridiculous; for, while by
washes, paintings, and such slibber-slabbers, they presume by the Ministry of
Art to overcome Nature, they fail in their Design; for Art, The use of the
skin of the Face.
as experience teaches us, cannot surmount Nature, nor by the most exquisite
and illustrious Pigments come near the native color. For, the God of Nature
will not permit a true and native color to be surpassed by a false and
counterfeit. Nature verily abhors such external adventitious beauty which
flows from Art, which being ab extra, confers nothing to the proper and
intrinsique end of her work; for, besides the use and action, you shall find
nothing in the body of man and its parts which is quid intrinsicum, to wit,
conferring to the end for which those parts were created; and who would grant a
beauty of this kind, he must profess that there is somewhat in the body of man
and its parts besides the use or action. It is freely confessed, there is in
the body of Man somewhat for ornament, which verily must be a Natural, or
Physical ornament, since in Art ornaments have their end. By which you may
understand, that although all the parts of the Body are not designed to action,
yet they have their use, because Nature has made nothing in vain. The Cuticle
of the Face has indeed no action in the body, but it has use; for it seems
(as Paraeus speaks) to be given by the singular indulgence of Nature to be a
muniment and ornament to the true skin; which providence of Nature these
Artizans (or rather Curtizans) do imitate, who for to seem more beautiful do
smooth and polish it, the baudy trimming of which cheeke-varnish proves but a
loathsome nastinesse, and is a complement more than Nature looks for at their
hands, which to see is a thousand pitties; for, your foul and worst favored
women are not only those that do this, but even your fairest, and those that
are most beholding to Nature, who think thereby to seem fairer, Painting
Condemned.
and to make Nature appear more lovely in Arts dressing, begin this work
betimes in the morning in their bed, and finish it at noone when the cloth is
laid. So that I say (and not without reason) That a woman the more curious she
is about her face, the more careless about her house, the repairing of the one
being the ruining of the other, which makes even Guzman cry out, O filthiness
above all other filthinesses! O affront above all other affronts! that God
having given thee one face thou should abuse his Image and make thy self
another. And it is a wonder (as my Lord Bacon notes) that this corrupt custom
of Painting has so long escaped penal Laws, both of the Church, and of the
State, which have been very severe against the excessive vanity of Apparel,
and the effeminate trimming of Hair. And the wonder is the greater how it has
escaped Ecclesiastical Censure, since all the Fathers of the Church have
strongly enveighed against forged and feigned beauty, and this practice of
introducing other hewes than the blood naturally affords; A vile thing it is
says one, thus to force and wrong Nature with Birdlime, Chalk, Daubing, and
such Trash, plainly marring all the beauty they have of Nature, growing foul
with making themselves fair: A gross folly to change the natural Beauty, and
seek after painting, the crime of Adultery is in a manner more tolerable, for
there Chastity is corrupted, and here Nature is forced. Saint Ambrose of such a
one: Thou defacest the features of God if thou cover thy Face with painting.

This Palliative Artifice which introduces an acquisite complexion to deceive
the Spectatours Eye for a moment is altogether to be rejected by women,
especially Christians. Painters admonished.
Cypr. Tract. 2. de hab. Virg.
And Cyprian writes truly, Not only Virgins, says be, and Widows, but all
married women are to be admonished, that this work, and facture, and plasme
ought to be no manner of way adulterated by yellow tincture, black dust, or red
paint, or any other Medicaments which corrupts the native Lineaments. And
afterward he says, thoy offer violence to God when they strive to deforme and
transfigure that which he has formed, not knowing that every thing that is
borne is the work of God, and what ever is changed is the work of the Devil.
These fantastical Correcters of their Natural forms (as another says)
seem to do nothing else then to reprehend the power of their Maker, who as a
most wise Artificer has so framed and colored them. A very great rashness
with such vain impostures to go about to correct and amend that which he has
made and perfected. Aug. Se^m. 240
For as St Augustine says, his works should not seem to be such unto thee as
if he transformed Natures, or in the Creation of any thing had ever turned
white into black, or black into white, when he said, Let us make man according
to out Image and Similitude, and yet thou desire to change that Face which
God has made, and thou will reform that which God has formed in thee; If, as
a holy Hermit, Petr. Herem. a Theod. in vit is sect. patr. hist. nona citat.
some famous Painter, or Limner, a cunning Master of his Art had with great
care and diligence painted some curious Picture, and brought it to its full
perfection: And another rude Painter should come who should rashly put to his
hand and presume to correct and amend it, now adding, now taking away somewhat,
now changing the shadow, and transferring those things which were obscure into
clear and lucid appearance, contrary to the precept of Limbing; He would both
distort the countenance, and render it void of all Grace. Painting a base
invention
Would you not think when the Master returned and saw what was done, he would
be most justly angry, considering how rude a Painter had put his hand to that
Image which he had so elaborately finished? In like manner you may judge that
God will be angry with such, who by vain invention of Modells and adulterate
Sophistications should dare to correct and amend that Image which the Divine
Majesty has so absolutely painted in thee. It Is to be feared, as St Cyprian
notes, that at the last day God will not acknowledge them for his Creatures,
but will exclude them from his House and Court as strangers and unknown persons
unpleasing unto him; they may justly fear, that when he sees them so deformed
he should say they were not the works of his hands, nor Creatures made
according to his similitude, but to exhibit the Ensigns and marks of the
Devil, to discover the works and impressions of his foul hand. And indeed a
good ground for this protestation had these holy men, for this Trade of
Painting is reproved in the holy Books, and made a reproach by the mouth of the
Prophets, Jer. 4.3.
as when Jeremy threatens the City of Jerusalem, When thou shall be destroyed
(says he) what will thou do, etc. though thou paintest thy Face with Colors,
yet shall thou trim thy self in vain; for thy Lovers will abhor thee, and
seek thy life. The Prophet Ezekiel makes the like reproach to the Cities of
Jerusalem and Samaria, which he compares to two lewd Harlots, who having sent
to seek out men coming from far, and being come they have washed themselves,
and have painted their Faces, and have put on their fair Ornaments. The Queen
Jesabel doing the same, 2 Kin. 9.30.
was for all that cast down out of a window, Some Fucus allowable.
and bare the punishment of her wicked life.

Yet we cannot say, that it is absolutely unlawful to use any Fucus,
especially when any foul blemish does disgrace the form of modest Virgins or
Matrons, and we know Physicians are sometimes constrained to satisfy the
desires of honorable Ladies, and great Persons, whom, as Galen says, we may
not deny. And indeed somewhat is to be allowed to women who are studious of
their beauty, and desire a nitor and certain splendor of Countenance, and
therefore either to repair the injuries of air, or any other loss and
damage that has happened to the Face, or what is wanting to the emendation of
the Elegancy of the Epidermis, or skin of the Visage is no trespass against
Piety, but may be honestly endeavored by a Physician, since this induces no
Fucus, but restores the natural nitor of the Body, upon whatsoever cause it is
lost, and therefore it is granted to women especially, who since they were
somewhat inferior to men in prudence, strength of Body and fortitude, and
other things, instead thereof; as Anacreon interpreted, sings, Natura donat
illis,
Decoram habere formam
Pro parmulisque cunctis,
Pro Lanceisque cunctis;
Nam flamma cedit illis
Ferrumque, si qua pulchra est.
And since Plato in Phaedro calls Beauty the most illustrious and amiable of all
things; and that a fair Face is illustrious with a kind of Divine Form; it is
worthy of preservation, and a fair restitution. (...) their Cosmetiques.
And indeed it belongs to the corrective part of Medicine to reduce a
superficies that is preternaturall; for, an inequality in the superficies
belongs to Decoration, as when any spot is in the Face from the Nativity, it
belongs to the Corrector to make this superficies beautiful and to correct it;
as women who have native spots in their face, Mont. medic. par. 2.
which the Moderns call Stercus Daemonum, which proceed from a thin and adurent
blood, therefore it is the Office of the Corrector to correct those spots in
them that have contracted them. But the practice of woman in this case is not
laudable, nor agreeable to the corrective Art of Medicine; for, your women in
your Cosmetique usurpations use only those things which constipate,
refrigerate, and repercuss, to remove them from the Superficies to the Center,
whereas they should also use those things which are abstersive and mundifying;
But because things abstersive and mundifying introduce a scurfe, women will not
endure this way of Reduction to the natural state of perfection. But as the
needless assumption and affectation of such Artifice is absurd, and no way
pleasing to Nature, so too much curiosity in such matters is naught and
reprovable. And to take in what a grave and learned Divine has, Dr Done Sermon.
20.
in concurring with the purpose of God in dignifying the Body, we may exceed
and go beyond Gods purpose. God would not have the Face mangled and torn, but
then he would not have it varnished with foreign Complexions; it is ill when
it is not our own blood that appears in our Cheeks; it may do some ill offices
of blood, it may tempt; but it gives over when it should do a good office of
blood, it cannot blush. God would not have us disfigure our Face with sad
Countenances in fasting and other Disciplines, Painting when sinful.
nor would have us go about to mar his work, or to do his last work, which
he has reserved to himself in Heaven, here upon earth, that is, to glorify
our Bodies with such Additions here, as though we would need no Glorification
there. But concerning this kind of transgression against the honesty and truth
of Nature, or rather the sinfulness of it, Cajetan is of an opinion, that as a
woman may conserve her natural beauty without sin, so she may also preserve it
by Art by adhibiting the virtues of Fucusses, Pigments, and other paintings, so
it do not intend an evil end, it is a fiction and vanity somewhat excusable;
Whereas it is concluded a mortal sin for any to sell such disguising trash to
those they know will abuse it for an evil end. And in this regard some Divines
will not allow so much as palliation of any deformity in the Face which has
proceeded from licentiousness and intemperance, or that they should be
disguised by unnatural helps, to the drawing in of others, and the
continuation of their former sins. The sin it self was the Devils act in thee,
but in the Deformity that follows upon the sin God has a hand; and they that
suppress and smother these by paintings, and unnatural helps to unlawful
ends, do not deliver themselves of the plague, but they do hide the marks and
infect others, and wrestle against Gods notifications of their former sins. The
invention of which Act of Palliation of an ascititious deformity against Gods
indigitation of sin, is imagined one reason of the invention of black Patches,
wherein the French showed their witty pride, which could so cunningly turn
Botches into Beauty, and make ugliness handsome; yet in point of
Phantasticalnesse we may excuse that Nation, Musicians Face Deformers.
as having taken up the fashion, rather for necessity than novelty, in as much
as those French Pimples have need of a French Plaster.

Among those who corrupt and deforme the Face some account Musicians that play
upon wind Instruments. It is storied of the Goddess Pallas, she was sometimes
delighted in playing on the Cornet, till it happened, that (one day) playing
thereon for her pleasure, by a frantane River, she beheld her self in the
water, and beholding those new and strange Faces, which she must necessarily
make while she played, was ashamed of her self, and presently broke the cornet
in pieces. And indeed it was well done of her, it not being an Instrument
fitting for Ladies, nor yet for men, except for those who are willing to
deforme themselves for pleasure or gain. Omnes Tibicines insaniunt, ubi semel
afflant, avolat illico vultus. And therefore Alcibiades was angry with Flutes,
because playing upon them disfigured the Beauty of the Face; yet that
peradventure happened, as the Marquess of Malvezzi well considers, because he
spoiled their harmony, playing less than was requisite, and deforming himself
more than he needed to have done. Vocal Music deformes not the Visages.
Yet he pardons such a conceit concerning Wind-Instruments in a tender and
wanton youth, And in a Court Philosopher, a Politician, a Peripatetick, talking
with Senators and Princes.

But vocal Music performed by Instruments which Nature has invented for
delight, ought not to be set at naught, for the same, or peradventure no reason
at all, as it is by the Stoic moral Philosophers; For, the Wind-Musique does
not deforme the Visage, it reformes, yea, conformes it: and the vocal, which
is correspondent to the hearing, alters the proportion of the Face, to
conform it to the Eye; the one requires setlednesse to be well looked upon,
and the other receives its perfections from motion: one unfolds the Beauty of
the Visage, the other both lays open, and accompanies the sweetness of the
voice; where there is a sound, Motion has necessarily proceeded, and the
motion is with measure, if the sound be harmonious. Sometimes also it is
voluntary, accompanied with the Head, Eyes, and Mouth; and with delight, though
without necessity, if it be with proportion. That motion which offends,
produces no harmonious sound, or does not accompany it proportionably.

SCENE XVI. Long-necked Nations.
National Monstrosities appearing in the Neck.
PEtrus Damianus, Damianus libello de mirac.
Archbishop of Ravenna, and Cardinal, relates, that Robert King of France
married a Kinswoman of his, by whom he had a Son with a Gooses neck and head,
whereupon by a common consent of the French Bishops they were excomunicated;
the King compelled by these streights takes better Counsel, and renouncing his
incestuous Bed, entered into lawful marriage with another.

Beyond the streights, of Magellan, Pigafetta reports to have seen men with
Necks of a Cubit long, the other parts of their body being proportionable
thereunto.

In Eripia, as some write, or according to Lycosthenes, in the extreme part of
Siricana, or as it pleases others in some of the Valleys of Tartaria, there
harbors a Nation of so long a Neck, that it wholly resembles the neck of a
Crane; afterward in the top of the Neck there is a ferine Face, Long gangrell
necks Inconvenient.
with the Eyes and Nostrils of a man, as also with a bill adorned with Gils
like a Cock. Aldrovandus (indeed) says, it will more avail one to read than
believe this Relation; yet he denies not but there are halfe-men with a long
Neck, and a ferine Face, do live in those Regions, their women being not so
deformed as the men, and they are said to be very seldom seen. This Nation is
carried with great force against their Enemies, and chiefly against the
Tartars. Aldrovandus has exhibited the Effigies of these Gangrell-Neck'd men
to be considered of by his Readers; Aldrov. monst. Hist. lib. 1.
which puts me in mind of that ridiculous wish of Philoxones, that grumbled at
Nature for the shortness of his Neck, who would have had the Neck of a Crane,
that thereby he might have taken more pleasure in his meat, or as some think,
to obtain advantage in singing or warbling, and dividing the notes in Music;
which Cavil of Philoxones against Nature, for not having respect unto the
Taste, or singing, in the contrivance of his Neck, is absurd, and in the very
foundation of the fancy to be condemned, D. Brown Pseudodoxia. Epid. lib. 7.
cap. 14.
as it is ingeniously observed by the late Enquirer into vulgar errors. And if
he had obtained this foolish request, yet the justness of Nature could not
have suffered him to have been a gainer by the bargain; for, a long gangrell
neck, which would have made the head look as set upon a pole, would by such an
elongation, caused a very inconvenient distance between the brain and the
heart; but the Epicure surely had a more reaching conceit, Nations that have no
Neck
knowing that they are more greedy of meat, and have better stomachs, who have
a greater space from the mouth to the paunch.

That there are Nations that have no Neck, Solin. cap. 153. Plin. lib. 7. c. 4.
C^rdan. de rerum varietate lib. 8. cap. 42.
Solinus affirms. Pliny says, that not far from the Troglodites there are
certain men that have no Neck. In the Province of Old Port in the West Indies,
there are men that want a Neck, my Author means that part of the Neck that is
next to the Atlantic Vertebra; not that they are altogether without Neck, but
they have but a little and short one; Neither are these Histories so
incredible, since many have been borne without Necks. Aldrovandus has
exhibited the figures in several postures of an Infant borne at Basil without
a Neck, according to the relation of Lycosthenes in the month of August 1557.
with the other members very well formed, only the Face was monstrous,
especially it was not eminent above the Neck, for it wanted that part.
Aldrovandus has also exhibited the picture of a monstrifique child, that
looked like Bacchus, which was an Embrion, to wit, an immature fruit of five
months, wanting a Neck and Forehead, Nations without a Neck.
but having a most broad Face. Neither is it impossible, as I have elsewhere
said, that men may live without a Neck; for it may happen, either by the
constitution of the Climate, or some kind of Artifice, that the Neck may not
appear advanced above the Shoulders, and yet the Instruments of Nature may
perform their office in a nearer approach of the Neck unto the Body, which is
the opinion of Kornmannus.

They that inhabit those Alps which divide France from Italy, their throats
are increased to that bulk and largeness, that both in men and women those
gutturall bottles hang down even to their Navels, and they can cast them over
their shoulders; and this is not commonly seen in the Allobroges Carinthians,
Syrians, and Nations living about the Alps, but it is also familiar to some
places of Spain. Fabricius ab Aqua pend.
Fabricius says, that such Tumors are frequent among the Bergomensians, where
the men and women all, for the most part, have such great pendent bags in the
forepart of their Throats. Joan. Stumpf. lib. Chr. 10. cap. 20.
Among the Rucantians, a people of Helvetia, now called Rhaeti, the
Inhabitants, especially about the Town Ciceres, are troubled with the same
gutturall deformity. M. Pol. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Neither does this happen only in Europe, but also in Asia; for, the men there
have such great wallets of flesh after a wonderful manner hanging at their
throats. But in Syria the women have their throats so protended, that they cast
it behind their back, as it were a Sack or Wallet, Ortel. in Illyrico.
lest it should hinder their Infants when they suck.

This swelling, or Throat-Dropsie, The cause of swelling throats.
is occasioned by the drinking of crude waters of dissolved Snow, as most
Authors suppose; which although it be a reason not to be rejected, Platerus.
yet Platerus to this Cause adds the Seed, and the Faculty Formatrix in the
womb, where they are familiar to any place, and that they are rather
propagated from the Parents in their Children, then that they happen by reason
of any meat or drink, or any other peculiar cause; which Sennertus thinks
does not seldom fall out so indeed; yet the first cause seems valid, because
it is observed that they that come well into any such places, after they have
abode there a while, they contract such a water between the skin and rough
Artery, which is called by Physicians Bronchocele, and Bocium a Bocii
ventricosi poculi similitudine, from the similitude of a great-bellied drinking
Cup.

Shoulders higher than the Head.
SCENE XVII. Humerall, or Shoulder-Affectations.
Lycost. Append Chron. prodig.
IN the Island Taprobana, High huff-Shoulders are in Fashion, and Natural.

The Wywapanami, a people in the West Indies, Purch. Pilgr. 4.
their Shoulders are higher than their Heads.

Whether these Nations are guilty or not of using Art to this purpose, I shall
not conclude, although I half suspect some concurrent affectations. My
apprehension of this business I have already expressed in the History of the
Acephali, which appear to be the same Nation.

In all the parts of Tartaria the men are broad-shouldered, which being
National, is held there in good repute: And if it were not at first affected
and introduced among them by Art, Broad shoulders where affected.
yet in other Countries, where it is noted to be extremely affected, there has
been some endeavor used to that intent, and where that has failed, they have
had recourse to outward supplements.

Concerning the Italians, Cresol. vacat. Autumn.
Cresollius has informed us of their ridiculous affectation in this kind:
Behold (says he) what the improvident curiosity of men has thought on, who
that they might seem Plato's, that is, broad-shouldred, full, square, and
somewhat strong, and mighty men, they bumbast their Doublets, and after a
childish, or rather, womanish manner, adhibent Analectides, use little Bolsters
or Pillows for to seem more fat and comely, bolstring so up their prominent
shoulders, as little women were wont to do of old, as Ovid describes the
Custom; Convenient tenues scapulis Analectides altis,
Angustum circa fascia pectus erat.


Well, could these men be Masters of their wish, yet it is a question whether
it would please their Mistrisses: For, the women of other Countries, and among
us, are not so well affected to broad shoulders; for it is worth the noting,
what women by long use have observed, to wit, that men that have broad
shoulders, for the most part, get great Children. Hence the Mother-in-Law of
Forestus, a fruitful woman, would not match her Daughters to Platonique men,
by reason she feared least in their Delivery they should be endangered by
reason of the greatness of the Child, which Forestus had often seen to
happen, the broad shoulders dangerously sticking in the Birth, Narrow shoulders
affected.
the cause whereof Riolanus thinks to be difficult: whence you may see what
work they make for the women, who endeavor by Art to purchase thick and broad
shoulders.

Narrow and contracted shoulders were esteemed so proper to women of old, that
they affected this composure of the shoulders, and as some think, learnt it
very diligently in their Palestra's as a great elegancy and beauty. Wherefore
Terence, in the Description of a hansome slender woman, makes her to have
demissos humeros, as it were pinioned shoulders. Cocles the famous Philosopher
reports, that he knew and saw sundry women in his time, which drew by Art, and
through their beastiall enduments, the shoulder-points so near together, that
they formed in a manner the like unto Osventris in the part behind,, and they
garnished and beautified these with Cosmeticall waters. This Cocles also noted
sundry Italians and fond French men, which he aptly names by that byword
Hermaphroditi, that exercised the like practice with their shoulder-points; A
matter which seems, in my opinion, incredible to be exercised of any
faithful Christian. The Right shoulder higher than the Left.
But the Physiognomer seems truly to utter what he saw and knew in Bononia,
his own Country, and in sundry other places.

The Maids of France, especially the more noble Virgins, their Right shoulders
are higher and bigger than the Left, so that among a hundred Virgins you shall
scarce find ten which have their shoulders handsome; the cause whereof,
Riolanus problematically offers at thus: Riol. Anat.
Whether it be by reason of the more valid motion of the right Arm, whereby
the Scapula is distracted, and abscedes, and grows prominent with the
interjected Muscles which raise it up, whether because the Lungs incline more
to the Right side than the Left; or whether it be that Nurses when they begin
to teach Children to go, are wont to draw them by the Right Hand: Citatus per
Neiremberg Hist, Not.
A thing to be well considered of by them who would not have their Children
Crump-shouldered.

Franciscus Hernandus in his Manuscript makes report of certain Nations in
India who are all buncht-backt, crooked and crump-shouldered.

Crook'd-backt Nations.
Whether it happen to them by Nature or Artificall affectation I shall not here
dispute; but verily if this foolish Custom of straight -- lacing were a little
more Epidemicall, and the ill effects of that Artifice more propagated by
Custom and interchangeable marriages of such gibbous persons, the Corporal
uprightness of our erect stature would in time be converted into crookedness,
and our straight Figure bowed into a national Gibbositie. For among the
external Causes of the Transformation of man, and a deformed issue, Physicians
justly reckon the Hereditary or accidentary diseases of the Parents, since by
reason of those, there follow many times monstrous productions: So we see lame
Children borne of lame Parents, and crookbackt of the Gibbous, and for this
cause, often saddle-nosed men beget saddle-nosed children, Stutterers
Stutterers, Dwarfes Dwarfes, and lame men a lame Progeny; for, the Seed
proceeding weaker from the maimed part, it is no wonder if they prove lame as
the Parents were. Thus the race of the Macrocephali were for a while continued.
Arist. 1 Generat. Anim. 17.
Examples of this truth there might be many produced. Aristotle reports, that
in Chalcedon, a Father that had his Arm marked with certain spots, the Son
got by him, represented the same, but with a confused note. Natural Marks.
Among the people called Dakes, the Children usually carry the marks,
imprinted in their Arms, of them from whom they are descended, even to the
fourth Generation. Bauhinus speaks of one George Hertz a Shoemaker, In libro
de Hermoph.
who having the great Toe of one of his feet of an extraordinary size, his only
Daughter had the like great Toe, which was then first observed when he was
jealous of his Wife, because he had lived many years with her, and had no
Children by her till then. And I knew one, who having a short little finger,
knew all his Children to be his by that eare-marke. It is also seen, says
Pliny, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
that Infants are at default of such parts as their Parents miss; yet it must
(with Pliny) be confessed, that Children are not always answerable to the
Parents in every respect; for, of perfect Fathers and Mothers, who have all
their Limbs, there are sometimes begotten Children unperfect, and wanting some
Members: And contrariwise, there are Parents maimed and defective in some part,
who nevertheless engender Children that are sound and entire, and with all
that they should have.

Arme-gallanry.
SCENE XVIII. Strange Inventions of certain Nations in ordering their Arms,
Hands and Nails.
IN the Province of Cardandam, in the great Chan Tartars jurisdiction, Purch.
Pilgr. 3. lib. 1.
the men about their Arms make Lists, pricking the places with Needles, and
putting therein a black indeleable tincture, and these Lists or marks are
esteemed with them a great gallantry.

The Inhabitants of the town Alimamu in Malhada, Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 8.
have their arms and thighs Oakred and dyed with red, black, white and yellow,
striped like unto panes, Little Hands where affected
so as they show as if they were in Hose and Doublets.

In little Venice, by the Gulf of Paria, Lindscot. l. 2.
the women, who are proud, paint their Arms and Breasts.

The Egyptian Moors, both men and women, Purch. Pilgr. ^. lib. 7.
brand their Arms for love of each other.

In Portugal little long hands are in fashion, and accounted a great beauty in
women; wherefore they use Art to have them so, wrapping the hands of their
Female Children from their Infancy in Clothes, and binding them straight in
with fillets, whereby they constrain them to grow narrow, and to run out in
length. An ingenious Gentleman, a Merchant, upon the credit of whose Relation I
have presented this affectation, assures me, that Gentlewomen and Ladies of
Lisbon have for the most part such small hands, and that this tradition of
their Artifice is there generally acknowledged. The Spanish women are noted to
have the least hands of any women in the World, and it seems probable to me
that they have achieved it by the same Artifice; and whether they began the
affectation to the Portugal women, Painted hands affected.
or the Portugals, at the second hand of Tradition, imitated their practice, I
leave to the Inquisitive Readers further inquiry.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 8.
The Abassines color their hands with the juice of a Reddish Bark.

Herberts Travels.
The Persians paint their hands into a red or tawny color, which both cooles
their Livers, and makes them in War victorious. The common women to show they
are servants to Dame Flora, (in her days a good one) they illustrate their
Arms and Hands, their Legs and Feet with Flowers and Birds.

Prosp. Alpinus lib. de plant. Egypt. c. 13.
The Egyptian women love golden Golls, who of the leaves of Cyprus, an oriental
tree, which the Egyptians call Elhannae, or Tamarrendi, make a Powder, which
they call Archenda: This they use for ornament to color their hands and feet,
tempering it with water, which makes a golden Tincture.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
In Candou Island accounted to Asia, it is the fashion to make the Nails of
their Hands red, this is the beauty of their Country; they make it with the
juice of a certain tree, and it endures as long as their nails.

The Turks paint their long nails red. Sandys in his Travels says, the women
paint their nails with a yellowish red. Mag. Geogr.
Maginus says, they infect their Hair, Hands, and Feet, especially their
Nails with a red color. Georg. Draudius Comment. in Solin. memorabilia
Africae.
This Tincture of their Nails, it seems, is imposed after their Lent, at the
Celebration of their Pascha, which in their Tongue they call Bairam, when with
great solemnity for three days they dawbe the nails of their hands and feet
with a certain oil, Long Nails a sign of Gentility.
called by them Chua, which makes their nails ruddy yellow. This color sticks
tenatiously, and can neither be washed or rubbed off; wherefore unless their
nails grow out new from the root, they always appear of that Rutilant
color, but off their hands it may be scoured with frequent ablution; the women
imbue not only their nails, but their hands and feet with the same.

The Persians paint their nails party-colored, Herberts Travels.
white and vermilion: but why so, my Author cannot say, unless in imitation of
King Cyrus, who in augmentation of honor caused his Heroes to tincture their
nails and Faces with Vermilion, sensibly to distinguish them from the Vulgar
sort, as did the ancient Britains in fight, to show more terrible.

In the Kingdom of Goer they paint their nails with yellow; De Bry descrip.
Ind. pars 9.
and the nobler any one is, so much the longer is his nails, so that he is the
best Gentleman whose nails appear like Eagles claws.

In Calecut the women have the Nails of their fingers prominent, Idem.
colored, cut, and jagged round.

Naile-Painters condemned.
These Nations who thus paint their Nails, offend against the virtue of
ornamentall Decorum, Decency, or reverence, in this unnatural excess of care,
being not contented with the natural beauty of the nail, and by their foolish
bravery, they obscure the natural light and splendour of their nails, which
arises from that lucid and pellucid temperament of a more clear substance,
which presents us in a glass the splendor of the Lucent principle, and inward
clarity of the vital spirits, wherein the ample study of Chyromancy is
conversant. The Egyptians to advance this splendor were wont of old to gild
the nails of the Dead, as appears by their Mummies: which Custom the women
in latter times in the Oriental parts have taken up, who as an argument of a
certain beauty, gild their Nails, as if they had heard Hipocrates, Hipoc.
progn. lib.
that it is, an ill Omen, and a sign of one like to dye, if their Nails
decline to a livid or obscure color.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7. De Bry Hist. Ind.
The Guineans, who have long fingers and strong hands, suffer their nails to
grow very long, it being held among them the greatest comeliness, and the more
prominent they are, they are esteemed more Noble; these they keep very cleanly
with scraping and rubbing, that they look like polished Ivory: Some of them let
them grow as long as the joint of a man's finger, which they esteem for a great
ornament, for that cause thinking themselves to be Gentlemen. The Merchants
that dwell within Land have good use of them; for that sometimes when they have
not a spoone by them, and that they unty their Purses to weigh Gold, Very long
Nails affected.
and wanting a spoone to take out for haste they use their long nails, and
therewith put their Gold into the Scales, half an ounce at a time they will
take out of small Gold like sand.

The Nayres, Purch Pilgr. 2. lib. 10.
which are Soldiers and people among the Malabars, wear their nails very
long, whereby they show that they are Gentlemen, that being a sign of idle
Gentility, because the longness of nails does let or hinder men from working
or doing any labor; which had been a better reason if Nature had not fitted
the hand for labor. But they have a more tolerable reason, for they say
likewise that they do it the better and faster to gripe a thing in their hands,
and to hold their Rapiers; which some Portugals and Mesticoes do likewise, and
hold the same opinion with the Nayres, whereof there are many in India that let
their Nails grow for the same cause, as a sign of a Gentleman, and one not
used to sordid labors.

In China some of them wear Nails of half a quarter and a quarter long, Idem
Pilgr. 3. lib. 1. Maffaeus hist. Ind. lib. 6.
which they keep very clean; and these Nails do serve them instead of Forkes
to eat withal; the use of silver Forkes which our Gallants so much used of
late was no doubt an imitation of this. Long Nails a great Nobility.


Sir Joh. Mand. Travels. c. 106.
In the Kingdom of great Cane, it is a great Nobility to have very long nails
on the hands, and they let their nails grow as long as they can, and some let
them grow so long that they come about their hands, and that is a great honor
and Gentility. Grimston of their manners.
In another Historian I find, that they do all suffer the nails of their left
hand to grow very long, and wear them of their right hand very short; and this
wearing of long nails is not without superstition, for they say they shall be
taken up into heaven by their long hair (of which they are curious) and their
great nails. Yet these are the men who with much babbling, brag, saying, that
they have two Eyes, and that they of Europe have but one, and all other are
blind.

Nearch, in Navigat. ad Indos.
Nearchus says, the Inhabitants at the River Thomeras have hard and sharp
nails, wherewith they killed Fish, and cut softer wood, for they had no use of
Iron) the harder wood they cut with stones.

Purch: Pilgr. 2. lib. 2.
The Abassines suffer their Nails on their fingers to grow as long as they
will, like Cock spurs, which also they sometimes cut from Cocks and fit to
their fingers.

Idem. Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
In a certain Island in Eight Degrees, as Sir Francis Drake sailed from Nova
Albion, the people have Nails on their fingers of an inch long.

Among the Tapuians the King is distinguished by the most long Nails upon his
Thumbes. Long Nails affected by women.
De Bry hist. Ind.
His Kinsmen, and his other Ministers of War have long nails on all their
fingers except their Thumb, long Nails among them being accounted a most
comely and beautiful wearing; but to wear long nails upon the powerful
Master-finger, is a Prerogative Royal, which yet is point of State in Turkey,
Graves Descr. of his Court.
for the Grand Signiour has his Turnackgee Bashaw, whose office it is to pare
the Kings Nails.

They of Java wear long nails. De Bry Hist. Ind. Caelius l. 18.


The Cedrosti, and Brasileans never pare their Nails, but suffer them to grow
as long as they live.

In Cumana it is one of the points of bravery with the principal women to
wear long nails; De Bry Hist. Ind.
A dangerous fashion if taken up here with us.

In Florida (also) the women let their nails grow long, Jacob. de Mayn. de
Florida.
scraping them on the sides that they become acute, but especially the men; for
if they can apprehend any of our men, in fixing their nails in the Fronts of
them, they claw off the skin, and leave them blind and torn.

I am informed by a Friend that has been in Persia, that observed the Custom,
The dignity of the Nails maintained.
that the Persians wear long nails, and that it is accounted with them a sign
of Gentility; these long nails are painted as you heard before; which
nailerites are so considerable among them, that our Merchants that are resident
there, conform unto their custom, which my Friend observed in one Master
Hunnywood an Agent there for the East India Company.

To defend the Dignity and Majesty of Nature in the increase of Nails, Galen
says, because either with scratchings, or other actions the ends of them wear
away, Nature has allowed these parts only a power of continual increase,
although the whole body has left off to be increased. Not as other parts in
all the dimentions of length, breadth, and profundity, but in length only,
other new nails always growing under the old, and driving forward the old.
Neither was this institution vain, but in supplement and reparation of the
decay of nails, by which device the construction of the nails was brought up
to the highest pitch of Natures Providence, whose will, verily, in commending
the providence of Nature is commendable. But Ulmus goes a better way to defend
this notable provision of Nature, affirming that her ineffable wisdom had no
respect in giving that power to the Nails, to any thing imperfect, but rather
very perfect; for, this argument is referred to warn the natural soul that
it should not be loath or ashamed to descend to conform and take care for the
Body (also;) which admonition and descention does not only elevate the forces
of our Soul, but rather very much increase them: for she collects this,
admonished by such an example, (for she is rational,) If I must descend to the
Body, why should I not also ascend to higher things? The growth of nails
profitable.
This agitation of the mind about corporal parts, and the ever-growing nails,
makes the Soul more boldly and ventrously to reflect upon it self, and to
investigate better things. Wherefore these parts and motions of the soul, to
conserve them, may be assimilated to sin, which sometimes becomes profitable to
the transgressour: So we compare these monsters of time and place to sins, for
they teach the utility and commodity of the natural work. We tremble to
pronounce any thing in Nature to be besides Nature: but this necessary care
about the perpetual increment of nails we may affirm to bring many
commodities to mankind. Hunger is the beginning of our contemplation, which
happens by reason of the dissipation of those things which constitute our
bodies, being occult, and a thing which escapes the reach of our Senses: who
ever condemned this Hunger? none ever; because it is the work of Nature,
working naturally, and admonishing us of alition, and the work of the
Nutrative faculty. Hunger would not happen unless the parts of the Body did
decrease, the sense of which decrement when it comes upon us, is called Hunger;
the perpetual increment of the Nails is correspondent to the decrement of
Hunger; for, as Hunger admonishes us that something is to be taken, that the
dissipated substance may be repaired: In like sort this increase of the Nails
puts us in mind that we must detract somewhat that these parts may be
commoderate to the operation of Nature, and no way hinder or disturb her; for,
when the extravagant nails grow too long, by that importune accrement, they
hinder the tops of the fingers if men be to use them upon employment. These
Nations then that are so unpolitick, may justly be called wild men, The
reforming of the Nails a noble care.
of a sordid disposition, from whence perchance the appellation of Secordes is
derived; for they carry those parts with themselves, which come to be rejected
with for did things and recrements. These therefore, who are so Salvage and far
estranged from humane life, as not to abhor the sordid toleration of their
growth, which very much displeases us, when by any neglect they gain an
extravagant and claw-like aspect, have little care or respect of their own
bodies. Not but that the increment of the Nails is very natural, and the care
of these (though small things) is in very Nature; nay, the care of these parts
is more noble than the care of our nourishment, since the care of them
appertains to reason, and to the practick Intellect; and by how much the
practick Intellect is more noble than the nutrient Soul, so much to a more
noble order does the care of the Nails in conforming them to the Law of Nature
appertain. And this care is so proper to man, that it has its virtues and
vice, which yet is very difficult to be understood by common wits. For as the
Advancer of Learning says, it has parts Civil, and parts Effeminate; For,
cleanness and the civil beauty of the body was ever esteemed to proceed from
a modesty of behavior and a due reverence in the first place toward God,
whose Creatures we are, then toward Society wherein we live, and then toward
our selves, whom we ought no less, nay much more to revere than we do any
others. Now, the Nails are existent parts which always (almost) grow; and
when they incur such an excess of an increased quantity, they do but hinder the
operations of the humane Soul, and when they decline from their proper Mode of
quantity, and increase further, the Deduction and Moderation of their
Excrescency to a just extendure, is to the benefit of the Intellect that
imployeth them; this is called Cultus: Increase of nails a prerogative.
the vice of this denominated virtue is Squalor, the other extreme is
Delitium, nomine ficto, non fictitio. Although this be accounted in the Roll of
Virtues, it is yet distinguished by the calculation of Sex, Age, and perchance
institution of life. Now the Organs of the practique Intellect are to rectify
and regulate the excrescent, supercrescent, and ever-crescent parts; for, in
all parts there is an appointed end, a certain commoderation of the quantity
of parts to the actions of them, according to the faculties using the Organ in
the Body. Neither are Nails extra hominem, unless in carcasses and those
buried: And their continual increase in man is an Argument of a Divine Nature,
a prerogative in which beasts cannot participate, and teaches us charity to
our Bodies. The neglect of this charity proves not only an inconvenience, but
as some think, long Nails is a sin, to avoid which Adam in the estate of
innocence in Paradise, before Instruments of Iron were found, perchance bit his
Nails: Yet surely in the state of Innocence his abode in Paradise was so
short, that no inconvenience could happen unto him this way, nor any necessity
enforce him to cut his nails; although he had too just a cause to bite his
nails afterward. Verily it is observed that Nature in the Nails has showed
us as a Law of amputation, whilst in Children, when they grow long, they
naturally fall off, until becoming harder, they cannot be so commodiously
separated by Nature alone. And therefore by no worse a Law of Nature do we cut
our Nails than our Hair, lest they should grow into an odious and hooked
curvity. Unnatural stovens therefore are they who never pare them, The use of
the Nails.
and very little have they to show themselves Gentlemen who have nothing but
long nails as the Crests of idle Gentility. It Is true, the nails do decrease
and wear by labor, and idleness no way arrests their increase, according to
the doctrine of Galen, which these men's fancies approve. And therefore the
observation is not so subtle (as Mercurialis notes) which Cardan speaks of in
his book de subtilitate, to wit, that he saw one who all his lifetime had no
need to cut his nails. For, the Rusticks and most of your handicraft-men never
pare their nails, because they wear away of their own accord in their
working; yet the end of their perpetual growth is not to repair their decay
by working, since if men never work yet their nails grow. The Nails (again)
have that order among the similar parts of the hand, that they are not in the
number of them that perform an action, but of those that are subservient, for
they were made for the better apprehension; their situation and hardness
gives them this. And therefore the other reason of the Nayros, Portugals, and
Mestichos, who were them long for the better griping and holding fast their
Rapiers, may better pass, since there is some allowance to be given to men
whose profession may be advantaged by a more extravagant extent of the Nail.
But for women to nourish long Nails as a beauty, is a strange Solecisme, and a
greater breach of the Law of Nature; especially si dantur ungues sexuales, as
some hold in the Affirmative. Nature as Galen observes, allows strong Nails
only to them that have strong Teeth, because strong nails answer to strong
teeth, and so upon the contrary; Plato therefore writes, that the Nails were
made Notae gratia, for a figurative token; Nails, no Arms.
For since man was among mild Creatures, either because he has reason, which
much conduces to mansuetude, he ought not to have strong nails, since he has
not strong Teeth; much less has that impotent Sex any color of pretense to
long and strong nails, since the nails were never intended as weapons of
offensive scratching, either in man or woman. Alcibiades (as the Marquess of
Malvezzi well observes) contending with another Boy, makes use of his Teeth and
Nails, peradventure to shame him whom he could not hurt, and being not able to
strike would mark him; his enemy taxes him for being womanish, to fight with
such instruments as were not given him by Nature for that purpose; He glories
to be Lion-like. Nails commonly serve men and beasts to cover the extremity of
Veins, Sinews, and Arteries, that the natural, animal, and vital spirits
might not evaporate that way; they also serve many beasts, in particular for
offensive and defensive arms. If Nature does not purge the humors by
convenient ways, it is either too weak, or too much oppressed; if a man vents
his wrath with unbeseeming weapons, either his rage swelling too high makes him
mad, or his weakness casts him down. The shape of the mouth, the situation of
it, the weakness of Teeth, are all evident signs that Nature did not place
them there for his defense: And who will imagine the nails to be man's arms,
seeing that when he will fight he hides them, and whereas other Creatures
strike with an open paw, he only fights with a closed fist? But since they
wear them for a beauty, it may be they have some such like conceit as
Aristophanes puts upon the Philosophers, who kept their nails unpared, not for
miserableness, Monstrosities of Arms.
that they would not part with the paring of their nails, lest with the
parings of their nails they should lose and communicate some portion of
Wisdom diffused throughout their Limbs. So these conceited women seem too
loath to part with this dangerous piece of affected beauty, lest perchance they
should lose so firm and precious a particle of their delicate substance, or
want too opportune a weapon fitted by Art, to wreake their impotent revenge,
upon any provocation of their Cat-like valor.

Many Monstrosities and depraved conformations have appeared in the Arms and
Hands; and many have been borne without Arms: Near Esselinga Nechari there
was a Monster borne, Lycost. lib. prodig. Anno 1528
to wit, an Infant with one Head, four Ears, four Arms, and as many Feet.

Idem lib. eodem.
Anno Domini 1389 there was an Infant borne, having four Arms, and as many
Legs, who lived until he was baptized.

Pataeus oper. suor. l. 24. c. 2.
Jovianus Pontanus reports, that Anno Domini 1529. the seventh day of January,
there was seen in Germany a Male Infant with four Arms, and as many Legs.

Idem eodem lib. cap. 4.
On the same day that the Venetians and Genuensians entered into a League, there
was borne in Italy a Monster with four Arms and four Feet, endowed but with
one Head; which being baptized lived sometimes after; Jacobus Rueffius the
Helvetian Surgeon declares, that he saw the like, but who had over and
above, the Genitals both of the Male and Female.

Jul. obsequens.
Tit. Graccus, and M. Juventius Consuls, there were boys born with four Hands,
and four Feet.

P. Crassus, and Q. Scaevola being Consuls, Monstrous Nations with many arms.
there was a Boy borne with three hands, Idem.
and as many feet.

M. Marcellus, P. Sulpitius Consuls, Idem.
there was a Boy borne with four hands, and as many Feet.

At Venafrum there was a Boy borne with three hands, and as many Feet. Jac.
Rueff. l. 5. de Concept. ex Romans Hist.
Some other Histories of fourefold Arms we pass by.

But these are hardly to be accounted Monsters who have such a Multiplication
of Arms, because there are many Nations who appear with such a Brachiall
Redundancy; for, Lycost. in sua Historia.
the Portugals sailing in the mid way to Calecut (where the Dog Star cannot be
seen) they found in a certain Island men provided with two Arms, and as many
Hands on the right side, with Asses Ears, and a Man's Face, who run like Hearts.
And we find it recorded in the Acts of Alexander the Great, Idem.
King of Macedon, that in India there were men endowed with six Arms, and as
many Hands, who all their life time incur no sickness, which was believed to
be another species of men.

C. Valerius, M. Herennius Consuls, Jul. obsequens.
a maid brought forth a Boy with one hand.

Salmuthus speaks of a Boy who altogether wanted his Left hand, Salm. obser.
Cent. 1. obs. 15.
in place whereof he obtained the fore-foot of a Cat, a miserable Spectacle.

P. Africanus, and Laelius Consuls, Idem.
at Amiternum there was a Boy borne with one hand and three feet.

In Tartaria there is found a Nation that have but one Arm, and one Leg and
Foot, of whom you may hear more in the three and twentieth Scene.

Many also have appeared without Arms. Men without Arms.


And even now while this Impression of man's Transformation was working off,
there was publicly to be seen a young man borne at Hagbourne, within four
miles of Abbington, whose name is John Simons, born without Arms, Hands,
Thighs, or Knees; who had no joint in his Knees, but one continued bone from
his Hip unto his Foot; not in height above three quarters of an Ell from head
to foot, and yet from the wast upward as proportionable a body as any ordinary
man wanting his Arms, and from the waste downward not a full quarter of a yard
in the Twist; He is about twenty years of Age, he writes with his mouth, he
threads a Needle with his mouth, he tyeth a knot upon thread or hair, though
it be never so small, with his mouth, he feeds himself with spoon-meat, he
Shuffels, Cuts, and Deals a pack of Cards with his mouth.

An observing Divine, a Traveller, and friend of mine, told me upon occasion of
Discourse of this armelesse man, that he saw in Cheapside London, but few days
before, a child that was borne without Arms, and had two little hands, which
it could move, standing out of its shoulders, a poor woman had the child in
her arms, begging with it.

Idem. Lycost. l. prod. and ostent. p. 141 ex Romans Histor. Com. ad lib. 3.
Tech. Galeni. Text. 177.
T. Gracchus, M. Iuventius Consuls, at Privenum there was a Girl born without
a hand.

In Picenum there was an Infant borne without hands and feet. Haly Rodoham
says, he had seen a man (who was then alive) who had neither hands nor feet.
Anno 1591, Feet used for Hands.
Incert. Author.
February 8th. there was a Female born at Strausburge who wanted all her
fingers both of her hands and feet, and lived to the ninth of July following.
It is not omitted by Dion, Dion.
how that among other presents sent from the Indians to Augustus, there was a
little youth without Arms, who yet with his feet performed the exploits of
hands; for he could bend a Bow, shoot an Arrow, and moreover sound a Trumpet.
We have seen, says Alexander Benedictus, Alex. Benedict
a woman borne without Arms, Sim. Majolus.
using her Feet for hands in spinning and sewing. Simon Majolus reports to have
seen such Creatures often in Italy. The Learned may find a world of such
Histories in Skenckius and Aldrovandus; And the recompense of this error (as
they call it) of Nature, Tulp. obser. med. l. 3. c. 54. Lotich. obser. lib. 6.
cap. 2. obser. 4, and 5.
in a British woman, in Tulpius, and in Lotichius, of an English and a Dutch
woman strangely recompensed; in as much as some admiring the wonderful
dexterity of men of distorted, lamed, or dibilitated members, or who are
altogether deprived of them, how they for the most part use other members
besides their office they were ordained for, have thought one might say,
considering the force of Custom, which is another Nature, that perfection did
not consist in the distinction of members, but in their continual use.

The ordinary Complement with Nature upon such occasions, is, That Her
unsearchable industry, as it with great wittiness appears every where, yet
more eminently in those bodies wherein as 'twere unmindfull of her charge or
business she has frustrated of this or that member, Sedigiti.
which error, as it were, with some shamefac'dnesse she abundantly
recompenceth by a munificent liberality.

Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 43. Gel. l. 15. c. 24. Petr. Crin. l. 3. de
poetis, c. 65.
Some men there be that have six fingers upon one hand; Pliny reports, that M.
Curiatius, a Nobleman of Rome, had two Daughters so handed: whereupon they were
Surnamed Sedigitae; He speaks also of one Volcatius, who was an excellent
Poet, who had six fingers to one hand, whereupon he was Surnamed Sedigitus.

Haly Rhod. Com. ad. lib. 3. Tech. Galen. number. 177. Jac. Rueff. de concept.
generat. homin. lib. 5.
Haly says, he had often seen a finger added.

Iacobus Rueffus records of some that are borne with superabundant parts of
their members, one having twelve fingers upon his hands.

There was a monstrous Boy, about fifteen years of age, seen at Arelat, Anno
1561. in the month of July, Valor. lib. 4. observe. 2.
who had six fingers on each hand, but in his Left hand the ring and middle
finger were joined together without any space at all between them, this Boys
hands were broad.

Corvus the Chyromancer, and H. Vuolfius affirm that they had seen such.

Franc. Joh. Post. ad Schenck. dat is observe.
In a certain Town, called Kittinga, Postthius says, he saw an honest Matron
with six fingers on a hand, who brought forth a Son who had as many fingers.

Aldr. Monst. Hist.
Aldrovandus was informed from men worthy of credit, that lately in the Country
of Ferrara, viz. Anno 1579. on the twenty fourth day of July about Evening,
there was a monster borne with four Arms, every of whose hands were bounded
with six fingers.

Salmuthus says, A sixth finger unprofitable.
he knew a certain Counselors Daughters of Leipsick, who obtained six
fingers on either hand, one was taken off from the right hand, but there
remained almost more deformity than before, this maid also was less handy
about any business, on which occasion 'twas doubted, or made a quaery, after
what sort therefore in our Bibles the Giant of Gath was reported to be stronger
than others, 2 Samuel 21.
in respect of his six fingers on his hands and feet. Since according to
Pliny, Plin. l. 11. c. 52.
look what part is more than ordinary by Nature in any living Creature, the
same serves to no use. As for example, the sixth finger in a man's hand is ever
superfluous, and therefore fit for nothing. Yet Caelius says, Coelius Rodig.
Antiq. Lec. 17. cap. 12.
he saw in Bononia a certain poor Plebean, who had six fingers in both hands,
inserted between the Ear and Ring finger, answerable in greatness to the
rest, being besides movable, and accomodated as is wont for every use, his
hands were of a remarkable breadth, there being nothing besides that was less
comely. Which he was the willinger to take notice of, that we might know, that
it is no judicial Statute that those parts that are agnatae, or more than
ordinary by Nature, are unprofitable, and of no effect. Certainly the hand of
man consists of five fingers, and if any thing arise in the body which exceeds
the number appointed by Nature, it ought to be referred to a Disease which
consists in number of parts, and if that which redounds appear in the natural
shape, as a sixth finger which has bones and nails sometimes does, it denotes
a superabundance of profitable matter, although it is very seldom seen that
this supernumerary redundancy does advantage any. Nations without Hands.


But what is more wonderful and worthy of a further enquiry, Odor. Poster.
Kornman. de Mirac. vivorum.
is, That there is a Nation that wants hands; a great many of which un-handed
monsters are to be seen in the Palace of the great Cham. The sad condition
that a Nation must needs be in who wants this Instrument of Instruments the
Hand, makes me reflect upon a rapture of our Chirosophy: What were the World
without a hand? whose force
Like the first Mover's most impetuous course
Sets all the Orbs of Trading, and the Spheres
Of Arts into their mystical Careeres;
Whose standing still, would as prodigious prove,
As if that the first Mover should not move.
For upon the Cessation of the Hand
All things would be at an enforced stand:
Down goes all Staples, and that free Commerce
Which entertaines the busy Universe:
Endeavor struck, as with a sudden dampe,
Would bring on Trade a universal crampe;
For, Traffic would but have poor empty veins,
All Manufactures ceasing with their gains.
Friendship would fail, and Charity grow cold,
And man to sloth and idlensse be sold;
And so would have, by having naught to do,
More business than he well could turn unto.


Man naturally both comes in, and goes out of the world empty handed; yet I
saw in London the other day an Italian, one Francis Battalia by name, about
thirty years of Age, A Stone-Eater
who was borne with two stones in one hand, and one in the other; who as soon
as he was borne, having the breast offered unto him, refused to suck, and when
they would have fed him with Papp, he utterly rejected that also, whereupon the
Midwife and Nurse entering into consideration of the strangeness of his birth,
and refusal of all kind of nourishment, consulted with some Physicians what
they should do in this case: They when they saw the Infant rejected all that
they could contrive for nourishment, told the women, that they thought that the
Child brought its meat with it into the world, and that it was to be nourished
with stones, whereupon they wished the Nurse to give him one stone in a little
drink, which he very readily took into his mouth and swallowed down, and when
he had swallowed all the three stones, and began to want his hard-meat, the
Physicians advised the nurse to get some small pebles, as like those which he
was borne with as they could, with the which kind of nourishment he was brought
up, and now in this stone-devouring-age, lest pebles should be too plentiful
and cheap, he subsists here among us with the same kind of aliment. His manner
is to put three or four stones into a spoone, and so putting them into his
mouth together, swallows them all down one after another; then (first spitting)
he drinks a glass of beer after them, he devours about half a pecke of these
stones every day: and when he chinks upon his stomach, or shakes his body, you
may hear the stones rattle as if they were in a sack, all which in twenty
four hours are resolved, Glass-Devourers.
and once in three weeks he voids a great quantity of sand by seige; after
which digestion of them, he has a fresh appetite to these stones as we have to
our victuals, and by these, with a cup of Beer, and a pipe of Tobacco, he has
his whole subsistence; He has attempted to eat meat, and bread, broth, and
milk, and such kind of food, upon which other Mortals commonly live; but he
could never brook any, neither would they stay with him to do him any good. He
is a black swarthish little fellow, active and strong enough, and has been a
Soldier in Ireland, where he has made good use of this property; for, having
the advantage of this strange way of alimony, he sold his allowance of provant
at great rates; for he told me, that at Limbrick in Ireland, he sold a sixpenny
Loaf, and two penny worth of Cheese for twelve shillings six pence. It seems
the fellow when he came first over, was suspected for an Impostor, and was by
command of the State shut up for a month with the allowance of two pots of
Beer, and half an ounce of Tobacco every day, but was afterward acquitted
from all suspicion and deceit.

Lust. Schol. ^ent. 2. curat. 69
This stone-devouring Monster, and helluo lapidum, may be compared to him whom
Lusitanus saw at Ferara, who did eat hides, potsheards, or broken glasses, and
concoct and digest them, in so much that all men called him the Ostrich, a bird
of a wonderful nature, to concoct things devoured without any difference. But
most resembles that Begger-boy whom Platerus speaks of, Felix Plat. de obser.
prop. 155
living by a miserable and horrid gain, Stone-Eater^^.
who for four farthings would suddenly swallow many stones, which he every
where met with by chance in any place, though they were as big as a walnut, so
filling his belly, that by the collision of them while they were pressed, the
sound was openly heard; yet neither he, nor the stone-devouring Castillian,
which Abraham e Porta Leonis speaks of too, Dialog. de Auro.
are any way to be compared with him for his rare faculty of concoction.

Long Breasts affected.
SCENE XIX. Pap-Fashions.
Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
THey of Malve in Ethiopia, have loathsome, lovely, long Breasts; for, the young
women if they be twenty, or twenty five years of Age, they have their Breasts
so long that they reach down upon their Wastes, and this they take for a
goodly thing, and they go naked to show them for a bravery.

The Egyptian women have such great Breasts, it being almost incredible what
Juvenal writes of them, supposing it to be natural unto them; Quis tumidum
guttur miratur in Alpibus? aut quis
In Meroem crasso majorem infant papillam?
Nempe quod hic illis natura non omnibus una.


Purch: Pilgr. 4. lib. 6. Helyn Geogr. Americae.
The People within the Main of South- America, called Camucujara, have Paps that
reach under their Waste, and near even down to their Knees, and when they run,
or go faster than ordinary, they bind them about their Waste. Long Dugs
affected.


In the Kingdom of Senega, Aloys. Cadam.
the women about the seventeenth year of their Age have their Breasts forcibly
drawn out by the men, who tie a rope about them for that very purpose, so that
they sag down to their Belly.

The Azanegi magnify very fat and gross women, especially those who have
longer Dugs, Munst. Cosm. lib. 6. cap. 50.
and which hang pensile from the Breast, and therefore the men there use the
same violence as the Senegans do to their women, Aloys. Cadam.
to stretch them out to the measure of their Fancy, insomuch as when they have
once borne Children they grow longer, and more ugly and filthy to behold.

The women of Mexico so love to have great Dugs, Montaign. Essay lib. 2.
that they strive to have their Children suck over their shoulders.

In the Island Arnobon, Du Pegr. Hist. Ind. Orient.
the Nurses have so long Dugs, that they cast them over their shoulders.

The Women of Guinea, Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
when their Children cry to suck, they cast one of their Dugs backward over
their shoulders, and so the Child sucketh as it hangs.

The proportion of the Breasts.
So also do the Irish-women at this day, Lythgough in his Travels.
whose Breasts (as one says) were fit to be made money bags for East or West-
Indian Merchants, being more than half a yard long, and as well wrought as any
Tanner with the like Charges could ever mollify such leather.

The Breasts the store houses of milk resemble a half Bowl, they rise the
breadth of two fingers high, when maids begin to have their Courses, and when
they are full ripe and grown marriageable, they swell so that they may be
covered with the hand; which Aristophanes calls (...), the goodly apples of the
Breast. And lest the heavy Breast should flag down too low, because a woman
goes always upright, they are knit and tied by their whole Basis or Bottom to
the bonie part of the Chest. A fault therefore it is in the women of Ireland,
and others who never tie up their Breasts: but they sin with a higher hand
against the Law of Nature who forcibly endeavor to break these bonds by
drawing them out unto a monstrous and ugly greatness; for by this Artifice the
convenient figure and decent magnitude of the Breasts, which should concur to
their natural constitution as it was, from whence their elegant beauty should
arise, and the Breasts become most apt for the generation of milk, The
inconveniences of great Breasts.
as having a moderate heat and excellent conformation. Let them that will
extol great Breasts like udders, because they generate a great deal of milk;
yet it is better to have a mediocrity then such a superfluity of milk, which
if retained is easily corrupted in the Breasts, and hence great Dugs are more
obnoxious to inflammations and Cancers, and being besides loose and moist, they
cannot retain that temperate heat, nay, not only by this perversion or
destruction of the natural and convenient form and magnitude of the Breasts,
and decent figure is this organicall part rendered deformed, and extended beyond
its just extuberancy which is accounted beautiful; but this goodly sagging
Dugs, a Pap-fashion which they so affect is to no end, unless to make their
children more saddle-nosed, which is the usual inconvenience that attends them
who suck Nurses with overgreat laxuriant Breasts, (and which it may be is the
intention of this practice) and by spreading over the whole region of the
Breasts, and swagging down sometimes lower, there follows one inconvenience not
yet reckoned, for by their extravagant expatiation and bulky weight they prove
no little hinderance to respiration. Nature (indeed) sometimes is a little
luxuriant and extuberant in the Breasts of some women, a remarkable History
whereof Salmuthus has of a Patient of his, Sal^. Medicin. observe.
the wife of a noble Secretary, who before marriage was endowed with great
Breasts; which notwithstanding at the first time of her impregnation did
increase and rise to a greater, nay, even a most horrid bulk: and they always
after her conception did so increase, that they were wont to hang down even
unto her knees, at which strange case ^^lmuthus stood amazed when her husband
showed her Breasts unto him to be cured, The chief use of the Breasts.
wondering at the matter, which otherwise uses to be collected toward the
Child in the womb, making together the Belly tumid, that so great quantity
should ascend upwards, or creep to the Breasts; whence he observed, that there
is not only a consent between the Veins of the Womb and Breast, but a conflux
also.

But although Nature, forced thereto against her will, prevaricates in the
shape of the Breasts, and Divine Providence has gone beyond the Rules, to
which she has necessarily constrained us, it is not to give us a dispensation
from them; they are blows of his Divine hand, which we ought not to imitate,
but admire as extraordinary examples, and marks of an express and particular
avowing of the several kinds of wonders, which for a testimony of his
omnipotency he affords us beyond our orders or forces, which it is folly and
impiety to go about to represent; and which we ought not to follow, but
contemplate with admiration, and meditate with astonishment, being Acts of his
Personage, and not of ours.

Another thing discommendable in some of these Nations, is, that they take
these loathsome lovely long Breasts to be a goodly thing, and that they go
naked to show them for a bravery; the chief use of the Breasts being the
generation of milk; that they may be ashamed who for nicity and delicacy do
forfeit this principal use of these excellent parts, and make them only
Stales, or Bawds of Lust, as too many Ladies amongst us do, who by opening
these common shops of temptation, invite the eyes of easy Chapmen to cheapen
that flesh which seems to lie exposed (as upon an open Stall) to be sold: The
Breasts accounted shameful parts.
To whose Udders I could wish some severe Cato could present a good wholesome
moral Hedgehog to make them shut up shop, and translate their Masks from
their Face to their Breasts.

More innocent are the Maldives in the other harmless extreme, Purch: Pilgr.
1. lib. 9.
who count the Breasts shameful parts not to be spoken of; who carefully hide
them, and to speak of them they account it very lascivious and dishonest: the
Maids go naked until their Breasts begin to bear out and increase, and then
they think it a thing needful to cover them, holding as great a shame to show
them as their Privities.

The most Noble Virgins of Secota in Florida also are more modest than ours, De
Bry Hist. Ind.
who for the most part apply their hand to their shoulders, so covering their
Breasts in sign of Virgin modesty, being naked in all the rest of their body.

There being good reason in Nature why women should have a modest regard of
them, and not so openly expose them; because the consent between the Breasts
and Womb is very great, in so much as the only contrectation of them provokes
Lust.

Another, and that no small aggravation of their offense against Nature, is
that these women should so love to have great Dugs, that they strive to have
their Children suck over their shoulders: for, this is a device contrary to the
intention of Nature, as plainly appears by the situation of the Breasts, as
we have showed in our Vox Corporis, or Moral Anatomy of the Body.

Suitable to this absurdity is the Custom of the Turkish women, Helyn.
who carry not their Children in their arms as we do, Very little Breasts
affected.
but astride on their shoulders; But more conceited is the Fashion of the
Matrons of Dasamonque in Florida, who have a strange manner of carrying their
Children, plainly diverse from ours: For we, as a gesture more conformable to
the hint of Nature, carry ours in our arms before our Breast; they taking hold
of the right hand of the Child bear them on their back, De Bry Hist. Ind.
embracing the Child's left-heele with their left hand, by a way as wonderful
and foreign as it is averse to Nature.

Purch. Pilgr. 3. lib. 2.
More commendable are the women of Uraba, who do mightily affect little Breasts,
and use all the Art they can devise to have them so.

Allowable is the use of those Cosmetiques which are contrived by Art to
restrain the exuberancy of the overgrown Breasts, and reduce them to their
natural proportion, which in the corrective part of medicine is performed by
refrigerating repercussive medicaments, which drive backward the matter to the
profundity, and excellently advancing the natural heat, compel it to enter
into the depth of the Body, and so meeting with the Aliment afar off prevents
its passage io the more superficial parts, and so consequently prohibits the
undecent augmentation of the Breasts.

Yet the practice of some Indian women, to avoid the deformity of sagging
Breasts, is no way allowed, who having Teats that become loose and hanging, use
therefore abortions with a certain herb, because they will not have this
deformity, and when they fall the principal women bear them up with Bars of
Gold.

As if the Breasts of women were intended only for ornament. Do you think
says Phaverinus, Men with great Breasts.
Phaver, in Aul. Gell.
that Nature has given women their swelling paps as so many more beautiful
Warts, not for the nourishing of Children, but for the adorning of the Breast?
for so many prodigious women endeavor to dry and dam up that most sacred
Fountain of the body and feeder of mankind; as if it should despoile them of
the ensigns of Beauty, of which not the Vulgar, but the Learned complain, that
the greatest part of women (an ancient crime) put forth their Children to be
Nursed, from whence there follows the frequent infirmities of men's Bodies,
together with a shortning of the age, and a diminution in their stature. The
same (or not much differing folly) are they guilty of, who use strange
counterfeit sleights to abortiate the fruit of their Body, that the smoothness
of the Belly be not winkled and enfeebled with the weight of the burden, and
the labor of Childbirth, a thing deserving all hate and detestation, that a
man in his very original, whiles he is framed, whiles he is enlived, should be
put to death under the very hands, and in the Shop of Nature.

In Egypt the men have greater Breasts than the biggest of our women; for,
Prosp. Alpin. lib. de med. Egypt. c. 9.
Prosper Alpinus writes that they grow so fat by their course of Diet, that he
never saw in any Country so many extreme fat men, as he observed in Grand
Cairo, and he reports, that most of them are so fat that they have Breasts far
greater and thicker than the longest Dugs of women. But if I should say that
men in some Countries have not only great Breasts, bearing out like unto women
which give suck, but that many men have given suck unto their own Children, it
would sound very strange, Male Nurses.
and somewhat against kind; Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 9. Alex. Benedict lib. 3.
cap. 4. Anatom.
yet upon credible witnesses it appears to be very true. For, one Peter a
Christian Cafar at Sofula, his wife dying after Travel of a Daughter,
nourished the same with milk from his own Breast for a whole year; Pity of
the motherlesse crying Infant, which his poverty could not otherwise relieve,
caused him to seek to still it with laying it to his Breast, and then gave it
somewhat to drink, which having continued two or three days his Breast began
to yield milk.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
A poor Jew of Ormus nourished his son with his Breast, the Mother dying when
it was young in the Cradle.

A poor man in Moura, being sixty years old, had as much milk as a
woman-Nurse, and gave suck to two Children.

I have not wherewith to accuse these Male Nurses of tampering with their
Breasts: yet since the business concerns the reputation of Nature, it is worth
the scanning. Anatomists say, that men have scarce any Glandules, since they
(according to Hippocrates) were not to have any milk in their Breasts; yet
they deny not that such a kind of humor like unto milk may be engendered in
them, which Aristotle calls milk, but unfit for nourishment. Bauhin. Anat.
As Bauhinus observed in two men whose Breasts were replenished with a more
copious juice; Idem Ibid. Alex. Buatus. Vesal. lib. 5. Hum. Corp. Fabr. lib.
18. sect. 7. Tra. 1. Sum. 2. ca. 39. J^c. Font. Art. med. pars 1
yet a certain learned man affirms that there have been seen some who putting
an Infant to their Breasts have given suck. Vesalius says, that more than once
he had seen abundance of milk in men, which also Nicolus affirms. Jacobus
Fontanus says, Women with manlike Breasts.
he knew a Butcher of a good habit of body and fat, that had Breasts abounding
with milk. And Bauhinus confesses, Idem Ibid.
that they who have viewed the new World, report, that men there generally
almost have store of milk in their Breasts. In particular we read of the
Cumacaiaro's, a Nation of Brasile, Renuard. Cysatus Ins. Japonia and Germanice.
that the men are endued with large Breasts, swelling with milk, which are
sufficient for the suckling and nursing up of Infants; their women on the
contrary being endowed with small and manlike Breasts. Which Femenine property
of men, although not so frequently, Card. 4. de hist. Anim. 20. de subtle. 12.
has appeared also in this our old world. Cardan affirms, that he saw at
Venice one Antoney Bussey, of thirty years of Age, who had such abundance of
milk in his Breasts, as was not only sufficient to suckle a Child, but it
moreover sprouted out exuberantly. Johan. Conradus Schenckius (the Son) knew
one Laurence Wolff, who from his youth to fifty five years of Age, being then
so old, abounded with such store of milk, that in their meetings (being
drunk) he would by way of sport, compressing his Breasts, ejaculate and spurt
milk in the face of those that sat right over against him, being known to many
by the name of Wolff the milke-spurter, being also desired by them often to
show his ability herein to others, neither yet did he hereupon perceive any
pain, heaviness, or tension.

And Vesalius affirms, Vesal. l. 5. c. 18. de Corp. Hum. Fabr. sect. 7. tract.
Sum. 2. c. 39. cited by M. Donat. med. Hist. admirab. Nic. Font. Art. Med. par.
1.
that he has more than once beheld milk issuing from the Breasts of men; and
Nicolus affirms as much.

Fontanus acknowledges, that through the goodness and perfection of
temperament, milk is found in the Breasts of some men: And Alex. Buatus cited
by him conceives it to be possible that men may have such store of milk in
their Breasts that they may suckle an Infant. How men come to have milk in
their Breasts


Hier. Eugub. lib. de Lacte.
Hier. Eugubius says, that he had seen men who had milk in their Breasts,
which by expression sprouted out, and it is well known that milk (in men) is
not made of menstruous blood.

Marc. Donat. ca. 8. de variol. and morbil. Corn. Gemma, lib. 1. Cosm. c. 7.
Marcellus Donatus remembers to have seen a man who sent milk forth out of his
Breasts in a manifest quantity, and it is well known that in Males it can
hardly be done out of menstruous blood.

Yet the observation of Fabricius looks somewhat like an analogicall
satisfaction to this point: As (says he) women have their monthly Courses, so
some men have a redundancy of blood, which can neither be discussed by urine
nor sweat, nor insensible transpiration; but it flows to the testicles, and is
excerned by the passage of Urine; hence many effeminate men in Germany and
Loraine have milk in their Breasts, and suffer purgations in an orderly
vicissitude like women.

Gal. de usu par.
And Galen confesses, that some men have Glandules in their Breasts, wherefore
these things vary according to Individuals: but that these Glandules are in all
men, you may without forcing the Text collect. For since he assigns a double
use of them, how can they satisfy the other, and the common if they were
destitute of Glandules? and to what end should that conformation of the Teats
be so like, that not a few men have given suck, (as the Histories
abovementioned witness) where if we turn away the calumny from Nature in the
Glandules, how shall we at length avert it in the Teats? But yet the question
is, whether the Breasts of men generate milk according to Nature? It Is true,
there wants in the Breasts of man that consent with the womb, Amazons fearing
off their Right Paps.
and there wants that congress of the Mammillaries descendent, with the
Epigastricall ascendent; if therefore for these two causes the Breasts engender
no milk, why are we deluded with a fashood of their glandulous bodies? There
is present too the conformation of the Teats that milk may flow out, why
should not then the Argument conclude? Hofman answers, that even as they are,
yet they are not for milk, and he would not have that which happens to one man
of Thousands to be attributed to all men, accounting these Stories of the New
World to be little better than Fables; Nature when she would have both Sexes to
be like one unto another, she made Breasts in men; for since matter was
present, what use should she make of it unless this, she being studious to
preserve the Analogy between man and woman. Neither are they in vain in men,
if they fulfill the use common to both Sexes.

Surely the Analogy between the Breasts of man and woman, is somewhat greater
than is ordinarily granted, Salmuthus in obs. med. cent. 1. ob. 92.
although this be somewhat more than that which Salmuthus relates of a Maid
servant, who having the care of an Infant, laid him in the same bed with her
self, and as wenches are sometimes prone to be wanton, she often offers him
her Breast to suck; her Courses stop, she has thereupon milk in her Breast
and gives suck.

The Ancient Amazones, Porta Human. Physiog. lib. 2.
of whom we read so often in learned Authors, were wont to sear off their right
Breasts, which was then the Archers fashion. Porta says, the Amazons fear off
their right Paps, that more nourishment going into the hand next it, might
increase the strength of that which was but weak by Nature. Others say, that
the Amazons much helping themselves in the wars with Bows and Arrows, Amazons
that fear off their Left Paps.
and finding that in this and other exercises of Arms their Dugs or Breasts
were a very great hinderance to them, they used to burn off the right Pap,
both of themselves and their Daughters, and thereupon they were called Amazons,
which signifies in the Greek Tongue, No Breasts.

Purch, Pilgr. 3. lib. 7.
The chief of the Guard of the King of Congo are left handed Amazons, who
sear off their left Paps with a hot Iron, because it should be no hinderance
to them in their shooting. Pigafetta in his relation of Congo.
Pigafetta in his reports of the Kingdom of Congo, makes the like mention of
these Amazons, who serve the Emperor Monomotapa. The History of Amazons no
Fable.
Grimston of their manners.
Grimston makes mention of these women warriors serving this Emperor, who
after the manner of the ancient Scythish or Asiatique Amazons, have their
Breasts cut off.

Near the Land of Chalde is the Land of Amazons, Sir Joh. Mand. Travels. c. 50.
which is inhabited by women only, who converse with men of neighboring
Countries whom they send for; if they have maid Children they keep them, and if
they be of noble blood they burn the left Pap away for bearing of a Shield,
and if they be of a baser degree, they burn the right Pap away for shooting.

There is also report, that there is a Nation of them about Guiana. And
although Sir Walter Rawley in his voyage thither when he was near the River of
Amazons, was very inquisitive after them yet could not find them; yet the
Translator of the report of the Kingdom of Congo hops that some good Guianean
may hereafter assure us that there is such a Nation.

For although those relations of Amazons, when they first come from the new
World, were by many accounted a Fable, Peter Martyr (formerly) esteeming it a
semi-fable, yet afterward in his seventh Decade his belief came more up to
it, being heightened by the allegations of men of credit, contesting that it was
true. And Eusebius Nierembergensis witnesses, Eusebius. Niet. Hist. Not.
that he was assured of the truth herein by a Cassique, or Duke of that Region.

The Breasts by Nature are two, even as the whole body always is bipertite,
that like good handmaids they might serve their Dame the Womb, The
Inconveniences of the Amazonian convenience.
which seem as it were parted into two; for, the Milk, the Fucus of Nature as
Plato calls it, comes not into the Breasts until the Infant be thoroughly
perfected; and that if there be two Infants, yet they might both at once have
wherewith to satisfy and nourish them. But these Amazons discarding the
tenderness of their Sex, and desiring to improve themselves Viragoes,
abreviate Natures provision for an unnatural convenience; whereby the
proportion of the Breast for ornament of the Chest, and the complete
representation of it is lost. This their institution being destructive to
another secondary use of the Paps, to wit, of their situation; for, they were
ordained to be a kind of covering and defense for the heart, and that
themselves having received heat and cherishment from the heart, might again
return unto its warmth, such as we get by garments we buckle about us: Hence
it is that those men who have great breasts, bearing out like a woman that
gives suck, as a Casar in the river Quiliame which we read of had, are of a
colder temperament, as Nature seems to intimate by a more than ordinary
provision of this covering; especially this use is manifest in woman, in whom
these Breasts grow oftentimes into a great mass and weight, so as they being
far colder than men, their entralls under the Hypocondria are warmed by them.
Hippoc. lib. de Glandulis.
Another penalty of their crime against the offended Majesty of Nature they
must needs incur, unless with their Breasts they put off the very Nature of
woman, since another use of the Paps, according to Hippocrates, was, to receive
excrementitious moisture: For if (says Hippocrates) any disease, or other
event, take away a woman's Paps, her voice becomes shriller, she proves a great
spitter, and is much troubled with the pain in her head. Men that pierce their
Paps.


The Inhabitants of Malhada, Purch. Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
the men have one of their Paps peirced from the one side unto the other, and
there are some that have them both pierced, and in the hole which they make
they carry a Cane acrosse, of the length of two spans and an half, and two
fingers thick; and and this is a singular piece of Gallantry with them.

Before this Scene goes off, I ought to take notice of a profane Cavil of
Momus against the Fabrique of the Breast of man, who found fault that Nature
had not made a Window in the Breast of man that one might have seen the motions
of his heart, and discovered the affections of his mind: And amongst other
things which King Don Alonso would (who was Surnamed the Wife) indiscreetly
reform in Nature, this was one among the rest, that he did blame her that she
had not made a Window in man's Breast, that he might see that which he was
plotting in his heart, and whether his manner of proceeding were fair and
sincere, or whether his words were feigned, No need of a window in the Breast.
or whether (like Janus) he had two faces under one hood?

Alas! the desired Window in the Breast would have been of little or no use,
since it stands not with the convenience of most Nations to go with an open and
bare Breast: and say that the Breasts were generally exposed to the Eye; Are
not the Eyes two Casements that look down into the Heart? And has not the
Countenance a sufficient declaration of the Affection? The Eyes being two
several Indexes of the same: Nature in recompense, and analogically to answer
the curiosity of these men's Phantsies, has established a certain Art of
Physiognomy whereby a man may attain unto a sufficient intelligence of the
thoughts and affections of others.

SCENE XX. What mischief by swathing of Infants.
Dangerous Fashions, and desperate Affectations about the Breast and Waste.
THe Pergamits, as it appears by Galens observation, had a great affectation
of old instreight swathing of their Children. The walls (says he) of the
Breasts, are for the most part, depraved by Nurses, while they from the first
education do overstrictly bind them about with swathing bands: especially
(says he) is this daily done among us to Virgins, for while their Nurses are
careful to increase their Hips and sides, that they may exceed the Breast in
magnitude, they roll them all over with certain bands, and more vehemently
restrain and compresse all the parts of the Scapula and Thorax; whence it
comes to pass sometimes, that when all the parts are not equally compressed,
the Breast is made to bunch out forward; or else the hinder parts that belong
to the Backbone are made Gibbous, Swathing a cause of crookedness.
so that they become crookbackt. Another inconvenience also follows, that the
Back becomes as it were quite broken, and brought to one side, insomuch
(indeed) as one of the Scapula's is not increased, but appears small and
compressed. We have the judgment of Frabicius Hildanus, and Sennertus. both
learned men, touching this matter. In certain Regions (says Hildanus) and
Families, Hild. lib. de morb. puer.
it is a custom by involving their little Infants as soon as they are born
(for what cause they know not) to pen them up in too straight swathing Bands.

Whence it often happens that their bodies and limbs protuberate with crooked
bunches, and other deformities of the Knees, Legs, and other parts; but also by
reason of the more strict involution it happens (which no man need to doubt of)
that their bones being yet tender, soft, and cartilaginious, are easily wrested
and drawn out of their natural situation, which afterward by degrees harden
into an excrescence, which he had observed in many. Hereupon becoming
crookbackt and lame, the natural proportion of the body is depraved, and the
body made incommensurate; for, whereas a measure taken from the Crown of man's
head to the sole of his foot should answer to the distance between the middle
finger of his right hand to the middle finger of his left hand when the Arms
are stretched out to the full length; this proportion cannot be observed in
crook-backt men, and hence they are justly accounted unproportioned.

The providence that is to be used in the swathing of Infants is a thing of
high concernment, and therefore there cannot be too much said thereof. Take
therefore what Mercatus has of this matter: Cautions in ordering Infants.
This, says he, ought always to be the care of Nurses, Market. de Infant.
Educat. l. 1.
that when they swathe their Children, they endeavor to touch and handle every
part of their body gently, and carefully to divide that lightly which is to be
divided, and to extend that which is to be extended, and depresse that which is
to be depressed, and to fashion every part according to the innate and more
comely proportion of each part, yet they must do it with a tender compression,
and with the very ends of their fingers too. But swathbands being provided for
that purpose, for the right ordering of the structure of the body; if there be
need, they must gently and softly revoake and rectify the members, (but if
they be formed according to Nature, they ought in no wise inconsiderately to
touch them, because oftentimes they fall into worse condition through the
carelessness of those that handle them;) and for that cause they must not only
be very careful to swathe their Children, but also in laying of them down when
they are swathed, lest some part should chance to remain awry, or ill figured.
They must also gently squeese the bladder, that they may the more easily make
water. Moreover the hands and arms are to be extended to the knees. They must
lightly bring the feet on both sides backward to the back, and before to the
head, that they may learn to bend every part which ought to be bent; yet they
ought not to remain settled upon the belly, lest they prejudice the Entralls;
neither again ought they to hold them with their face downwards until they
are swathed all over; For it is better, first to compose the swathbands, that
being laid they may receive the Infant upon his back; yet they must observe
this caution, lest in swathing them, a leg or an arm, the back or the neck be
by any means distorted; Our Custom of swathing children condemned.
they ought to clean the Nose, and to wipe the eyes with a gentle linen
cloth, and thus after they have sucked sufficiently, to lull them asleep by
very gentle motions of the Cradle, for by violent rockings the Epilepsie
arises: And it is better from the third month, that they should be carried,
and in the Nurses arms lulled asleep; also you must take heed that you bind
them not too strictly, for that oftentimes is the cause of gibbosity and
crookedness, neither therefore ought they to be too loose, because their
members are wont to lose the natural figure, and acquire that which in the
relaxed space can be acquired. Moreover we ought not to permit them forthwith,
nor in the Summer time to have their arms at liberty before the space of three
months, and in the Winter not before four; yet the right hand must for some
few days be first taken out, that thereby they may become right-handed; indeed
their hands are weakened, and their fingers for the most part are depraved with
crookedness. Also after nine months you may suffer them to put on shoes,
about which time they will be able to trample on the ground, and to hold
themselves upright, and that they may do twice or thrice in a day, and
afterward compel them by little and little, and by degrees to go by steps, so
that by that labor you do not very much enforce them, but gently, until they
attaining more strength desire it of themselves, and may without harm endure
it.

We in England are noted to have a most perverse custom of swathing Children,
and streightning their Breasts.

Which narrowness of Breast, occasioned by hard and strict swaddling them, is
the cause of many inconveniences and dangerous consequences. For, all the bones
of newborn Infants, The natural proportion of the Breasts.
especially the Ribs of the Breast, are very tender and flexible, that you may
draw them to what figure you please; which when they are too strictly swathed
with Bands, reduce the Breast to so narrow a scantling as is apt to endanger,
not only the health, but the life of Children. For hence it is, that the
greatest part of us are so subject to a Consumption, and distillations, which
shorten our days, and bring us to an untimely Grave: For they who have more
straight and narrow Breasts, are necessarily made opportune to spitting of
blood, distillations and the inflammations of the parts of the Breast, since the
Lungs in such grow very hot; for when the rest of the body retains its
proportion and due magnitude, and the Breast is made narrower, more blood is
collected about the Breast than it can digest or expel from it self, whence
neasting in those cavities (especially of the Arterious veins, or
veine-Arterie,) degenerates into the causes of many diseases. Moreover, the
Breast it self corrected is very much weakened, whereupon the blood flowing
thither hotter, or (sticking there) becoming sharp, does easily erode the
vessels, neither is Nature now able to defend her self any longer. The Breast
has an Ovall figure, in its natural magnitude, it does make eight
Geometrical inches, to wit, that which begins at the throat-bone, and is
terminated in the sword-like cartilage; the Back from the first Vertebra of the
Breast to the end of the twelfth, or reaching to the beginning of the first of
the Loins, obtaines a Geometrical foot and one inch: So that the Breast is
shorter than the Back by five Inches, the sides run out from the Clavicula to
the end of the Breast, where the Bastard-Ribs end, and have nine inches and a
half; the Perepheria of the Breast is two Geometrical foot and two Inches.
Swathing a cause of the Rickets.
If you render your breadth it is narrowed an Inch; If you take it in, it is
dilated two Inches, this is the natural proportion. Now when either by Nature,
or this foolish violence of Art, the Breast by compressing is made narrower and
unproportioned, the Scapulae usually appear prominent, and they become such as
Hipocrates calls Alatos, and by that figure obnoxious to a Phtysique, the
backbone not only being hurt, and they made gibbous, but the Lungs thereupon
cannot preserve their figure: the best prescription therefore for such who are
become this way proclive to a Phtysique, is to use such exercises as gently
dilate and extend the Breast, as shooting, vociferation, commotion of the
Arms, and attraction and compressing of much breath, which yet must be done
with caution and without violence. Among such, and other the like
inconveniences, occasioned by this unhappy custom, it is very remarkable, that
the Rickets, a disease frequent with us, but scarce known where they use not to
swath their Children, is occasioned, as I am persuaded, (and some good
Physicians are of the same opinion) only by this perverse custom of swathing,
it being an observation among some Ladies that I have discoursed with, that no
Children that are kept with a Belly-bands only, and not swathed straight
upward, are troubled with the Rickets; A notion worth the taking notice of by
those who would not have their Children grow sick of the Fashions. And although
Doctor Glisson, and the other Doctors his Assistants in that learned Tract,
which to their great honor they have lately published of this new disease,
commonly called the Rickets, or more properly the Rackets; where they speak of
the causes of the Curvity of the bones, The cause of the Rickets enquired into.
they do not wholly assent to their opinions who ascribe it to the flexibility
of Bones, inveighing against Nurses which prematurely commit Infants and
Children to their feet, thinking that their bones are bent by the weight of the
sustained body, nor to others likewise accusing the unskilful way of swathing
practiced by Nurses: yet they partly grant, that in so tender an age the bones
may perchance be somewhat bent, yet they would not remain bent as Lead or Wax,
but left to their liberty they would at length return to the proper position
of the parts; for they do not consist of a Ductile matter, in so much as they
would be broken in the bending, or would certainly endeavor to recover the
former site of parts. And as to the unskilfulnesse and carelessness of Nurses,
they do not wholly excuse them, yet they think they cannot justly impute this
Curvity unto them; since they see that the Children of poor men are handled
with less care, and sooner committed to their feet than Gentlemen's Children
are, and yet their children are more rarely infested with this infirmity than
theirs; and they have known Nurses, who having used the uttermost diligence
both in swathing, and other ways of handling Infants, that they have given
suck unto, yet they could not prevent or avoid this Curvity of the bones. But
where they come to speak of the Causes, why, in tract of time, the Spine or
Rack-bone cannot be raised up according to a straight and natural line; here
verily (say they) we cannot at all excuse the negligence and carelessness of
nurses, that they do not attentively enough observe unto which part rather,
Infants whom they suckle, are prone to incline their body, to the end they may
diligently and carefully endeavor to direct it to the opposite part. Where
they never swath Children.
Likewise also, when Nurses prematurely and without regard commit weaker
Infants to their feet, it may fall out, that since the Tonique motion of the
Muscles is not sufficient for sustentation of the Body, they may suffer the
Knee or Leg of the Child to be bended into one side; whereupon the Ligaments of
the joint are extended either on the inner or outward side and by consequence
the Ligaments of the adverse sides are contracted, whereby the Joint must
necessarily be bended either outward or inward. Therefore although they had
above denied the Curvity of the Bones to depend upon this, yet they grant that
the distortion of Ioints in weak Infants may happen through such a
carelessness of Nurses; granting moreover, that by their constant and foolish
Fasciation, the bones, which otherwise were straight, may be incurvated,
although they do not esteem it to be the constant and ordinary cause of this
organicall infirmity.

Plut. in the Life of Licurgus.
The Spartan Nurses used a certain and better manner to bring up their
Children without swaddling or binding them up in clothes and swathing-bands;
Grimston of their manners.
so as they made them nimbler of their Limbs, better shaped, and goodlier of
body: And this was the reason why many strangers sought to have Nurses from
Sparta, to nurse and bring up their Children.

Purch: Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
In Candou- Island, one of the Islands accounted to Asia, they never swadle
their Children, but let them go free, yet never any prove deformed: So do the
Irish, and yet none of their Children prove crooked, although the women be not
slender. So they do in the North of England, Where they never swaddle Children.
where the Rickets has not much prevailed. As for the swaddling of Children,
they that dwell in hot Countries and near the Tropicks, Ramutius Narrat. of
Nova Francia.
have no care of it, but leave them free unbound; but drawing toward the
North, the Mothers have an eeven smooth board, like the Covering of a Drawer or
Cupboard, upon which they lay the Child wrapped in a beaver furre, (unless it
be too hot,) and tied thereupon with some swadling-band, whom they carry on
their Backs, their Legs hanging down, then being returned into their Cabins
they set them in this manner up straight against a stone, or something else.

In Brasile the Children are never swadled, Lindscot. lib. 2.
or lapped in Clothes, but only laid in a little Cotton Bed; we would think
that if our Children should not be wound or swadled, that they would grow
crooked, whereof not any are foundamong them, but rather go uprighter than any
people in the World.

The Canarins and Corumbins of the Indies, Grimston of their manners.
who live not far from Goa, the women among them are delivered without a
midwife, and then they presently wash their Children, and lay them upon Indian
figleaves, and so they go presently about their business, as if they had not
been newly delivered; the Children are nursed naked, and when they are filthy,
they use no other mystery than to wash them with water; so as they grow strong,
and active, and fit for any thing, for they are not daintily bred. The men of
this sort live many times an hundred years in perfect health, and never lose
tooth, What swathing our Clymate requires.
mocking at our delights, with the which we wrong our lives and nature.

Spigelius. An^^m.
The Venetians therefore have an excellent Custom, to involve rather than
swathe their Infants in a light swath-band, desiring to have rather a broad
than a narrow Breast, a full than a slender.

Fond opinion (indeed) has obtained this with us, that Children, unless they
were diligently involved and constrained in swathing-bands, they would have
distorted Legs: Which the Barbarians take least care of, who put their Infants
newborn naked and unswathed into their Hamacchos, whose Children
notwithstanding of all Mortals go most straight. It Is confessed, the
temperature of the air does very much avail to that purpose, and therefore we
may allow our Children in Wintertime to be diligently involved and bound up
with swath-bands in their Cradles, because otherwise they are unfit to endure
the Cold of our Climate: but in Summer and temperate seasons of the year
(especially when there is no frosty weather, with others good leave, says a
learned Physician) I should think (as much as I can attain by experience)
that Infants are to be freed from these bands and set at liberty; some kind of
Couch invented for that purpose, out of which they cannot fall; and verily
(says he) I am of that mind, that the extraordinary heat does not a little
incommodate, wherewith Children in the time of Summer revinct with swath-bands
are as it were stewed.

Yet it is not to be omitted what our Physicians observe in their late learned
Tract of the Rickets; That the too early leaving off those swath-bands and
blankets, wherein Infants are discreetly involved, Enquiry after the Causes of
the Rickets.
is conceived to be one cause why Infants, when they are newborn, are very
seldom troubled with the Rickets; for, Midwives and Nurses order newborn
Infants with such Art, that their condition may as near as can be approach
unto that which they lately had in the Womb. For they on every side involve
the whole body, except the head, in one continued enclosure; whence the outward
parts of the body, and the first affected in this disease are defended against
the injuries of the external cold, and the hot exhalations breaking out from
any part of the Body, by that swadling-clout perchance doubled or trebled, and
rolled about with swath-bands, are evenly retained, and equally communicated to
all parts of the Body, that they may be cherished as it were in a common stove
with an equal heat. Therefore since the chief part of the essence of this
disease consists in an equal cold distemper, no marvel if these muniments of
the body do avert it, at least for a time: But when after some months, if not
sooner, the hands of Infants are freed from that common covering, as the
Custom is, and perchance before they are six months old, their feet also in
the day time, although they are again swathed at night, all the day at least,
their outward members are destitute of this common nourisher of natural heat:
Our Nurses also, (as they judiciously note) often err while they too soon
coat feebler Infants; for they unhappily define the time of Coating Children by
number of months, whereas they ought rather to make their account out of the
activity and strength of motion in their feet and hands: for when the motion
and exercise of those parts may more confer to excite and cherish their heat, A
strange way of ordering Children.
and irritate their pulses, than the nourishment of swath-bands, without doubt
then is the mature time for Children to be freed from their primative
inrollments, having then no other need of this propulsive cause.

The manner of ordering Infants among the Peruvians, is worth the taking notice
of; for there, the Children, both of the Nobles and Plebeians, are first washed
in cold water, and in like manner every day before they swathe them, neither do
they until the third month let them have their Arms at liberty, supposing
that conduces to their strength; they lay them in wooden Cradles upon nets
instead of Beds, they never take them into their Arms or their Laps, no not
when they give them suck, but stooping down reach the Dug unto them, and that
only thrice every day. And that which may shame our Ladies of Europe, the
mothers themselves, although they were Queens, nurse their Children, unless
they are hindered by a Disease, or some other Sontick Cause, and then for the
most part they abstain from the company of their husbands, lest they should be
constrained to weane their Children before the time, for they who upon such a
Cause are weaned before their time, by a propudious name they called Ayusca, as
much as to say Bastard.

Joan. de Laet. descript. Novi orb. occident. lib. 11. cap. 21.
Another foolish affectation there is in young Virgins, though grown big enough
to be wiser, but that they are led blindfold by Custom to a fashion pernicious
beyond imagination; who thinking a slender waste a great beauty, strive all
that they possibly can by streight-lacing themselves to attain unto a
wand-like smalnesse of waste, Small Wastes pernitiously affected.
never thinking themselves fine enough until they can span their Waste.

By which deadly Artifice they reduce their Breasts into such streights, that
they soon purchase a stinking breath; and while they ignorantly affect an
angust or narrow Breast, and to that end by strong compulsion shut up their
Wastes in a Whale-bone prison, or little-ease; they open a door to
Consumptions, and a withering rottenness: Hence such are justly derided by
Terence; Haud similis virgo, est virginum nostrarum, Terence in Eunucho.
quas matres student: Demissis humeris esse, vincto pectore ut graciles fient.

-- Si qua est habitior paulo, pugilem esse aiunt, deducunt cibum,

Tametsi bona est natura, reddunt curvatura junceas.



So that it seems this foolish fashion was in request in the time that Terence
lived.

Hoechstetterus in his description of Auspurge, the Metropolis of Swevia
observes, this foolish custom is at this day entertained generally among the
Virgins there. Streight-lacing a cause of much mischief
They are, says he, (describing the Virgins of Auspurge) slender,
streightlaced, with demisse shoulders, lest being gross and well made, they
should be thought to have too athletique bodies.

Which among other Causes may contribute much mischief to that Epidemicall
Disease, the whites and white Feavour, with which they are so frequently
annoyed in these times, whereof the ancient women boast they never heard of.

Paraeus where he propounds Instruments for the mending such deformities,
observes, that the Bodies of young Maids or Girls (by reason they are more
moist and tender than the bodies of Boys,) are made crooked in process of
time: Especially by the wrenching aside, and crookedness of the back bone; the
most frequent cause whereof is the unhandsome and undecent situation of their
Bodies when they are young and tender, either in carrying, sitting, or standing
(and especially when they are taught to go too soon) saluting, sewing,
writing, or in doing any such like thing. In the mean while he omits not the
occasion of crookedness, that happens seldom to the Country people, but is
much incident to the Inhabitants of great Towns and Cities, which is by reason
of the straitness and narrowness of the garments that are worn by them;
which is occasioned by the folly of Mothers, who while they covet to have their
young Daughters bodies so small in the middle as may be possible, pluck and
draw their bones awry, and make them crooked. For, the Ligaments of the
Backbone being very tender, soft and moist, at that age, cannot stay it
strait, and strongly, but being pliant easily permits the Spondels to slip
awry inwards, outward, or sidewise, as they are thrust or forced. Causes of
Crookedness
And in another place, speaking of dislocations, or luxations, and the causes
of Bunch-backs, and saddle-backs, and crooked ness, he says, that fluid and
soft bodies, such as childrens, usually are very subject to generate the
internal cause of these mischiefs, Defluxions: But if external occasions
shall concur with these internal causes, the Vertebra will sooner be
dislocated. Thus Nurses whilst they too straightly lace the Breasts and sides
of Girls, so to make them slender, cause the Breast Bone to cast it self
forwards or backwards, or else the one shoulder to be bigger or fuller, the
other more spare and lean: And if this happen in Infancy, the Rib^ grow little
or nothing in Breadth, but run outward before, therefore the Chest loses its
natural Latitude, and stands out with a sharp point, hence they become
Astmatick, the Lungs and Muscles which serve for breathing being pressed
together and straightened; and that they may the easier breathe, they are forced
to hold up their heads, whence also they seem to have great Threats, and their
bodies use unto grow at the Spine, and the parts belonging to the Breast and
Back become more slender; neither is it any wonder, for, seeing the Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves are not in their places, the spirits do neither freely,
nor the alimentary juyces plenteously flow by these straightened passages,
whence leanness must needs ensue. The the same error is committed if they lay
Children more frequently along upon their sides than upon their backs, or if
taking them up when they wake, they take them only by the feet or legs, and
never put their other hand under their backs, never so much as thinking that
Children grow most toward the Heads. And I would to God the vanity and
indiscreetnes of Mothers in their Institution, Children unborne how disfigured.
and precise exercise of their Laws and Customs in this matter, did only take
effect when they endeavor it on set purpose after the Birth of their Children,
and that their inconsideration and imprudency did not unwittingly many times
deprave their Children, even whilst they embrace them in the womb. Not to
mention those impressions of deformity which depend upon Imagination, frights,
falls, or blows, and evil Diet, from whence much mischief many times proceeds
to the disfiguring of the Child yet unborne. To the causes of man's
transformation are justly referred the undecent Session, or the ill collocation
of the mother in sitting, or lying, or any other posture of her body during the
time she goes with child: For hereupon, not only the body of the mother, but of
the Child enclosed in the womb, is perverted and distorted. Wherefore they who
all the time of their going with Child either sit idle at home, or with their
legs acrosse, or with bodies bowed toward their knees, sew, or spin, or employ
themselves in some other action, or more straightly constringe their Bellies
with long bellied, and straight-laced Garments, Busks, Rollers, or Breeches,
bring forth Children awry, or stiffnecked, bowed, crooked, crump-shouldered,
distorted in their hands, feet, and all their Limbs, because the Child can
neither move freely, nor commodiously extend his members. What should they do
with others? If they had better they would spoil them.

Spigelius.
More cautious and better advised are the Venetian Dames, who never lace
themselves, accounting it an excellency in beauty to be round and full bodied;
to attain which comely fullness they use all the Art possible; and if they be
not corpulent by Nature, Round and full Bodies affected.
nor can be really brought to it by Art, will yet counterfeit such a Habit of
body by the bumbasticall dissimulation of their Garments. Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib.
6.


The Egyptian Moorish women discreetly affect the same liberty of Nature, who
spread their Arms under their Robes, to make them show more corpulent, for
they think it a special excellency to be fat, and most of them are so in
frequenting the Baines for certain days together, using such frictions and
Diet as daily use confirms for effectual.

And indeed, as my Lord Bacon notes, Lord Bacons not. hist. cent. 9.
Frictions make the parts more fleshy and full: as we see both in men, and in
the currying of Horses, etc. the cause is, for that they draw greater quantity
of spirits and blood to the parts: And again, because they draw the Aliment
more forcibly from within: And again, because they relax the Pores, and so
make better passage for the spirits, blood, and aliment: Lastly, because they
dissipate and digest an inutile or excrementitious moisture which lies in the
flesh: all which, help assimulation. Frictions also do more fill and impinguate
the Body than exercise. The cause is, for that in Frictions the inward parts
are at rest, How to make a body fleshy and full.
which in exercise are beaten many times too much; and for the same reason
Galley-slaves are fat and fleshy, because they stir the Limbs more and the
inward parts less.

SCENE XXI. A modest Apology.
Strange inventive Contradictions against Nature, practically maintained by
diverse Nations in the ordering of their Privy-parts.
AFter our Historical peregrination, to discover the use and abuse of Parts,
being arrived at this place, in the Tract of a practical Metamorphosis, I
could not see how I should answer it to Nature, if I had silently passed by the
abuses that have been put upon her in these parts; for had I given way to such
an unseasonable modesty, my design had proved lame, and a great part of my end
and aim frustrated, it being to make a thorough discovery, not only of the
pragmaticall vanity of man, but of the raging malice of the enemy of mankind,
who labors to deforme and destroy the work of Nature, while after most
wonderful and strange ways he exercises profane and wicked men by the law
of his Tyranny, to which he has enslaved them, The cause of frequent
Transformations.
who in the first place has laid snares for the parts of Generation, there
being no other part be so deadly hates, not only endeavoring (as Peucerus
rightly notes) to increase the penalty inflicted by God upon Nature; but to
hinder the propagation of the remaining impression of the Image of the
Archetype in man, and debar his restitution, which is one reason that is given
by the learned Bauhinus of the cause of man's so frequent Transformation.
Bauhin. lib. de^ Hermoph.
I, but some may say, this might have been an obstacle; to reveal the veil of
Nature, to profane her mysteries for a little curious skill pride, to ensnare
men's minds by sensual expressions seems a thing liable to heavy
constructions. But what is this (as one says, apollogyzing for himself in
such a business) but to arraigne Virtue at the bar of Vice? Has the Holy
Scripture it self, the Wisdom of God, as well in the old Law particularly, as
also in many passages of the New, balked this Argument? God that created these
parts, did he not intend their preservation in the state of Nature, and can
they be preserved so, if we know not their natural perfection? Or if the
injurious inventions of man have practically depraved these parts, can Nature
be vindicated, or her honesty asserted without knowledge and discovery of the
Abuses that have been, and are committed in these parts? Examples there are of
this Concession, not only in Latin, but in all mother Tongues. And the most of
my Histories are in English already, as appears by the grave Authors quoted,
and this has had an allowance in all Ages and Commonwealths, and the opinion
of grave and reverend Divines, is, that such discourses upon fit occasions are
not to be intermitted. Indeed, Yard-Balls.
it were to be wished that all men would come to the knowledge of these secrets
with pure eyes and ears, such as they were matched with in their Creation. But
shall we therefore forfeit our knowledge because some men cannot contain their
lewd and inordinate affection? Our intention is first and principally to
discover the abuses of the parts; Secondarily, to teach those who are sober
minded the natural use honesty and perfection of parts, as well to give glory
to him who has so wonderfully created them, as also to explode and detest the
mischieves, prodigious vanity, to which among, and above the rest, these parts
have been notoriously subjected. As much as was possible we have endeavored
(not frustrating our lawful scope) by honest words and circumlocutions to
render the Argument more favorable to the ears of those who are wise indeed,
and not to discontent any, unless the Negative ignorance of such, who
precisely think there is no other principle of goodness, than not to know
evil.

The Inhabitants of Ava in the West Indies, Purch. Pilgr. 3. lib. 1.
wear in their Yards betwixt the skin and flesh, Bells of Gold, Silver, or
Brass, of the bigness of Nuts; which they put in when they are of age to use
women, and in short time cure the place; and the men much please themselves to
hear the sound of them as they go, these Venus-Morris-Dancers frisking often
to the tune of their own Codpiece-musique.

In Pegu, Langiamnes, Siam, Purch. Pilgr. 3. lib. 10.
and the Bramas men wear Bunches, or little round Bals in their privy members,
some of them wear two, and some three, for they cut the skin and so put them
in, one into one side, The cause of the invention of Yard-balls.
and another into the other side; which they do when they are twenty five or
thirty years old, and at their pleasure they take one or more of these
yardballs out as they think good. When they marry, the Husband is, for every
Child which his wife has, to put in one until they come to three, and then no
more, for they say the women do desire them.

Magin. Georgr. Ind. orient.
One Geographer gives in evidence against the Peguans, that they are very much
given to luxury, and that they in favor of the women wear golden or silver
bells, hanging at their virile members, to the end that they make a sound as
they walk through the City.

Grimston of their manners.
Another says, the Peguans are wonderfully given to the love of women, and for
their sakes they wear little bells of Gold and Silver hanging at their
members, to the end they may make a noise when as they go in the streets.

Herberts Travels, lib. 3.
For Siam another Author reports, that to deter these Catamites, a late Queen
Rectrix commanded that all Male Children should have a bell of Gold (in it an
Adders Tongue dried) put through the prepuce, which in short time not only
became not contemptible, but in way of ornament, and for Music, few are now
without three or four; so that when they have a mind to marry, he has his
choice of what maid he likes, but beds her not until the Midwife presents a
sleepy Opiate potion, during the operation whereof, the Bell is loosed from the
flesh and fastened to the Foreskin, which hinders not, but titilates; A
description of these Yard-balls.
the Unguent is applied and the cure is perfected.

I believe the report of these Bells of Siam will ring like a loud lie, and the
yard, Tennis-Balls, keep a vile racketin men's imaginations, and ere Reason has
played out the Game, will be struck into the hazard of incredulity; yet beyond
expectation I have met with a kind of ocular assurance in this business, which
I owe to the courtesy of an ingenious Physician, who knowing my Design,
freely offered to contribute to the curiosity thereof; (I would all knowing men
were of his intellectual Constitution, and had the right gallant temper of a
Platonique Spirit, to communicate and advance Notiall Idea's.) This noble
Doctor (I say) procured me one of these Balls which a friend of his brought
from Pegu; when he delivered it unto me we both wondered at the unexpected size
and weight thereof, for it was a little bigger than a musket bullet, being
about an Inch in Diameter; the metal is of such a temper which we know not, it
is two parts Gold and one Brass, perfectly round, and yielding a very sweet
sound, far beyond any of our hand Symbals, which this somewhat resembles; and
the hissing melody thereof makes me to think that it is an Adders dried Tongue
that is within it, according as Historians report: but the containing Concave
being close and not open, as our little Bells, our curiosity would have spoiled
the instrument with a forced inspection; the Gentleman that brought it over,
informs us that they use there to put three or four of them in between the
Glans and the praeputium, and they remain fast there without slipping out; who
can sufficiently admire that any member should officiate clogged with such
weight! or that they should find stable room for it, A restraint of Sodomy.
and yet Travelers have discovered the ways of an artificial Capacity.
Surely the men exceed, not only us, but them of Ginne in the largeness of this
Organ, or else they must needs suffer much by such a dolorous extension of the
praepuce, as this fond fashion will necessarily occasion. Whether, O whether,
and to what prodigious extremities does the abused fantasy of man sometimes
drive him? Among all the Inventions that he ere found out, this would appear
most mad and filthy if it had been merely for Ornament, Music, or Delight;
but my zeal for the honesty of Nature is somewhat tempered with patience, when
I find that the original of this contrivance was, because they should not
abuse the Male Sex, for, in times past all the Country was so given to that
villainy, that they were scarce of people; And therefore a Queen Rectrix imposed
the wearing of those Balls upon them in way of restraint.

But as for the other part of their Queens ordinance, it no way stands with the
honesty of Nature; who the better to allure men from Sodomy, ordained that the
women should wear but three Cubits of cloth in their Smocks, which they wear
with three braces, which is therefore so straight that they cannot go but they
must show their secrets as 'twere aloft, and in their going they feign to hide
it with their hand, but cannot, by reason of the straightness of the cloth;
for they are so covered (as another observes, Herberts Travels.
) that (a base device!) it is made to open as they go, so as any impure air
gives all to men's immodest eye, denudating those parts which every modest eye
most scorns, each honest thought most hates to see and think upon.

Which thing it seems was invented by a Queen to be an occasion that the
sight thereof might remove from men that vice against Nature, (...) ^jects of
women to gain regard.
which they were greatly given unto, which sight should cause them to regard
Women the more. Yet they of the Kingdom of Benni are, it seems, Purch. Pilgr.
2. li^b. 7
of another opinion concerning the effect of this Invention; for there men and
women are not ashamed to show themselves one unto another, as they themselves
affirm, and by reason prove, saying, that a man more coveteth and desires a
thing that he sees not, or may not have, then that he sees and may borrow and
have; and for that cause they hide not their privy members.

And all those Spaniards, Portugals, Frenchmen, Flemmings, and Englishmen,
that have been conversant in those parts, have affirmed, that their manner of
going naked is neither fightly nor pleasing, and that nothing makes a woman
more despised and contemned than to behold her ordinarily naked. Wherefore they
are not to be imitated that so freely discover their parts of shame, only
thereby to gain husbands; Nor the Africans, Indians, Caribes, or Brasileans,
who go naked, not for ostentation, but by custom, either in regard of the
Countries great heat, or by not being acquainted with the use of Garments; but
rather we ought to cloathe and conceal those parts which Nature her self has
placed so far off, both from the sight of our selves and others. And indeed,
although it may seem to be a bait and provocation to lust and lasciviousness,
yet experience shows the contrary, for that splendid apparel, The Art of
Infibulation of the prep^ce
counterfeit crisped hair, is more discommendable than the nakedness of these
Barbarians, which might be made good by many reasons. Our first Parents, after
their sin, were justly ashamed, seeing their nakedness; And we detest the
Heresy, which violating the Law of Nature (not in this point sufficiently
observed by our Adamites) endeavors to bring in this shameful Custom. Yet we
are nevertheless to be condemned for condemning them for going naked, since we
offend in the contrary, with too much decking our bodies; And would we could
regard more modesty and necessity of habits, and use them rather for honesty
than to pride and vanity, which is more hurtful than their nakedness.

Among the Ancients, to prevent young effeminate Inamorato's, especially
Comedians, from untimely Venery, and cracking their voices, they were wont to
fasten a Ring or Buckle on the Foreskin of their Yard, as Celsus reports; and
hereto Martial seems to allude in that place, Mart. Epigr.
where he says, Dum ludit media, populo spectante, Palestra,
Heu! cecidit misero fibula; verpus erat.
Juvenal. Satyr.
A practice also noted by the Satyrist,
Solvitur his magno Comeodi fibula. --


Concerning this Art of Infibulation, or buttoning up the Prepuce with a Brass
or Silver Button on both sides of the Glans, a kind of rational invention, it
was borrowed, as I suppose, from the Egyptians or Arabians; Where they wear
Rings in their Yards and trusse up their Genitals within their Body.
for as Veslingus notes, among them, Vesling. Synt. Anatom.
such who by a serious vow of Chastity would gain and preserve an estimation
of purity, in that portion of their Foreskin reserved after their Circumcision,
being bored through, do wear a huge unmeasurable great Ring.

The Patagons, a Race of Giants, Purch. Pilgr. 1. lib. 2.
in the fortieth Degree of the South Pole, trusse their Genitall members so, as
it is hidden within their body.

Which is a transgression against the moral Law of Nature, established in our
members; Nature having excluded these parts from out the Continent of the body
for the better moderating of Concupiscence.

They in the Bay of Soldania have but one stone naturally, or Ceremonially,
Idem eodem l. 4.
my Author indeed knows not; yet I find in another that they trusse up their
right stone, Arrianus Juriscons. ff. de re militari. Haly Comment. ad lib. 3.
techn. Gal. text. 177. lib. 49. Pand. Iuris. Titul. 17. de re militari.
Herberts Travels.
which I suppose may be national unto them, for it is a thing that happens to
many, as it did to Silla and Cotta; Haly also speaks of one who was born but
with one Testicle only. Semi-Eunuchs and Eunuchs.
And the Civil Lawyers allow such for men, and that they may juremilitari make
their testament.

Most of the men of the Cape of good-Hope are Semi-Eunuchs, one stone being
ever taken away by the Nurse, either to distinguish them from ordinary men, or
that Mistress Venus allure them not from Pallas.

D. Mat. cap. 19. D. Hieron. cont. Iovin.
There are some who are not borne with any stone at all, who are Eunuchs from
their mothers womb, such a one was Dorothaeus Bishop of Antioch, a very
learned man, and skilful in the Greek and Hebrew, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
in whom Aurelianus the Emperor took great delight, as Eusebius witnesses.
And although these Instruments of Generation are called (...), because for the
most part every man has two, yet among other monstrous constitutions of these
parts, they have been found to be trebled, Caelius Rhod. lib. 24. cap. 4.
Jacob. Moccius ex advers. Joh. Drijandri. Scholiograph. ad cap. 62. l. 1. de
morb. intern. Holerii. Joh. Pontanus de rebus Coelest. cap. 6. l. 10. Kornman.
de vivorum mirac.
as it is reported of Agathocles the Tyrant of Cicily, and of Franciscus
Philelphus. And Anatomists have observed in their dissections, such an
unnatural triplicity in some, and this is said to be peculiar to some Families.

Many fantastical reasons have been framed, and ends propounded to introduce
Eunuchisme, and this way of degrading men from their manhood. Semiramis was the
first that caused young Male children to be made Eunuchs, therein offering
violence to Nature, and turning her from her appointed course, by a tacit Law,
as it were stopping the primigeniall Fountains of Seed, and those ways which
Nature had assigned for the propagation of Posterity, that so she might make
them have small voices, and to be more womanish, that conjoined with her, Ends
propounded in Eunuchisme.
she might the better conceal her usurpation and counterfeit manhood.

Upon which there arises a Physical question, whether the Testicles be
required to the forming of the Voice? Galen in his book de Semine, says, Galen
lib. de Semine.
that they do confer to the formation of the Voice, although they are remote
from the other Instruments of the Voice: the cause is placed in their native
heat, although it be not the proximate cause, but the Antecedent cause; for,
Galen in the same book does constitute the Testicles to be next the Heart, a
Fountain of heat and strength; so that the Testicles cut out, only not the
other Fountain is destroyed, but the heat of the very heart is lessened and
debilitated. One Fountain therefore of heat destroyed, the others strength is
decayed, and by consequence there is a necessity the voice should be changed.
And Castration is so experimentally known to advance the smalnesse and
sweetness of the voice, that as an ingenious Traveller has lately observed,
Mr Raymond in his voyage into Italy.
in Florence they are so given to the music of the Voice, that there the
Great ones keep their Castrati, whose Voices scandalize their breeches.
Concerning the reason of this effect of Castration, the Conceit of Aristotle is
pretty, although it agree not with the common opinion, who thinks the Heart is
stretched by the Testicles, and therefore relaxed when they are cut away, and
so a common principle affected, because the strength of the Nerves is relaxed
or loosened in their original or beginning. Even as we see it comes to pass
in Instruments which have a more acute or treble sound when the strings are
stretched, and a lower and more remiss when they are loosened: Right so is it
in Eunuchs; the Testicles being taken away, and so the heart affected, The
ends of Castration.
the Voice and very form becomes womanish. But according to Anatomicall
verity the strength of the heart depends not upon the contention or
stretching of the Testicles, but upon his own proper temper; neither if the
heart needed any such tenter, were the Testicles pins fitting for the same.

The Parthians used this out of Luxury for the retarding of Age, and the
prolongation of life, it having been observed, that castrated Animals in any
kind, and Spadoes by Art, live longer than they that retain their virilities,
and by this Artifice they retain a better habit of Body, Oemma Fris. Apend. ad
Apian. Cosmograph. pars 2. Munst. Cosm. lib. 5.
upon which score those Canibals who live near the Equator, who hunt after men
to eat them, when they have taken any Males of the neighboring Nations, they
many times geld them, and so fat them up for slaughter as we do Capons. Some
have practiced this Artifice to introduce a necessary Chastity and purity of
body, that their waiters might be more clean, as Claudius intimates of the
Babilonians practical intent, which the Romans afterward observed, Coghan the
Author of the haven of health
as appears by Juvenal, which is the Physique, that Coghan would have
prescribed if he had been Physician to our Ancient Abbats and Monks, who used
other less effectual means to preserve their Chastity, viz. the same remedy
that Mr Smith a Canon of Hereford practiced upon himself in the beginning of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Abscissionem Testiculorum, for this is the
surest remedy (says he) that can be devised for Cupids Colts. Benivenius de
A^a^tis.
Benivenius speaks of a Monk, who through an indiscreet zeal to Chastity,
being no way agreeable to that Rationabile obsequium that God requires,
Selfe-Castration.
played the same holy pranks with himself. And this course is so effectual to
prevent any just suspicion of incontinency, that some have practiced it upon
themselves, thereby to introduce a voluntary impotency, as Combalus did, who
perceiving himself to be affected by Stratonice the Wife of the King of
Assyria, and being to attend upon her in some Progress she made, secretly
castrated himself, and sealing up his virilities in a Box, delivered it unto
the King, to be kept as some Jewels of worth. Suspicion afterward growing of
his incontinency with the Queen, he was quitted of the accusation by that
pledge of his fidelity he had left in the Custody of the King: And this was the
first rise of the reputation of these Semi-virs, or halfe-men. You may read in
Schenchius, Schench. obser. lib. 4. Treasury of Time. vol. 1. lib. 2. cap. 7.
and the Treasure of Times, of other persons, who on their own private motion,
and for some such ends have committed the same cruel Trespass against Nature.
But the maine design in this business originally, was to make them more fit
to keep their women; the name Eunuch imposed upon them, being as it were a
cloak, wherewith they covered the injury done to Nature; it signifies as it
were Chamberlain and keeper of their Bed, entertained and appointed for the
preserving their women, Montaig. lib. 1. Essay 22.
yet in some Countries where Eunuchs have religious women in keeping, because
they shall not be loved, they have also their Noses and Lips cut off.

And as the Genitall parts put a difference between Nation and Nation, so
between one Religion and another: Religious Eunuchs.
For the Priests of Cybele, (the great mother of the Gods) used to cut off
their own members, and so geld themselves without danger of death, which they
do with a sheard of Samian earth.

Voscius de orig. and progr. Idolat. lib. 2.
I find in Voscius the reason why those Priests of the Goddess gelded
themselves, it was but in respect of the Corn that was reaped, but the
feminall force is in the harvest; for as the prolifique virtue is from the
virile parts, so seed from the Corn: And by their Example, a man of a simple
wit, to be revenged of his wife, played such a pranke with himself, of which
Lucilius; Lucil. Satyr. 7.
Hanc ubi vult male habere, ulcisci pro scelere ejus.
Testamsumit homo Samiam, sibique illico telo
Praecidit caulem, testesque una amputabat ambo.


Plin. not. Hist. lib. 11.
Thus Religion also has made Eunuchs, as the Priests of the Gauls, who
castrated themselves, Mat. cap. 19.
and of Stone-Priests became Galli Castrati, French Capons. And herein appeared
most manifestly the Lapse of Origens judgment, who having wrested and taken
all other places of Scripture in an allegorical sense, took this -- Some have
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God, in a litterall sense, and to
that end castrated himself. And there were many in his time, and since, were
hardly conceited of him, and (that justly) that he in the flower of his Age,
being then about twenty five years old, should deprive himself of Virga
virilis, not having in those parts any disease that might require any such
extirpation; Diverse ways of Castration.
for, to deprive himself (however sanctimonious his intentions were) of those
parts, contrary to the order of Nature, was an unlawful mutilation, and mere
treason committed against her. Two ways there are of this unnatural
dilapidation of the body, one is performed by contusion the other by excision,
the last being more approved of; for they who have suffered the contusion of
their Testicles, may now and then affect to play the man, some part (as it is
likely) of the Testicles lying hid within, those that had passed this kind of
Eunuchisme by contusion, were called Thlibiae, and Thladiae. And because
Physicians are now and then by Great ones, against their wills, compelled to
castrate also, Paul. Aeginet. lib. 6. cap. 68.
Paulus Aegineta delivers the manner of operation: A thing very improper to our
Art, which is the chiefest servant of Nature; for whereas the Physicians Art
does reduce bodies from the state which is against Nature into the natural;
the manner of making Eunuchs, which the Greeks call Eunuchismum, promises
the contrary. But the keen jealousy of latter times has gone a little nearer
with Eunuchs, Rousset de partu Caesar. sect. 6. cap. 6. Hist. 2. Cardan.
Comment. in Hippo. l. de Aere Aquis and locis. Lect. 62. Text. 19. Scaliger
exercit. 104. number. 8. ad subtle. Cardani.
and made them taste deeper of the Rasor, even to the total deprivation of the
Genitals: For although at first among the Turks their Eunuchs were only
Castrati, gelt, yet since perceiving Eunuchos posse etiam, non velle solum; now
they will not trust their Eunuchs with any part of their virility, no way
confiding in simple Eunuchs. But the Eunuchs in the Great Turks Seraglio, who
are in number about two hundred, they are all of them not only gelt, The time
of making Eunuchs.
but have their Yards also clean cut off, and are chosen of those Runegago
youths which are presented from time to time to the Grand Signiour; Graves
descrip. of the Grand Sign. Court.
Few or none of them are gelt against their will. For then (as the Master
Workmen in that business affirm) they would be in great danger of death,
wherefore to get their consent they promise them fair, and show unto them the
assurance they may have (in time) to become great men. All which must be done
when they are very young, at their first coming into the Seraglio: For it is a
work not to be wrought upon men of years, which invention, although it abate
their courage, yet they generally prove men of the greatest judgment and
fidelity, their minds being set on business rather than on pleasure.

This kind of Eunuchisme was of old a fashion in Persia, and all parts of the
Levant, where it is a Custom to geld their Male Children when they are young,
that being Eunuchs, they may be capable of places of Trust and preferment in
Princes Courts, who indeed are often advanced by that means, none being held
so trusty as they, especially to look to their women; who therefore think
they have a good bargain in exchanging the natural Conduit of their Urine for
a Quill, which they wear in their hats in a way of jolly ostentation.

Mareus Paulus Thenetus, and Garcias d' Orta a Portugal Physician, do deliver
for a certainty, that in Bengala (a Kingdom most potent at this day, seated on
the Islands, and mouth of the River Ganges in the East Indies) the Moors
inhabiting that place, Where they sell their Children to be made Eunuchs
do travel into other foreign Lands, and the neighboring Isles, to buy
young Children, whose Parents being poor and covetous of money, do sell their
Sons, else these villains will rob and steal them thence, and carry them
quite away, and not only cut off Virga, but Parastrates also; such as escape
death after this cutting, they educate them very delicately, and afterward
sell them to the Persians, and other Mahumatists, who buy them at a very dear
rate, to wit, three or four hundred Ducats a piece, to serve as men of their
Chambers, in a foul and unlawful acquaintance, and also to have the charge of
their Wives.

The Turks that dwell in Europe and Asia do use the very same Castration on
such young boys as they can seize on in the Christian Countries, and then make
sale of them in manner aforenamed. A practice seen and observed by the Lord
Villamont in the City of Damas in Syria, Ld Villamont Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
in the year 1589. where a beautiful Russian slave of a Bashaw, whom his
Master intended to geld (in full manner before recited) and then to present him
to his Daughter, as one fit to attend her in her Chamber; which deliberation
coming into the Slaves understanding, he concluded to shun his Masters intent,
because it was a hazard of life either in Child or man; and therefore rather
than thus to dye, he resolved to kill the Bashaw his Master before he would
endure so notorious an infamy, and executed his determination.

When other courses could not help, many have been so bold as to Castrate
themselves in the Leprosy, Castration high Treason against Nature.
and have been better; for, you shall not easily find any Castrati, or women,
troubled with that disease. Some more confident Physicians have put to their
hand, and those who have escaped the danger have proved cured; some in Mania,
or melancholy madness, have attempted the same, not without success,
although they have remained somewhat melancholy, like Gib'd Cats, some for the
prevention of the dangerous consequence of Hernia Intestinalis, have undergone
the same experiment.

And verily a dispensation may be granted in case of these inexorable, and
otherwise incurable diseases. But upon any other pretense whatsoever, to
adulterate the coin and image of Nature by so gross an allay as makes them
not current for men, or willingly to degenerate into the Nature of women,
suffering themselves to be transformed from the Masculine to the Feminine
appearance (a false Copy) is to offer as great an Injury to Nature as the
malice of man's refractory wit can be guilty of: And it is so manifestly against
the Law of Nature to tamper with the witnesses of man's virility, that our Laws
have made it Felony to geld any man against his will. There is an ancient
Fable, that the fish called Remora, did stop the ship of Perianders
Ambassadors, whom he had sent to geld all the Males that were left of the blood
Royal; as if Nature her self held it an unworthy Act that man should be
despoiled of these parts that were given him for the preservation of the whole
kind. And although this Castration of the Testicles being not done in an
apparent part, causes (of it self) no deformity, yet because when both the
Testicles are cut out, Castration of women.
other mischiefs follow, (especially if this be done while they are in the
years of puberty,) which betray them to be Eunuchs, as an effeminate voice,
and the want of a beard, by this means it brings a deformity upon them. And
although man may live without them, yet after a manner they ought to be
accounted as principal members, Galen lib. de Semine.
for it appears that Galen preferred the Testicles to the Heart; for, says
he, the Heart indeed is the Author of life, but the Testicles conduce to
well-being, for they communicate a certain air to the whole Body, by whose
mediation virility is reconciled, the body acquires strength and firmness, is
made more lively; at length, the principal members do more perfectly execute
their office; which parts being cut away, besides that, men are deprived of the
Generative power, they want all these conveniences, the venerian mood is
extinguished, Love grows cold, the Veins fall, the color and heat grow dead
and withered, they are made beardlesse, and altogether effeminate, therefore
the Testicles are of that efficacy, that they corroborate and affect the other
bowels with a common benefit.

The extravagant invention of man has run out so far as the Castration of
women; Coelius Rhod. li. 4. antiq. lect. in cap. 10. and lib. 20. cap. 14.
Athen. Dipn. lib. 12. Xanthus lib. 2. Lydiorum. Alciat in lib. Spadonum.
Andramistes the King of Lydia, as the report goes, was the first that made
women Eunuchs, whom he used instead of Male Eunuchs, after whose examples the
women of Egypt were sometimes spaded. Giges is accused of the same trespass
against Nature by Hesychius and Suidas. The end might be the same in spading
women as men, both being made thereby impotent, and so consequently apt to envy
others, The Danger of spading women.
and less subject to be corrupted with their passions. Julius Alex. lib. 22.
cap. 14. Salubr. and in annot. ad. Gal. page 122. Reiner. Reineceius Tom. 3.
Hist. de Lydorum orig. and imper. p. 82. Athen. Voscius lib. 17. de orig. and
progressu Idolat. fol. 1081
And it seems Julius Alexandrinus could never find that this was a received
Custom in any Nation; yet he had read in diverse Authors of many Castrated to
abate their untamed Lust: But that end which the first inventors of this
shameful deed propounded to themselves, was (as is supposed) to prolong their
youth, and that they might perpetually use and enjoy them in a flourishing
condition of body. It is an Anatomicall Question, An mulier Castrati possit,
and it appears de facto, to have been done; but concerning the manner of
operation there arises a greater difficulty: Whether they castrated women by
drawing out their womb, or by avulsion of their Testicles? Both ways it is
certain that women will be brought into great danger of life; for, although
Sows may be spaded, yet with the like security it cannot be administered in
women, by reason of the seat wherein they are placed, and the society they have
with other parts: For he must necessarily cut both the Flanks who would
Castrate a woman, Cardan. Dialog. T^tim. inscript.
a work full of desperate hazard; yet it may be done with little or no
danger, if it be attempted with an Artfull hand. And a Friend of mine told me
he knew a maid in Northamptonshire that was thus spaded by a Sow-gelder, and
escaping the danger grew thereupon very fat. A Gentleman who undertook since
in some company to tell me this Story again, said that he was present at the
Assizes of Northampton when this Sow-gelder was arraigned for this Fact. I
doubt there is some mistake in the Scene, A maid spaded a new way.
for by another Information of a Justice than was there, it was in
Lincolne-shire, and the Fact done upon Lincoln Heath, and that was not his
first Fact, so that his first attempt might be upon the Northampton maid; this
last maids name was Margaret Brigstock; but the Judges were much confounded how
to give Sentence upon an Act against which they had no Law; for, although the
Castration of men was Felony by the Law, yet there was nothing enacted against
spading of women; and well might they be ignorant of such a Case, when
Platerus, the great Physician, professes he remembers not that ever he read
or heard of such an attempt. This Clearke (for that was his name) was hanged
for this last Fact, but not by a Law, but for robbing her of two penniworth of
Apples which she had in her Apron. But it is more dangerous to pluck out the
Womb, although this succeeded well to a certain Sow-gelder, who suspecting
his Daughter guilty of Adultery, violently extracting the Womb, spaded her
after the manner of Cattle, that afterward she might be unfit for bearing of
Children, Vuierus lib. 4. de praestig. Demon. cap. 2.
as Vuierus witnesses; And we read that this Johannes ab Essen,
Sow-gelder-Generall to the Clivensian Duke, was deservedly punished by the
Prince with a pecuniary mulct for that villainous deed. But Riolanus supposes,
that as they button up the Naturals of Mares which they would not have horsed,
to wit, with Iron rings trajected in order, Dalechamp. in not is ad lib. 12.
Athenaei Deipnosoph.
wherewith their Naturals are shut up; so women of old were spaded, for so
Dalechampius interprets the ancient Castration of women, Circumcision where
first practiced.
after which manner, as he hears, the jealous Italians secure their Wives from
the admittance of any Rival.

Circumcision, a strange and smart invention of man, is a very ancient device
practiced to the diminution of the natural comeliness of this part.

Joh. Bohem. de rit. gent. lib. 1.
The Egyptians (as the Greeks are persuaded) were the first that circumcised
their virilities, confessing they were Circumcised for cleanness, because it
was better to be clean than comely or beautiful. Coelius Rhod.
Caelius says, they were wont to Circumcise their Newborn Infants,
conceiving it not a little to conduce to the commodities of life, thinking that
the filth and corruption of their bodies was thereby taken away.

Grimston of their manners.
And it is thought, that perchance the Egyptian Priests, and other Flamines of
the natural Law, used Circumcision as a certain sign of Piety, as Orus
Apollo insinuates, saying, that a Cynocephalus was a note of Sacrifice, because
he was borne Circumcised; others think they used it as a note of religious
cleanness; and that the Egyptian Priests who were bound to shave all their
body every three days, to the end they might not carry any filthiness into
the Temple and Sacrifice, so they did cut the Foreskin to be more neat, and
that it was more seemly to be without filthiness than in any other sort
whatsoever.

Veslingus in Synt. Anatom.
Veslingus thinks they were necessitated to do this to a natural end, for the
prepuce in the Egyptian and Arabian little Children grows out often so beyond
measure, (...) Christians.
and by much increasing, is so attenuated, that they are constrained, no less
for fear of a Phimosis, than by the prescript of Religion, to cut off part
thereof; so over-carefull sometimes is Nature in providing for a decent
covering of this shameful part.

That the Egyptians used Circumcision appears by Philo Judaeus, They mock,
says he, at our Circumcision, which was in great honor with other Nations,
especially the Egyptians; Philo Judaeus.
and there was some cause why it was a Custom with them, unless we would
condemn the easiness of a Noble and most ancient Nation, since it is not
likely that they would rashly Circumcise so many Millions, and ordain the
torment of Mutilation of the dearest pledges in their body.

At this day the Copties, Sands Travels. lib. 2.
called commonly and corruptly Coftes, who are the true Egyptians, the name
signifies privation, in regard (as some will have it) of their Circumcision,
notwithstanding they are Christians they are Circumcised: whereof they now
begin to be ashamed, saying, that in the Country they are thereunto compelled
by the Moors, in Cities where secure from violence, they use it not, doing it
rather in that it is an ancient Custom of their Nation, mentioned by
Herodotus, than out of Religion. The Colchians, Ethiopians, Trogloditians,
Syrians, and Phaenicians, were of the same Cut. Grimston of their manners.
The Iucatans used Circumcision, but not all in general. But Circumcision has
been most remarkable in the Hebrews, Genesis 16.
not that they took this fashion from the Egyptians, but from the Covenant God
made with Abraham: Reasons of Circumcision.
But the Circumcision of Abraham was no new contrivance, but at length approved
of and sanctified by God, Vallesius in sacra Philos. cap. 18.
as Vallesius well collects. Strabo who has a strange History of Moses,
contrary to the received truth, says, he commanded not Circumcision, but that
Circumcision, excision, and if there were any such like thing, were introduced
by his superstitious and tyrannical successors; but there was a plain
command for this Act on the eighth day, according to Moses Law. Philo
alleges four Reasons why the Foreskin was commanded to be cut off: For the
better prevention of the disease called the Carbuncle, that the whole body
might be kept more pure and clean, and that no soil or filth should be hid in
the Foreskin, that they might be more apt to Generation, and the part
circumcised should better express the similitude of the Heart.

Moses Egyptius.
Moses Egyptius says, that Circumcision helps to bridle and restrain
inordinate lust and concupiscence of the flesh, but the contrary does appear;
for no Nation is more given to carnal lust than the Egyptians, Saracens, and
Turks that are Circumcised. Some think, in greater detestation of the
superstition of the Egyptians, and other Nations that did adore that part, and
make an Idol of it under the name of Priapus, and did carry it about in open
show in their wicked idolatrous Solemnities.

When the Foreskin was circumcised it might by Art be drawn over again, as
Epiphanius collecteth out of Paul: 1 Cor. 7.18. 1 Machab. 1.16.
And such mention is made of some in Maccabes that renounce their Circumcision,
and made themselves uncircumcised; The manner of Circumcision with the modern
Jews.
This practice of drawing again the Foreskin that was circumcised, is thought
by Epiphanius to have been invented by Esau, to deny his profession, and to
raze out his Circumcision. You shall find in Paraeus, among his cures of
praeternaturall defects, the cure of a prepuce made short by Circumcision,
which is used to the Jews, when they having abjured their Religion full of
Superstitions, for handsomnesse sake they would cover the Nut of their Yard
with a Prepuce, and recover their cut off skin; The present Jews Circumcise
upon the eighth day, and it may not be done before; and in case the Child
should be sick, or very weak, it may be deferred longer, till such time as he
shall be in health and able to endure it, then they use to make choice of a
Circumciser, which they call Mohel, which may be whomsoever they please, so he
be but an expert and skillful man at the business, and they account it to be
the most meritorious thing that can be to be a Circumciser: And if by chance
the Father of the Infant be one of these, he then circumciseth his own Child
himself. The Godfather sits upon the seat provided for him, and so taking
the Child in his arms, fitly places him upon his knees, then comes the
Circumciser with a Charger in his hand, wherein are the Instruments, and other
necessaries for the present business, as namely a Razor, restringent powders,
with little clouts dipped in oil of Roses, and some also use to provide a
dish-full of Sand to put the Foreskin into when it is cut off; then the
Circumciser unswathes the Child; Mohammedan Circumcision.
and some use to have silver pinsers, with which they take up as much as they
mean to cut off of the Foreskin, then does he take his Razor and cut off that
thicker skin of the Prepuce, and afterward with his thumb nail he rends in
pieces that other thinner skin that remains. The people that are present
forthwith presage unto him that it will be much advantageous to his marriage,
in the mean time the Circumciser going on in his business, with his mouth
sucketh the blood which abundantly flows from the wound, doing this two or
three times, and so spitting it forth into a bowl of Wine, with which he
afterward in naming the Child besprinkleth his Face; Then does he clap upon
the wound some Sanguis Draconis, powder of Coral, and other restringent
things, wrapping it about with plasters of oil of Roses, and so binding it up
close, the Child is swathed again; the Child uses to have his wound healed in
a short space, and it is never above twenty four hours in healing.

Solin. and Com. Draudius.
The People of Loango, in the Province of Congo, are Circumcised after the
manner of the Hebrews.

Munst. Cosmog. lib. 5. cap. 76.
The Mahometans also are circumcised, but it is thought that Mahomet in the
Alcoran commanded Circumcision, not as any point of Religion, but for mere
superstition, or as some say, lest there should remain some filth under the
Prepuce after his Followers had washed themselves. Munster describes the
Turkish Circumcision after this manner, Munst. Cosmog. lib. 4. cap. 78.
a precious Banquet being prepared, and their Friends thereunto invited to the
Parents house, The difference of the Mahometans and Jews Circumcision.
afterward while they are at Banquet, and during the Feast, the Boy to be
Circumcised is brought in, whose Nut the Physician does uncover, laying hold of
the replicated skin with a pair of Pincers, then to take away all fear from
the Child, he says he will perform the Circumcision the next day, but in the
interim on a sudden he cuts off the Prepuce, applying a little salt to the
wound, afterward he is led into the Bath with great Pomp. This is celebrated
at the seventh or eighth year of the child's Age, who had before received his
name at his Birth. This Circumcision of Turks is somewhat more favorable, and
not so deeply performed as the Judaicall. A reverend ingenious Friend of mine,
who had been present and seen the manner of their Circumcision, informs me,
that the Circumciser draws the Prepuce a little over the end of the Nut, and
then laying hold of that part which is brought quite over with a pair of
Pincers, he cutteth it off with a knife, and throws it into a Chafendish of
Coals which stands by him, afterward with a certain powder he cures the
wound. The Jews that dwell in Turkey, are for a note of distinction, not only
somewhat more largely circumcised, but at their Circumcision the Prepuce in
Dorso penis is a little slit up with the Priests nail, and by this mark they
use to distinguish a dead Jew from a Mohammedan, and to afford them differing
Burials.

The Mahometans of Africa do excise themselves, because a Prophet named Homer
commanded them. The manner of Circumcision at Ginney and Binney.
And there are women that have this office of cutting them, but practice it not
in the presence of men; which Act is thought well of in the women; and they go
crying in the streets of Towns and Villages to make known what they can do,
carrying themselves so wisely in the deed, that they cut but little of the
superficies, for otherwise there would follow a great flux of blood.

In Madagascar they are circumcised, but as Mahometans.

About the sixth year of their Age.
The Circumcision that they use at Ginney and Binney, is, as is conceived, done
for a natural end, the Ceremony being performed in the morning, when the Sun
is some two hours high; Mr Jobson in his discovery of these Countries,
relates the ceremony after this manner, there was a Messenger came to entreat
us to send Samgulley, a Negro Boy of ours, (that was taken from us to be
circumcised) a white cloth, and that he would pray us to come and see him. As
soon as we came he was brought forth into the open field, between the houses
and the place where they remained, who were cut the day before: he had taken
away his clothes they brought him ashore in; which was a Shirt, Breeches, and a
Cap of stripped stuff, after the greatest fashion of the Country, and only
brought him with a white cloth close about him. Whereas we did expect some
great ceremony after a religious manner to be performed; He was first set down
upon a little molehill, diverse people coming forth to see him, amongst the
which were most women, who stood directly a little distance off looking on; the
Master of the Town was likewise there, (...) Circumcision at Ginney.
and three of us, amongst which our Surgeon was one, to comfort him not to
fear; he was very confident, entreating me to lay my hand upon his shoulder;
from amongst the Blacks came forth an ordinary man with a short knife in his
hand, which he whetted as he came, like one of our Butchers unto a Beast, and
causing the Boy to stand up, he took off his clothes giving it to a stander by
to hold, so as he was stark naked, and set his hands upon his sides, being
neither bound nor held: Howbeit there were some by, who offered to hold his
Arms, but because he promised not to move, they let him alone, the Executioner
taking hold of his Members, drawing the skin over very far, as we conceived,
cut him largely, and had three several cuts before he had done, whereat the Boy
shrunk very little; in so much as the Master of the Town, who stood by, told
us, he had very seldom seen any abide it with so great a courage; to our
thinking it was exceeding fearful and full of terror, insomuch as I told the
Doer in a very angry manner he had utterly spoiled him; when he asked wherein,
I replied, in cutting him so deep: His answer was, it is so much the better for
him, and without any curiosity taking up his cloth showed his own members,
that it might appear he was cut as far; howbeit my distaste was such upon him
that I could not yield to give him any thing in the way of gratuity to wash his
hands withal; and as the manner of the Country is to do by such as are Friends
to the party circumcised; the thing performed, the Boys white cloth was cast
over him, Privileges affected to Circumcision.
and by two men which held his arms he was hurried apace to the same quarter
where the other that were cut remained: We made first a request that they would
let us go along to the place with him, and were going with some of the people;
but presently in haste overtooke us four ancient men, who did not only stay
our going, but made show of much displeasure to such as were going with us, and
would by no means suffer that we should come amongst them; then we desired we
might have the Boy along with us, telling them we had better means to cure
him, and to make him sooner well than they had, showing our Surgeon unto
them, who they knew had healed wounds and sores amongst them, but we could not
prevail; by the interposing of these ancient men, some of the rest seeming to
consent unto us: So as we were there driven to leave our Boy, who amongst the
rest of his Consorts had without doubt no other Surgery to cure his tender
malady but only to attend the expectation of time, who by the help of their
youth and nature might wear is out; which appears the rather to us, in regard
at these times there is unto these youths allowed a certain licentious
liberty, whereby they may steal and take away peoples hens, or poultry; nay,
from the Fulbies a Biefe, or cattle to eat and banquet withal amongst
themselves, without any offense to the Laws or Government of the Country,
which at other times is strict in that behalf, thereby animating, and
encouraging their spirits to more alacrity, and according to the condition of
their wanton Age, The Ginnie Circumcision.
by these stolen delights to draw the more willingly to the thing, and make the
time of their recovery less tedious unto themselves, and discourageable to
others. And if I might be worthy to deliver my opinion, considering this their
Circumcision, as I have carefully observed, I should conclude, it were done out
of mere necessity, as a Moral Law for the preservation of their lives and
healths, and so found out by their precedent Ancestors, and by strict
observations laid peremptorily upon them, wherein I shall submit my self in
the account I could give to more able judgments, only this you may please to
note, that it is done without any religious Ceremony, and the word in their
Language is expressed unto us by no other signification than cutting of pricks;
and this is done in certain bigger Towns of the Country whether the smaller
Towns and Habitations make their resorts, bringing their Youth to be all cut
together. Now from the place where they that were cut were kept all together,
there proceeded a great noise of Voices, as also drumming, and thumping more
clamorously; demanding what it meant, I was answered, in that place remained
those Youths that were cut, and they were to continue until such time as they
were recovered of their soreness, and that the greatness of the noise did
come from those people who kept them company, which were the younger sort of
people above their Age, who had already past and received their Circumcision.

A new way of Circumcision.
Alex. Benedict lib. 1. cap. 34. de curand. morb.
The Assyrians indeed have a new way, as it were by strangulation, when they
would Circumcise great youths or men, that they may not feel the pains, they
lay them upright in a Bath, and comprehend the veins about the throat,
whereupon sense and motion are intercepted, and so they cut off their privities
as apopecticall parts of the body.

Thus the superstitious and pragmaticall wit of man has ventured upon many
conceited ways of Transgression, to introduce an Artificial deformity upon
this part, by an untoward deprivation of an ornamentall portion; yet I
confess, Anatomists are not very well agreed about the Natural use thereof;
Unless I be deceived, says Galen, the Prepuce was only for beauty, yet in
another place he adds, for an operiment: because there is no great necessity of
it, which appears out of experience, for your Jews were (as the Mahohometans
are) fruitful, although they be (...), or Apella. Ulmus thinks the skin of the
Prepuce a great beauty, as may be seen by the deformity of the Ape; and they
who say it was ordained for ornament, do it not without good reason, because
upon the more dishonest part, God and Nature, or rather the God of Nature has
put the more honor, that is, the more covering. Saint Ambrose therefore cannot
be understood in a litterall sense, where he says, that the Foreskin was cut
off, that those which were the more ignoble members should put on, and be
surrounded with more comeliness and honesty. It Is true, one may be borne
Circumcised by Nature, and they write that Sem was so borne, of which assertion
there is no ground; this natural Circumcision is very rare, but when the
Prepuce is drawn back by Nature that it cannot cover the Glans or Nut, The
inconveniences of Circumcision.
this affection is called Capistratio. This Foreskin in the end of it
sometimes is so contracted and drawn together, that it cannot be drawn back, or
the Nut discovered without the help of a Chyrurgion. Yet neither of these
misprisions of Nature in this Organicall part are to be endeavored by Art in a
foolish imitation, since Art was rather intended for the reformation of such
unnatural accidents. Again, this Cutis Epiphisis, as Galen calls it, in Latin
preputium, or the Foreskin, a putando, was devised, that the Glans or Nut of
the Yard or virile member might be kept smooth, soft, and glib, it being a
covering which arises from the skin of the Yard, is brought forward, and
again reflected and returned. But when the Nut is uncovered, that it might
recover its cover again, this Prepuce is tied in the lower part with a
membranous band or tie, which the Greeks call (...), vinculum caninum, the
Latins frenum, in English the Bridle. Archangelus calls it a Ligament. This is
that which bridleth, or reineth up the Foreskin on the lower side to the top
of the Nut by that natural signature exhibiting a cautionary prevention, and
the dislike of Nature of any of this kind of uncomely baldness. So that these
recited conveniences of Nature, and others also, are merely lost by this
Artifice; and that cleanness (of any) which they acquire by Circumcision, is
but a supposed benefit, not worth so shameful and odious an endeavor.

Pars insuper praeputii prominentior and propendens in coitu nunc sursum, nunc
deorsum fertur, ut hoc attritu magis incalescat, cum mulierum voluptate and
tentigine cujus contentationis fruitione per hanc injuriosam inventionem
defraudantur. The injury of Circumcision.
For the shortness of the Prepuce is reckoned among the organicall diseases of
the Yard, whether it be original or assititious, by an Artificial procision
of it: And although neither of these kinds of brevity does incommodate the
action of the Yard, which is extention and e^aculation of the seed; or
prejudice fruitfulness: Tamen Circumcisio aliquid a voluptate sexus alterius
detrahit titilationem diminiendo, hinc Illa in Epigrammate invisa fuit haec
inventio, magis rationabile putans addidisse huic organo quam substraxisse.
Hence also it is thought there commonly passes opinions of invitement, that
the Jewish women desire copulation with the Christians rather than their own
Nation, and affect Christian Carnality before Circumcised Venery, D. Brown
Pseudoxia Epidem.
as the ingenious Examiner of Popular errors well notes. And yet it is noted,
that the Turks, Persians, and most Oriental Nations, use Opium to extimulate
them to Venery, and they are thought to speak probably, who affirm their
intent and effect of eating Opium is not so much to invigorate themselves in
Coition, as to prolong the act, and spin out the motions of Carnality; which
Venerian Prolongers were intended to lengthen the titillations of Lust,
luxurious Leachers thinking Nature too sudden in her motions. And therefore
Mahomet well knowing this their beastly and inordinate affection, promises
them that the felicity of their Paradise should consist in a Jubilee of
Conjunction, that is, a coition of one Act prolonged unto fifty years. For any
Natural end therefore, except in case of an Epidemicall disease or Gangrene to
Circumcise, The end of Judaicall Circumcision.
that is, to cut off the top of the uppermost skin of the secret parts, is
directly against the honesty of Nature, and an injurious unsufferable trick put
upon her. As for Circumcision commanded by God, it was for a moral reason, and
had an express command; otherwise, Dr Whateley.
as a Grave Divine expresses it in the case of Abraham, as a natural man, it
would have seemed the most foolish thing in the world, a matter of great
reproach, which would make him as it made his Posterity after him, to seem
ridiculous to all the world, it carried an appearance of much indecency and
shamefulnesse, to cause all his servants to discover themselves unto him. Much
more might have been alleged against this Ordinance; What good could it do?
What was any man the better, because he had wounded himself, and put his body
to torture? And indeed, as Lactantius, Eucherius, Irenaeus, and all the Greek
and Latin Fathers say, unless this mutilation of the flesh in the Jews did
signify the Circum-of the heart, or had some figurative meaning in it, as the
taking away of Original sin, it would have been a most unreasonable thing. For
if God would have had only the Foreskin cut off, he had from the beginning
made man without a Prepuce. No little danger of life (also) they incurred in
this case; for, the Judicial Circumcision was performed with a sharp cutting
stone, and not with any knife of iron steeled, a thing which was most dolorous,
and whereby the young tender Infants sometimes got a Fever, whereof they after
dyed. Howbeit, they had enough to do with other occasions, as the cutting and
fall of the Navel, whereby Hyppocrates gives assurance that Children do incur
diverse dangers. Thevet, and many others, who have voyaged into the Countries
where this Circumcision is used, Circumcision of women.
do say, that they have seen store of young people dye, grown to indifferent
stature, and young Children of eight days old, only by being Circumcised,
which may manifestly be proved by Sacred Histories. The Sons of Jacob, after
they had fraudulently Circumcised all the Males of the City of Sichem, situate
in the Land of Canaan, they took them the third day after their Circumcision
and made them pass the Edge of the Sword, for they well knew, that they were
so sore and tormented with pain, as they could not stand upon their own
defense.

Cael; Rhod.
In Arabia there is a kind of People called Creophagi, among whom they were not
wont to circumcise (Judaically) the men only, but the women also.

Herb. Travels.
The women of the Cape of Good Hope also excise themselves, not from a notion of
Religion, but as an Ornament.

Bellonius 3. observe. 28 Jovius lib. 3. Magin. Geogr.
In Ethiopia, especially in the Dominions of Prester John, they Circumcise
women. These Abassines have added error upon error, and sin upon sin, for
they cause their Females to be circumcised, whom they call Cophles. A thing
which was never practiced in Moses Law, neither was there ever found any
express Commandment to do it; I know not where the Noselesse Moors learned
it, for they cut their Females, although they be of marriage estate, taking
away a certain Apophosis, or excrescence of musculous skin that descends
from the superior part of the Matrix, which some call Nympha, or Hymenea, one
growing on either side, even so far as the Orifice of the neck of the Bladder,
The way of Circumcising women.
which serve the erection to coition. Many women both here and elsewhere have
caused themselves to be cut, as being overgreat, and exceeding Nature, but not
for any matter of Religion. In all which places it is done by cutting that part
which answers the Prepuce or Foreskin in a man.

Munster (indeed) shows the original of this invention, attributing it to the
Queen of Sheba, Munst. in Cosm. lib. 6. cap. 57.
whose proper name was Maqueda, who ordained that women should be circumcised,
led to it by this reason, that as men have a Prepuce, so women also after the
same manner have a glandulous flesh in their Genitals, which they call Nympha,
not unfit to receive the character of Circumcision, this being used to the
Males and Females upon the eight day.

The Chiribichenses use to bind up the Fore-skinne of their Privities with a
little Cord, Helyn. Geogr.
and untie it not but to make water, or when they use the Act of Generation.

Montaigne in his Essaies, Nations that tie up the end of their Yard.
speaking of these late discovered Nations, says, as there were some people
found who took pleasure to unhood the end of their Yard, and to cut off the
Foreskin, after the manner of the Mahometans and Jews; Some there were found,
that made so great a conscience to unhood it, that with little strings they
carried their Foreskin very carefully, outstretched and fastened above, for
fear that end should see the air. A restraint, which if Nature had imposed
upon them, Momus might have found an occasion to Cavil, and they escape well if
they pay not dear for this invention; and that some are not oftener borne with
their secrets so contracted and drawn together, as some have been among us,
for which Fabricius ab aqua pendens has showed the way of Chyrurgicall
reduction, Fabricius ab Aquapendens in Chirurg.
affirming upon his own experience, that such are not barren as some have
thought them to be. This fantastical cohibition against the freedom of
Nature in this part, Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
makes me reflect upon as inconvenient a restraint (deserving but a collateral
insertion) imposed upon the reverse of this, and the benefit we receive from
the egestions of Port Esquiline: For the Guineans are very careful to let a
fart, and wondered at the Netherlands rusticity and impudence, who used it so
commonly, and durst commit such a stink in presence, they esteeming it, not
only to be a great shame and contempt done unto them, but they had rather die
than perpetrate such an abominable act.

De Bry Hist. Ind.
The Irish are much of the same opinion in this point of unnatural restraint,
whereas the Romans by an Edict of Claudius the Emperor, (...) adorn their
Genitals with precious stones.
most consonant to the Law of Nature, at all times, and in all places, upon a
just necessity, freely challenged the benefit of Nature; Verily, although it be
not held decent before Superiors, as a note of some familiarity and contempt,
yet they who have not confidence enough to claim the benefit of the Law of
Nature, ratified by Claudius, had not need be subject to the Colic, for they
would hardly endure the Criterium of Nature, when, as Hippocrates speaks,
Crepitus ventris solvit morbum.

Those milder kind of Canibals, Gemma Fris. Apend. ad Appian. Cosmogr. pars 2.
who inhabit beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, not only bore their Lips and
Ears to receive in ornaments, but in their abominable pride they pierce their
Genitals, to adorn them outwardly with most eminent precious stones.

In Spain, Turkey, and many other hot Countries, they deprive the secret parts
of that which Nature intended to make them more secret, the Hair, which in
Turkey is done in their Banians by a powder. Which powder (as Bellonius, and
Iacobus Fontanus inform us, is called by the Turks Rusma, being some fossile,
like to the excrement or dross of Iron, but lighter, blacker, and as it were
burnt, which without burning, takes off clean the Hair, that there remains
no sign of hair behind.

This is done upon pretense of much cleanliness, and to avoid some
inconvenience which the heat of those Countries might otherwise occasion; and
it seems so rational a thing in their weekly practice, that they esteem all
Nations nasty that concur not with them herein. Where the Hymen is held
unprofitable.


The absence of which modest furniture in women here, would be more rationally
suspected as a note of unwholsomnesse; to prevent which deserved suspicion,
some (as the report goes) have been found to have contrived an artificial
supply, and there are such instruments of accommodation vendible by name. I
have been told that an English Lady, who was named unto me, being in Turkey,
and out of Curiosity entering the Banes, and suffering her self to be dealt
withal according to this their Custom, her Husband thereupon entertained such
a suspicion that he forbore her bed for two years after.

Vesalius lib. de China.
Vesalius says, that in some places the Midwives were wont to break that
membrane as unprofitable, which Anatomists call Hymen, Columnam, and Claustrum
virginale, Hymen quasi Limen, the entrance, the pillar, or lock, or flower of
Virginity; for, being whole, it is the only sure note of untamed Virginity: And
the very Index and Conservatrix of it. This they do, Digitum podici and vulvae
immittendo, ut parts istas connatas aperiant. Even as they are wont with their
Nails to cut the Bridle of the Tongue in them that are tongue-ty'd; so that it
may indeed in those places (where the flower of Virginity is so soon cropped,
and Nature defloured) be a question, An Hymen reperiatur? And we may very well
in the cause of Nature bring a Writ of Quare clausum fregit, against such fond
Emissaries of Lucina.

Indeed many famous Physicians have once conceived an opinion, as if Nature had
not endued all Virgins with this ornament, The Hymen asserted.
or muniment of integrity; among whom I most bemoane the error of Antonius
Ulmus in this matter; in other things a faithful Champion of Nature, and
zealous of her honor: Whereas Vesalius, Fallopius, Spigelius, and the most
ocular Anatomists are strong assertors of this natural preservative, making it
good by an Autopticall demonstration. Among the rest Wierus most positively,
and as the truth requires, affirms, that all kind of maids are from the
beginning endowed with the birthright of Virginity, not one excepted; and that
this exists the preserver, keeper, and muniment of corporal purity: Nor is
this Hymenean constitution universally established by an ordinary Law; but
Nature is so solicitous about the safeguard and protection of Virgins, that for
the more secure straightning of the Virgin Zone, as it were with the expansion
of a thinner skin, does sometimes draw over another membrane, which transversly
like a Zone stretched out does cover the chinke of the Hymen; which the most
skillful Dissectors have described in like manner for the Hymen, although it be
found in few, and being found, by the rashness of the Midwives it is for the
most part, as an unprofitable covering burst or broke asunder. Veslingus, who
has visibly exhibited the Hymen to chaste minds, as it is observed in
marriageable Virgins, and Infants, has described the form also of this
extraordinary membrane. After all which ocular demonstrations, I cannot but
wonder at the strange dissension of some other Anatomists, who although they
allow a Hymen or Virginal flower, will have it consist of four Caruncles,
placed in the middle of the neck of the Womb, in manner of a Crown;
Hermophradites.
and in Virgins by the intervention (until they be forced asunder in
devirgination) of little Fibers circularly interwoven and wrinkled together,
yet proforated as the other. Among whom Lodovicus Gardinius enters his dissent
thus; Gardinius Instit.
To say that any skin placed overthwart in the midst of the neck of the Womb,
which should make the neck impervious, should be the Hymen, is altogether
fabulous, or at least is so besides the order of Nature as the string is, which
sometimes against Nature, is engendered under the tongue of Infants to be taken
away.

Hist. in Floridae.
In Florida and Virginia there is a Nation of Hermophrodites, which have the
generative parts of both Sexes. Iacobus de Moyne, whose Surname is de Morgues,
and who followed Laudonerius in that Navigation, makes a description of them in
certain figures, reporting that they are hated by the very Indians, yet they
employ them, because they are strong and able bodied, instead of Beasts, to
carry burdens, and all other servile offices.

In the time of Innocent the third, there was a Heresy sprung up, which
affirmed that Sexes had not been divided if Adam had not sinned, therein making
the first man an Hermophradite; and therefore they would not have
Hermophradites accounted Monsters, whereas they are the greatest Monsters of
all. August. de Civit. Dei lib. 26. cap. 8.
St Augustine confesses, that such Monsters are found, but very seldom. But
lest this foul kind of men should arrogate praise to themselves upon that
passage of Genesis, wherein the Creation of man is delivered, Idem de Genesi ad
literam. l. 3. cap. 22.
he answers thus: Let no man think that it was so done, that in one man both
Sexes were expressed, after that manner, The kinds of Hermophradites.
as some are borne whom they call Androgyni: therefore the plural number is
always added, saying, Male and Female created He them, He made them, and
blessed them. Bauhin. lib. 1. Herm. cap. 38.
Bauhinus where he propounds what kind of Cure there is for Hermophrodites,
whose deformity brings a foul shame upon both Sexes, sets forth the
differences and several sorts of Hermophradites in these words. Differentiae
quatuor (Leonide Auctore) existunt: tres quidem in viris, unae in mulieribus.
In viris siquidem alias juxta regionem inter scrotum and anum: alias in medio
scroto, forma muliebris pudendi pilis obsiti apparet. Tertia vero ad haec
accedit, in qua nonnulli veluti expudendo quod in scroto est, urinam
profundunt: In mulieribus supra pudendum juxta pubem virile genitale frequenter
reperitur, quibusdam Corporibus extantibus uno tanquam Cole, duobus autem
veluti testiculis; Sic mero Isaac Israelita Solomonis Arabiae regis filius
adoptivus. Hoc licet tempore sit natural, in viro tamen turpius: In viro and
muliere fit quatuor modis: tribus in viro, uno in foemina. Viris fit in pectine
and in testiculis, velut vulna vera mulieris pilosa ut in foeminis. Tertius
modus est gravior: quia per virgam and vulvam mingunt. Mulieribus vulva fit in
pectine: and sub vulva post veretrum maximi testiculi. Ei licet in his
utriusque sexus genitalia sint, eorum unum tamen altero sit luxuriosius and
potentius etsi sunt alii Hermophroditi qui in utroque sexu omnino impotentes
sint. Those who are curious to know more of this ugly representation may find
satisfaction in the Chapter of Differences of Hermophradites, written by the
same Author. And what Cure this vile deformity admits, The causes of
Hermophiadites.
the same Author affords in this place. There is a Book written in French,
called the Hermophradite, V. de licet lib. 1. Hermoph. cap. 38.
which does notably set forth the effeminacy and prodigious tenderness of this
Nation. But let us a little examine the Causes of their Generation. De medicin.
Com. 1. Dial. 5.
Andernacus to Mathetis, enquiring why Nature in Humane Bodies does so mock and
laugh man to scorn; Answers, and says, he knows no other cause besides the
influx of the stars, intempestive copulation, and evil diet, since at this day
there is such corruption of life and manners, and so great Lust, that it is no
wonder if men altogether degenerate into Beasts: And although Natural
Philosophers, and Physicians partly impute this conjunction of Sexes to the
material and efficient Cause, and partly to the Cells of the Womb: Yet those
causes sound to me most probable which are alleged a Decubitu, and the time of
Conception. Sunt enim qui velint horum generationem causari a decubituminus
convenienti vel in congressu, vel post congressum. In congressu quidem, monente
Lemnino, indecenti: non nunquam ait, vitiosus hic infamisque conceptus, ex
indecoro concubitu conflatur, cum praeter usum ac comoditatem exercendae
veneris, -- vir supinus, mulier prona decumbit, magno plerunque valetudinis
dispendio, ut qui ex inverso illo decubitu herniosi efficiuntur: praesertim cum
distento, oppletoque cibis corpore, inusitata hac inconcessave venere utuntur.
A decubitu supino post congressum: sic enim Dominicus Terellius, in muliere
posteaquam virile semen receperit in utero, positura corporis observanda:
Semper vitanda est, quae modo supino fit. The reasons are here alleged;
Androgyni.
In Bauhin. li. 1. cap. 30. Hermoph. Pierius, Fenestella Annal. Tertul. advers.
Valent. c. 33.
which appears by your Lunensian women, who taking no care to this supine
positure after conception, bring forth more Hermophradites, many Authors taking
notice of store of Hermophradites among the Lunensians. By which discourse you
may see what a hand the lust and folly of a man has in this Hemophraditicall
Transformation, or Androginall mixture.

Those who in old time were called by the name of Androgyni were reputed then
for prodigious wonders. Howbeit as Pliny notes, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap.
3. Aul. Gel. l 9. c. 4 Isidor. lib. 11. cap. 3. Jul. Obseq. lib. prodig.
in his time men took delight and pleasure in them.

M. Messala, C. Livius, Consuls, in Umbria, there was a Semi-man, almost twelve
years old, by the command of the Aruspices slain.

L. Meteblus, and Q. Fabius Maximus Consuls, there was an Hermophradite, borne
at Luna, Idem.
by command of the Southsayers cast into the sea.

P. Africanus, C. Fulvius Consuls, Idem.
in the Country of Ferretinnum, there was an Hermophradite horn and carried
unto the River.

Gn. Domitius, Cajus Fannius Consuls, Idem.
in Foro Vessonum, another borne and cast into the Sea.

L. Aurelius, and L. Caecilius Consuls, Idem.
about Rome there was another Hermophradite, some eight years old, found and
carried unto the sea.

L. Caecilius, L. Aurelius Consuls, Idem.
there was another about ten years old, found at Saturnia, and drowned in the
Sea.

Q. Metellus, Tullius Didius Consuls, Idem.
another was carried from Rome and drowned in the Sea.

A course taken to prevent Courses.
Cn. Cornelius Lentulus, P. Licinius Consuls, there was an Androgynus found,
Idem.
and carried to the Sea.

Beyond the Nasamones, and their neighbors confining upon them (the Matchlies)
there be found ordinarily Hermophradites, called Androgyni, of a double nature,
and resembling both Sexes Male and Female, who have carnal knowledge one of
another interchangeably by turns, as Caliphanes does report. Cited by Pliny
Not. Hist. lib. 7.
Aristotle says moreover, that on the right side of their breast they have a
little teat or nipple like a man, but on the left side they have a full pap or
dug like a woman. Montuus de Med. Thoresi. lib. 1. cap. 6.
I knew, says Montuus, an Hermophradite who was accounted for a woman, and was
married to a man, to whom she bore some sons and daughters, notwithstanding he
was wont to lie with his maids and get them with child. This is remarkable,
Anno 1461. in a certain City of Scotland there was an Hermophrodite maid got
her Masters Daughter with child, who lay in the same bed with her, Veinrichius
Com. de Monstris page 7. facie aversa.
being accused of the Fact before the Judges, she dyed, being put into the
ground alive.

The Tovopinambaultian women of Brasill in in America, Purch. Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
never have their Flowers, not liking that purgation; it is thought they divert
that flux by some means unknown to us; for, the Maids of twelve years old
have their sides cut by their mothers, from the armehole down unto the knee
with the very sharp tuske of a certain beast, the young Girls gnashing with
their Teeth through the extremity of the pain; some conjecture they prevent
their monthly flux by this remedy. Women affecting straightness.


Concerning the nature of the Menstruall blood, there has been, and yet is,
hard hold, and many opinions among Physicians. All agree that this blood is an
excrement; for, like a superfluity, it is every month driven forth the Womb:
but many would have it an unprofitable excrement, and of a noxious and hurtful
quality; but I am of the contrary opinion, to wit, that it is natural and
profitable, and that it is in its own nature laudable and pure blood, and no
way offensive unto the woman, but only in the quantity thereof, as is by some
evicted by the Authority of the Ancients, and by invincible and demonstrative
arguments. So that the impurity of the Courses is not so great as some would
have it, the menstruall blood being only abundant in women, and has no other
fault at all in sound bodies, and is but abusively called an excrement.

Unthankefull therefore are those Tovopinambaultian women to Nature, who seem
to abhor so signal a benefit of hers, in endeavoring to divert the ordinary
course of Nature.

More respective to Nature are the women of Iucaia, who when the Menstrua begin
to come, Petr. Mart. Decad. 7.
as if they were to be brought to a man to be married, the Parents invite the
Neighbors to a banquet, and use all signs and tokens of joyfulnesse.

In the Kingdom of Monomotapa the maids are not to be married till their
Menstrua or natural purgations testify their ability for conception. Holyn.
Geogr.


The women of Vraba have a most straight and narrow neck of their womb,
Consal. Ovied. Hist. Iud. Spigel. Hum. corp. Fabr. l. 1.
that they very hardly admit a man: A quaere about women's straightness.
which Spigelius thinks happens to them by Art, and not by any benefit of
Nature, since it is known that they much affect such a straightness; the men
of that Country, as it is likely, delighting in none, but such who have that
accommodation.

It may be a Quare, whether these women owe not somewhat of this strictness to
the indulgent artifice of their Midwives? And whether their Navils were not cut
shorter at the birth to make them (forsooth) modester, and their wombes
narrower, according to the conceit and practice of the European Midwives. I
confess, Spigelius, and all our Modern Writers jeere at this, and he makes
himself merry with this opinion; for, says he, if it were in the power of
women to make the Privities greater or lesser by cutting off the Navell string;
in sober sadness all women laboring with child would complain of Midwives,
and that deservedly too, because they left not a great part of their Navell
string when they were borne, that so their Privities being large, they might be
delivered with the more ease. Yet Mizaldus orders it to be cut long in Female
children, because the Instruments of Generation follow the proportion of it;
and therefore if it be cut too short in a Female, it will be a hinderance to
her having of children. Taisnier the famous Chiromancer and Astrologer affirms
the same thing.

The general conceit of the Italians in this matter causes the same
industrious affectation of Art in your Italian Dames: It being a familiar and
common thing with the Italian Curtezans with astringent Pessaries, by Art to
make the neck of their womb as straight as they list. And honest Matrons,
Mischiefs ensuing affected straightness.
to satisfy the wanton curiosities of their Husbands, use the same Art, who
have many times proved very unhappy in the miserable and dangerous effect of
that Artifice, and have dearly paid for their foolish officiousness, with a
sad bitterness of experience, too late repenting them of trying of such a
conclusion as shuts up the gate of birth, themselves, with their dead-borne
children thereby perishing together. Nor is this Artifice altogether unknown
unto the women of other Countries. Observe. med: Decad. 3. cas. 5. in Schol.
Hachstetterus narrat Ancillam quandam sponsant, procul dubio ut sponso virgo,
quae non erat, appareret, balnco, in quo radices consolidae majoris decortae
erant, usam fuisse, in quod cum hera inscia insedisset. Ei ita orificium
pudendi coarctatum fuit, ut Maritus uxorem claustrum virginale recepisse
miraretur. Et Nicolus Florentinus, refert se vidisse mulierem, quae post
partum, cum obstetrices adhibuissent medicamenta valde astringentia, ita clausa
reddita fuit, ut non potuerit coitum exercere. Et cum Sennerto loqui, hoc
institutum, ut in scortis culpandum, ita in honestis mulieribus non
reprehendendum, si ipsis hoc vitium post partum accidat, potest enim cervicis
uteri amplitudo causa sterilitatis esse, interdum procidentiae uteri, and
praeterea vitium hoc mulieres viris ingratas reddit, et hic quastio resolvitur:
An Sinus muliebris adstrictio and angustia, certum virginitatis signum sit.
Quod negandum.

The women of Siam are contrary minded, Herb. Travels.
both in their opinions and practice; for, to see a Virgin there at Virgins
years is as a black Swan, in regard in their green years they give the too
forward Maids a virulent drink, whose virtue (vice rather) is by a strange
efficacy to distend their Muliebria so capaciously, Where they sew up their
Females.
that the Bells which the men wear in their Yards, with rope-ring too easily
may enter.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
The Maracatos, within the Land of Brava, have a fashion to sew up the Females,
especially their Slaves, being young, to make them unable for Conception; which
makes these Slaves sell dearer for their Chastity, and for better confidence
their Mistresses put in them.

Among the Peguans there are some that sew up the privy member of their Female
Children as soon as they are borne, leaving them but a little hole to avoid
their urine, and when she marries the husband cutteth it open, and makes it
as great and as little as he will, which they with a certain ointment or salve
can quickly heal. Lindscot. Travels. lib. 1. c. 17.
Lindscoten saw one of these women in Goa, whom the Surgeon of his Master,
in the Archbishops house, did cut open; Men would judge says he all these
things to be Fables, yet they are most true; for, I do not only know it by the
daily traffic of the Portugals out of India thither, but also by the Peguans
themselves, whereof many dwell in India, some of them being Christians, which
tell it, and confess it for a truth, as also the neernesse of place and
neigbourhood makes it sufficiently known.

Helyn. Ethiop. Infer.
The people of Quilea, of the Province of Zanziber in Ethiopia Inferior, have
among them the same strange fashion, which may be mentioned rather for variety
than decency. They use when they have any Female Children born unto them, to
sew up the privy passages of Nature, Virginity secured.
leaving only a small passage for the Urine. Thus sewed, they carefully keep
them at home until they come to marriageable age, then they give them to their
neighbors for Wives; And of what rank or condition she be, which is found by
her Husband to want the sign of her perpetual Virginity, is with all kind of
ignominy and digrace sent home unto her Parents, and by them as opprobriously
received: And it seems they confide in no evidence but their own ocular
Surgery here. Petrus Bembo says, Pet. Bembo, Lib. Hist. Venet.
they give their Daughters in marriage thus sewed: but first that care is left
unto, and lies upon the Bridegroom to cut and divide with an Iron Instrument
the conglutinated lips of the neck of the womb.

In so great honor with those Barbarians in marrying a wife is the certain
assurance of incorrupt Virginity, who little trusting to the frail enclosure
of Nature, do secure with more strong guards the fortress of Virginity. Had
these people known the famous Liniment of Paracelsus, which but smeared upon
the opening of the mouth, in a moment (forsooth) will contract and conglutinate
that Orifice: they would, it may be, have stood in little need of needle and
thread, and such dolorous punctures for sewing up this suspected passage. It
should seem, these people are loath to trust the security of Nature: More
cruelly jealous of their Daughters than the Venetians are of their Wives, on
whom they hang a padlock: And surely they have a slight opinion of Hymen, and
either know it not, or are not willing to confide in it, whereas the Jews were
no way doubtful of it: And Spigelius, and many other Anatomists could by
ocular experience satisfy them concerning Natures constant provision to
preserve virginal integrity. The practice of Irish women for easy Delivery.
Certainly these Nations would have been well pleased if Nature had produced
all their Females imperforated, and the Orifice of their wombs closed and
sealed up, or the Hymen so thick and fleshy that it straightened the passages of
Nature, that it needed incision, an evil which holds proportion in men, when
the Prepuce grows unto the Nut.

It is thought that the Irish women are wont to break the Os pubis, or
share-bone of their Female children as soon as they are borne, to make them
have more easy labor when they come to childbearing: And it is well known
that your Irish women have very quick and easy deliverance in Childbirth.

I confess, I could not in a long time by any enquiry receive full
satisfaction concerning this practical endeavor of the Irish, nor discover any
thing thereof in Books: Yet I incline to believe the Report, because it is an
Invention somewhat rationable. Yet since the first impression of this Book, I
have been assured of this practice by a Gentlewoman who was present at an Irish
woman's Labor in Ireland: For in the conformation of the share and Hanch-bone,
there appears a singular benefit of Nature conferred upon women, who providing
with all Art for the pains of Child bed would have the closing of the
Share-bone loosed for the facility of Birth; and therefore the Cartilagineous
coupling of the Share-bone is in women more soft, and in women with Child, a
little before their delivery, more thick embued with an unctious humor. Touch
also and sight-do manifestly perceive the divulsion of the Share-bone; for, if
you lift up one Leg of a woman lately delivered, The practice of Irish women
examined.
you shall perceive the spine of the Share-bone to rise up in the other. The
truth of this thing may be confirmed by Authority, for to omit the well known
opinion of Hippocrates, Alex. Benedict lib: 5. Anat. c. 3. Gorraeus Com. in
Hippoc: de natura pueri. Aetius Tetra. 4. Sermon 4. cap. 22. Jacob. Carpus in sua
Anat. Sylvius in Isagoge Anatom. Aristotle. Riolanus Schola Anatomica.
and Avicen, many others do witness of the bones of the Ilium and Pecten are
opened or separated, to wit, the joints relaxed, not exarticulated, but justly
said to be loosed, because that great distention seems to be quaedam species
solutae continuitatis, and this is naturally, although at other times they are
most strongly bound together. But there is little need of witnesses inso
manifest a business, experience only to whom the best appeal is made in this
Anatomicall controversy may make it credible, to whom Physicians think they
are bound to give more respect than unto Reason; for, Riolanus affirms, that
he thrice in the presence of Physicians and Chirurgions, saw the Cartilage
which holds together the bones of the share, loosed, and relaxed a fingers
breadth; but that which makes somewhat more to this purpose, Fernel. lib. 6.
Pathologiae. Aethius Tetra. 4. Sermon. 4.6.22.
Fernelius among the causes of a difficult birth, reckons the more firm
compaction of the share-bones, when they cannot be dilated in the Birth. Now if
upon this account the Irish women obtain a more than ordinary faculty of
dispatch in Childbirth, it is likely the force they use to their Female
Infants as soon as they are borne may relax the Ligaments, and move the tender
Share-bones to a competent Dilation, that may prove afterward productive of
such an effect. And it may be the women of the Conarins, Corumbins, and other
Provinces of India, who scarce travel at all, they are so soon delivered from
the pain and peril of Childbirth (if they do not rather receive the benefit
from the temper of the Climates) and the favorable indulgence of the Genius of
the Place use some such kind of Artifice conducible to this end, Nations with
great privy members.
although the report of their practice has not yet arrived at our ears. As
for the matter of Fact (taking it for granted) it pretends to work a mitigation
in that pronounced woe, in Dolor paries; but this is not the only way that man
has endeavored to ease himself of those inconveniences his transgression
has entailed upon him.

Purch. Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
They of Guinea have a great privy member, much surpassing our Countrymen,
whereof they make great account.

Richard Jobs. Golden Trade.
I read in Jobsons discovery of the River Gambra, and the Golden Trade of the
Aethiopians, of a Town called Cassan, which is the Kings Seat, and by the name
of which Town he holds his Title, King of Cassan, seated upon the Rivers side
of Gambra. The Inhabitants of which Town, and parts thereabout being Subjects
to the Great King of Cantare, and of Bursall.

By a conjecturall Geography I take this Cassan to be that which Cardan calls
Cassena, a Region in Africa; and although I read nothing here concerning their
great Noses, yet I meet with a strange report, touching the magnitude of that
part which answers to the Nose: His discourse runs after this manner.
Undoubtedly these people originally sprung from the race of Canaan, the Son of
Ham, who discovered his Father Noah's Secrets, for which Noah awaking, cursed
Canaan, as our holy Scripture testifies; the Curse, as by Schoolmen has been
disputed, extended to this ensuing Race, in laying hold upon the same place
where the original cause began, Men with members like Asses.
whereof these people are witnesses, who are furnished with such members as are
after a sort burdensome unto them, whereby their women being once conceived
with Child, so soon as it is perfectly discerned, accompanies the man no
longer, because he shall not destroy what is conceived, to the loss of that,
and danger of the Bearer, neither until she has brought up the Child to a
full and fitting time to be weaned, which every woman does to her own Child, is
she allowed in that Nature the man's society, so that many times it falls he
has not a wife to lie withal, and therefore has allowance of other women for
necessities sake, which may seem not over-strange unto us, in that our Holy
Writ does make mention thereof; as you may read in the 23 Chapter of the
Prophet Ezekiel, where Jerusalem and Samaria, being called by the name of two
Sisters, Ahola, and Aholiba, being charged with Fornication, are in the
twentieth verse of the same Chapter said to dote upon those people, whose
Members were as the members of Asses, and whose Issue was like the issue of
Horses, therein right and amply explaining these people.

The Turks, who (as I hear by a Traveller) are Mentulatiores, and these, would
have made brave Companions for Heliogabalus, that extreme luxurious Emperor,
Lamprid, in vita ejus.
who gathered together a number of these well weaponed men, whom he called
Nasatos, Vasatos, Onobolos, id est, Mentulatiores, whom he made use of to
satisfy his inordinate Lust. As for the virile member, it is of such length
and magnitude as the necessity of the kind requires for procreation, Magnitude
membri virilis
conformed according to the Law of Nature: in one of a just age, Quando
erigitur obtinet sex uncias longitudine and quatuor in Perepheria. Although it
varies much according to the race of Families and course of Life; for, there
are certain Families, (and as you see) Nations, who have an ill or a good
report according to this very thing. And how much frequent coition conferreth
to the accession of its augmentation, they daily are advised of; who more
often, or with more alacrity descend into venerean encounters; and indeed the
length and thickness thereof varies in respect of the particular creature, or
individuum, because it is formed according to the proportion of the members,
yet sometimes it is larger in a little man, because of the abundance of the
proportion of Fathers seed, of which it is framed, for the Seed falls from
every part of a man's body, and carries in it power of generating that part
from whence it sell. But it may be these Guineans, tamper not with Nature, but
have this prerogative from the subtle indulgency of their Midwives. For it is
thought it will be longer if the Navel-strings be not close knit by the
Midwives when the Child is newborn, and that because of a Ligament which
comes to the Navill from the bottom of the bladder, which they call Urachos;
for, the straighter that is tied to the Navell, the more the bla^der, and the
parts adjoining are drawn upward. Yet Spigelius says, he cannot well conceive
in his mind how this can be done: But for the matter of practice he reports,
that upon this conceit Midwives leaves longer part of the Navell-string of a
Male than they do of a Female, because in Males they would have the Instrument
of Generation long, Whether the Navell appeared in our prototype.
that so they may not be cowards in the Schools of Venus. Now if the
supposition be true, we are all at the mercy of the Midwives for our
sufficiency. In which operation Authors make much ado, and Midwives at
present can scarce agree about the place. The distance the Navell-string should
be cut off from the Child's body Aetius prescribes to be four fingers breadth,
Aetius lib. 4. c. 3 in his direct. to Midwives.
a wooden direction says Mr Culpepper, because Midwives fingere differ so
much in breadth, he will imagine it to he meant four inches, and says, the
Ancients jumped generally in that opinion. This Tortuosity (then) (...)
complicated nodosity, which we usually call the Na^ill, occasioned by the
Colligation of vessels, is a knot contrived by the Midwife, and ensuing upon
this action, being a part after parturition of no profit or ^^nament. And
therefore, at the Creation or extraordinary formation of Adam, who immediately
issued from the Artifice of God, nor also that of Eve, who was not solemnly
begotten, but suddenly framed and ^namalously proceeded from Adam, was any such
knot (as we now behold in our selves) to be seen; for, it cannot be allowed, Dr
Brown. Pseudodoxia Epid. l. 5. c. 5.
as the Ingenious Reformer of popular errors demonstrates, except we impute
that unto the first cause which we imposed not on the second, or what we deny
unto Nature we impute unto Nativity it self; that is, that in the first and
most accomplished piece, the Creator affected superfluities, or ordained parts
without all use or office; Therefore this being a part not precedent but
subsequent to Generation, Nativity or parturition, it cannot (as he speaks) be
well imagined that it appeared in our prototype, as in us his off^ring, for to
imagine so, were to regulate Creation to Generation, the first act of God unto
the second of Nature. Pinis Longi inconvenientia.
This we may however affirm in the honor of Nature, that whatever
augmentation in this or any other part is gained by Art, or besides the will
and ordinary allowance of Nature, it is commonly attended with some
inconvenience. And there are reasons for it; for, the magnitude grossness,
and foul, and immoderate longitude of the Organ of Generation is a twofold
hinderance to fruitfulness, as Hucherus notes: Primum quidem eo quod muliebre
pudendum, ut and uteri cervix immaniter dilacerantur, unde cicatrix
relinquitur, quae maris semen ante effluere for as sinat, quam id ipsum uterus
prolectarit (sie foeminam unam urinae incontinentia, alterum perpetua Diarrhoea
laborantem videre illi contigit, divulso ab ejusmodi violento concubitu vesicae
alvique sphinctere.) Deinde quia interno uteri osculo graviter impulso
percoitum contusoque, ita prae dolor Mulieris voluptas interturbatur, ut neque
proprium semen emittat, neque virile admittat, excipiatque. Est and aliud
incommodium, quod longa mentula secum trahit, cum foeminas uterinae
suffocationis obnoxias reddat, quod ligamenta uteri, cervicem nimium in coitu
elong ando, admodum laxet, ut apparet ex observatione Spigelii; and you see the
inconveniences after Conception, that follows upon the ample furniture of
these Ginnie Asinegoes. Avicen has taught a way how to magnify this Part, and
indeed when it is less than is convenient it is an inequality of figure, which
may be corrected, and the Directions conducing thereto are admitted by Montanus
into the corrective part of Medicine. Moneanus, Med. pars. 1.
Hae igitur sunt regula docentes per methodum magnificare per attractionem
multi alimenti ad locum, calefaciendo and fricando prius locum, sed caute
procedendum, Men whose members hang down to their shanks.
ne nimis trahant vel nimis calefaciant, qui nutrimentum attractum resolveret,
and volentes membrum magnificare, minus ipsum efficerent, sicut nimius motus
frigiditatem inducit, moderatus calorem. Eadem res effectos oppositos producit.
Nimia ergo attractio, and nimia loci calefactio resolvit, and dum magnificare
quaeritis, parvitatem efficietis; moderata autem attractione facietis
magnitudinem. Ars etiam est curativa de elonganda mentula cum pondere plumbeo.

The Floridians so love the Feminine Sex, The Author of the Descrip. of Nova
Francia. lib. 2.
that for to please them the more, they busy themselves very much about that
which is the primary sign of unclean desires; and that they may the better do
it, they furnish themselves with Ambergreece, whereof they have great store,
which first they melt at the fire, then inject it (with such pain that it
makes them to gnash their Teeth) even so far as to the Os sacrum, and with a
whip of Nettles, or such like thing, make that Idol of Maacha to swell; on the
other side, the women use certain herbs, and endeavor themselves as much as
they can to make restrictions for the use of the said Ityphalles, and to give
either party their due.

Nescio an revera constat, quod diverbio fertur, Arvum Genitale in mulieribus
Belgicis, altiorem in pube scituationem obtinere, sed Medicus quidam ex
observatione propria mihi communicata, affirmat, Genitalia in viris Hybernicis,
al^iora in pube apparere.

In the Isle of Hermes the men's members hang down to their shanks, Sr Joh.
Mand. Travels, cap. 53.
insomuch that the men of that Country, who knew better manners, do bind them
straight, Pygmaei magno vererro.
and anoint them with ointments, made there for to hold them up, whereby they
may live more civilly, which is supposed to be by reason of the heat of the
climate dissolving the body.

Ctesias, Indicus Ionst. Thaumatograph.
Ctesias says, that the Negro Pigmies who dwell in the midst of India, who are
saddle-nosed and deformed, have a veretrum so great and long, that it hangs
down even unto their Ankles. Hinc de Nanis and Pygmaeis quaerendum, cur majorem
penem habeant? An quia ut scripsit Aristoteles, quemadmodum homo non habens
caudam, illa materia in nates conversa sit; similiter materia, quae
augmentaioni staturae Nani non est famulata, in penem transmutata sit.

But concerning these and other strange corporal properties of Nations,
mentioned in this book, Quaere Card. Comment in Hip. li. de Aere Aquis and
locis.
I wish some Commentator on Hippocrates Book De Aere, Aquis and locis, would
arise, who supplying the loss of the much desired Comment of Galen upon that
Book, might render some account of these matters. What Cardan in his Comment
upon that Book has done I can give no account, having never, after much
enquiry, had the hap to meet with it.

That women have been metamorphosed into men is not only confirmed by Pliny,
and the credit of other ancient Authors but of later times many examples are to
be found very evident in modern Writers; Skenck. observe. med. lib. 4. Korn. de
mirac. vivorum fol. 41 Marc. Donat. med. Hist. mirab Tulp observe. Delrio
Inquisi^ Mag. ^^danus.
and for all that I perceive, there are few that are willing to have it
accounted a Fable. And the conceit is grounded upon the Authorities of
Aristotle and Galen, which Anatomists little approve of which is, that Nature
always intends the Generation of the Male, but if she err from her scope, and
cannot generate a Male, then brings she forth the Female, Women no monster.
which is the first and most simple imperfection of a Male, which therefore
they call a Creature lame, occasional, and accessory, as if she were not of
the maine, but made by the bye; concluding the Woman or Female to be nothing
else but an error or aberration of Nature, which the Peripatetiques call
(...), by a Metaphor taken from Travelers which miss of their way, and yet at
length attain their journies end; yea, they proceed further, and say, that the
Female is a by-worke or prevarication, yea, the first monster in Nature, which
is unworthily said of them, for the perfection of all natural things is to be
esteemed and measured by the end: Now it is necessary that the woman should be
so formed, or else Nature must have missed of her scope, because she intended a
perfect Generation, which without a woman cannot be accomplished. But now it is
to be enquired how in terminis naturalibus it can be done that women should be
turned into men, as the infinite examples of such Cases seem to prove; which
since it is monstrous, we must have recourse to the causes of Monsters, which
happen by the error of Nature, occasioned, either through the disobedience of
matter, or debility of the Agent, and therefore they properly and modestly
enough define a Monster to be a certain oblaesion of Nature. And that it is
monstrous for women to be turned into men, is apparent by Aristotle's
Definition; for that is monstrous which is besides Nature, to wit, that Nature
which for the most part is; for besides that which always and necessary is,
nothing is done, therefore Monstrosity happens when any thing besides Nature
appears in those things which for the most part are so done, How women are
turned into men.
but may also be done otherwise: wherefore since it is against the order of
Humane Nature, that a woman should degenerate into a man, yet notwithstanding
it being not impossible, that we call monstrous, and it has the same cause
which other Monsters according to Quality, Number, Magnitude, or Situation of
Members, wherefore for this reason the Learned reduce the cause of this Humane
Metamorphosis to the error of the virtue Agent, and the aptitude of
superfluous matter. If this happened while every Animal existed in Generation,
it would clear all doubts: But since it is done when the Animal is borne, how
the virtue Formatrix can effect it, is not easy to explain, but seems a
great Difficulty. Therefore Anatomists and Physicians say, that the virile
member in such women was from the first, ingenite, the Agent virtue working on
superfluous matter that form upon it, but by such a Law of Nature that it
cannot come forth until such a determinate time, which ought not to seem
impossible to any man, since we see in Embrions, even in the mothers womb,
Teeth formed, and yet lie hid until the appointed time of their extramission;
which is very true, and known by ocular Faith from the dissections of Abortives
and Infants newborn, Barth. Eustachius de dentibus libello, cap. 15. and. 17,
etc.
as many Anatomists affirm. Therefore even as all Teeth have their beginning
of Generation in the mothers womb, yet are concealed, nor come out perfect but
in progress of time, which yet is not definite and the same with all. What
then should hinder but that in a woman, a virile member made in the first
formation, should in appointed Tract of time come forth perfect, and be made
manifest, but that this change by extrusion of inbred or inverted members
should happen after the time of Childbirth, That women cannot be transformed
into men.
exceeds all possibility of belief; Pontan. lib. 10. de reb. Coelest.
yet Pontanus bears witness of a woman who after she had borne a son,
attained by a wonderful change unto the virile Sex, which be confirms by the
testimony of Antonius Colotius Umbrus.

That Men should be transformed into Women is more rare, it having been no
where ere found that a Male degenerated into a Female Nature, abhorring such a
perverse regresse from more perfect to less. Indeed Licinius Mutianus
reports, Cited by Plin. Not. Hist. l. 7.
that he saw at Smyrna a Boy changed into a Girl, but I think Philosophers
will no more regard his report than they do the Fictions of Poets who have made
descriptions of such a needless Metamorphosis. Herodotus in Thalia.
As for that which Herodotus delivers concerning the men of Scythia, evirated
and changed into a Feminine estate, it is not to be understood that the
Masculine Sex was truly changed into the Feminine, but he speaks of a kind of
disease which we elsewhere shall have an occasion to touch at; for men then to
lose the appearance of their Virilities, and to have those parts translated
into the appearance of the other Sex, is a thing not only rare, but impossible
in Nature, unless we will imagine that the Female Patriarch of Greece, and
Pope Joane of Rome, were the Subjects of such Metamorphosis. Nero (indeed) whom
nothing in the ordinary course of Nature would satisfy, by a most prodigious
conceit attempted to make such a Monster by Art, and would needs have a Boy of
his, called Sporus, cut and made (forsooth) a woman, to whom he was solemnly
married, which occasioned some justly to say, that it had been happy for the
Commonwealth if Domitius his Father had had no other but such a wife; and
verily none but such a Monster of Men could have endeavored so absurd a
Transfiguration of Man. Nero's absurd attempt to make a woman of a man.
That the Devil, furnished with natural Causes, may by Divine permission
cause some apparent change of Sexes is not doubted of by the Learned, yet he
can no way by the Nature of things convert a Man into a woman; much less could
Nero do it, who is called by Jordanus, Bipedum nequissimus, the wickedest man
that ere went upon two Legs.

SCENE XXII. Tailed Nations.
Tailed Nations, Breech-Gallantry, and Abusers of that part.
THere is not a living Creature excepting Men and Apes, but is furnished with a
Tail for the necessary use of their Bodies. The reason why man wants a Tail
is rendered by Aristotle; Arist. de part, Animrl, lib. 4.
for that the aliment that should go to the Tail was spent upon his Buttocks,
Thighs, and Legs, which are more fleshy and full than the parts that answer
them in other Creatures, and there was no necessity of a Tail in man, since
his Buttocks with their Corpulency afford a sufficient covering. But the chief
Cause of this difference is the upright stature of man, which is his peculiar
Prerogative, the Ape his counterfeit, as a two-legged Animal, wants a Tail, and
as a foure-footed, he has no Buttocks.

But although Man naturally wants a Tail, yet Pausanias reports of Nations
that were furnished with Tails. Neither is the report of our Kentish
Long-tailes a mere Fable; for, besides the Records of our English Chronicles,
Kentish Long-tailes.
there are diverse Authors that have registered the Original of this
Monstrosity, Neiremb. lib. 1. de mirac. Naturae in Europ. Joan. Major lib. 2.
de gestis Scotor. cap. 9. Guliel. Nang. Geneb^. in Greg. M. Korn. de vivorum
mirac.
whose Relations amount to this effect. When Augustine the Monk, being sent
from Gregory the Great, came to preach the Gospel unto the English Nation, at
Rochester, the Vulgar, in derision of the Holy man, pined fishes tails upon
his Garment, or, as some say, threw them at him; whereupon Augustine prayed to
God that their Children might be borne with Tails, and it pleased God to
confirm his Doctrine by inflicting this punishment upon the Posterity of that
incredulous people; so that these Kentish Long-tailes proceeded not from the
influence of Heaven, but from a miracle. And although Antonius Neirembergensis
thinks that this punishment endured but for a time, and that this Miracle is
now ceased, yet I am informed by an ingenious and honest Gentleman of good
worth, who professed that he had read in some of our Chronicles, or other
Author, whose name he could not very well remember, that there is at this day a
Family in Kent, who have to Surname the name of a Village very near Rochester,
whereof all that are descended have a Tail, insomuch that you may know any one
to be rightly descended of that Family by having a Tail: Yet I must suspect
some failing in my friends memory, Delrio disquis. Mag. Polydor. Virgil. Hist.
Angl. lib. 13.
because I find in Delrio, his disquisition of Magic, that the original of
the Kentish Long-tailes was after this manner. Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury being in disgrace with Henry the Second, and riding through Stroud
near Rochester, the Inhabitants, to put an affront upon him, cut off his
Horses Tail, Irish Long-tailes.
which ever since was entailed upon them, insomuch as you may know a man of
Stroud by his long Tail. And to make it a little more credible, that the
Rump-bone among brutish and strong-dockt Nations, does often sprout out with
such an excrescence, or beastly emanation. I am informed by an honest young man
of Captain Morris Company, in Lieutenant General Iretons Regiment, that at
Cashell in the County of Tipperary, in the Province of Munster, in Carrick
Patrick Church, seated on a hill or rock, stormed by the Lord Inchequine, and
where there were near seven hundred put to the sword, and none saved but the
Mayors Wife, and his Son; there were found among the slain of the Irish, when
they were stripped, diverse that had Tails near a quarter of a yard long; the
Relator being very diffident of the truth of this Story, after enquiry, was
ensured of the certainty thereof by forty Soldiers that testified upon their
oaths that they were eyewitnesses, being present at the Action. It is reported
also, Test Eusebius. Iesuita.
that in Spain there is another such tailed Nation. But that which gives great
reputation to the Narratives of Tailed Nations, is a History we have gained by
the Coryphaeus of Anatomy; Dr Harvey, Anton. Neiremb. Not. Hist. Dr Harvey lib.
de Generat.
who in a learned Tract he lately published, informs us, that a certain
Surgeon, an honest man, and an Acquaintance of his, returning from the
East Indies, declared unto him upon his credit, that in the Mountanous and
remote places from the Sea of the Island Bornea, at this day there is a
certain kind of tailed men, of which with some difficulty (for they inhabit
the woods) they took a Virgin, Tailed Monsters.
whom he saw, with a thick fleshy tail of a span long, intra clunes reflexa,
quae anum and pudenda operiebat, usque adeo velari ea loca Natura voluit. We
read also of some tailed Monsters, and that Nature sometimes has fallen into
such impediments that she has been constrained to add a tail to man,
although it is well known, that a tail is not competent unto him. Ulysses
Aldr. Monst. Hist.
Aldrovandus exhibits a two-headed Monster which was most worthy of admiration
in it, because two fingers above the Podex it had a tail a palm long, which
covered the vent of excrements, as it is observed to do tailed Quadrupeds. This
Tail about the beginning was of the breadth of the Ear finger, and afterward
ended in a sharp point. The Effigies of this Monster Marius Galassus the
Neopolitane, a great Searcher out of natural things in times past,
communicated to the most learned man Ulysses Aldrovandus.

Schenck. lib. observat. Aldrovand. Hist. monst. c. 6.
Schenckius recites a story of such another two-headed monster with the
rudiment of a Foxes Tail. Aldrovandus also exhibits the Effigies of an Infant
with the Tail of a fish; so that we might sing with Horace, Desinit in piscem
mulier formosa superne. Yet the Verse in verity would not square with this
Monster, because all the upper parts were very deformed. Schenckius also
exhibits the description of a little Child borne at Cullen, Anno 1597. who
among other monstrous parts, in the posteriour parts about the Fundament bore a
Sows Tail. Sodomiticall Boys.
If any man desire to know the causes why sometimes a Tail is monstruously
added to a humane offspring, these eminencies of the skin are to be referred
to abundant recrement, the virtue Formatrix being valid.

Among the Persians, and other Nations of the Levant, there are infinite
swarms of Catamites or Sodomiticall Boys, who make an unrighteous use of the
Rectum Intestinum, to the foul shame and dishonor of their Bodies. Which
Contagion has spread both into the East and West- Indies, insomuch as some
Countries have been almost depopulated thereby, and Laws have been made to
restrain that beastly practice, to which intent the Yard-Bals or Bells of Pegu,
Siam, and the Bramas were (as some suppose) invented.

Vaschus found the King of Quarequas house infected with most abominable
Leachery; Pet. Mirt. Decad. 3.
for he found the Kings Brother, and many other young men in women's apparel,
smooth and effeminately decked; which by the report of such as dwelt about him
he abused with preposterous venery: When Vaschus had given forty of these to
his Dogs, when the people heard of the severe punishment executed upon that
filthy kind of men, they resorted to him, as it had been to Hercules, for
refuge, by violence bringing with them all such as they knew to be infected
with that Pestilence, spitting in their faces, and crying out to our men to
take revenge of them, and rid them out of the world from among men as
contagious Beasts. The stinking abomination had not yet entered among the people
which was exercised only by the Noblemen and Gentlemen; The sin of Sodomy
revived
but the people having a natural hatred of unnatural sin (lifting up their
hands and eyes toward heaven) gave tokens that God was grievously offended
with such ugly deeds, affirming this to be the cause of their so many thunders,
lightnings, and tempests, and diseases. I would all men were of this opinion.
All other Creatures observe a constant Law in their coition, which they observe
and transgress not, only the vitiosity (as one says) of man has acted all
their varieties; nor content with a digression from Sex to Species, has in his
own kind run through the Anomalies of Venery, and been so bold, not only to
act, but represent to view the irregular way of Lust.

Nor is the ancient sin of Sodomy revived only in the Indies among barbarous
and unsanctified Nations, but is too well known to be practiced by Christians;
for in Italy nothing more common, and not only tolerated, but held convenient,
especially for the Clergy, Breech-Gallantry.
who are the chief Commanders of these Ganimedes; concerning the use of whom,
a great Cardinal could profanely say, it was suave and divinum opus. A sin
which in Iudes Epistle, is called, following of strange flesh, a strange and
unnatural way of following of strange flesh.

Among other filthy-fine devices of some Nations, Montaign. in his Essaies.
I remember to have read in some Author of a certain people, who in an absurd
kind of bravery, bore holes in their buttocks, wherein they hang precious
stones. Which by their leaves must needs prove but an inconvenient and uneasy
fashion, and very prejudicial to a sedentane Life.

See the preceding page for the Figure.

Little Feet affected.
SCENE XXIII. Leg and Foot-fashions, or certain Legs and Feet in esteem with
diverse Nations.
Purch. Pilgr. 3. lib. 1. Pet. Maffaeus. Hist. Ind. lib. 6.
THe women in China, from their Childhood array their Feet in Clothes, that they
may remain small; and they do it, because the Chinois do hold them for finer
women that have small short Feet; so that it is accounted one of the greatest
ornaments they have, to have very little Feet, and they are so little, that
they go very badly, and always they seem to go as if they would fall. The
Chinois themselves know not the original occasion, why this is accounted for a
beauty, How they come to have such small Feet.
albeit some say, it began not for a comeliness, but only with a purpose to cut
off all occasion from them of going abroad. But I believe it was first an
affected form of bravery, since it is used only among the Nobler sort, and not
among the baser.

Mr Grimston says, Grimst. in his estate of China
they hold it for a great grace to have little Feet; and for this cause from
their Infancy, they bind up their Feet hard, which they endure patiently, for
they that have the least Feet are held the properest women. But this custom
comes not only from their curiosity, but also from the jealousy of men that
have brought it in, to the end that they should not be able to go but with
pain, and that going slowly and with a bad grace, they should have no great
desire to go out of their houses: And this custom is so ancient, and received
in this Country, as it has in a manner the force of a Law, so that, that
mother who should break it in the breeding of their Daughters, should incur
the Note of Infamy, and be punished.

In the great Caanes Kingdom, Sr Joh. Mand. Travels, c. 106.
the Gentry of a woman is to have small Feet, and therefore as soon as they
are borne, they bind their feet so straight that they cannot wax half so big
as they should.

I believe this matter to most men will seem prodigious and incredible; No man
would ever have believed these things before he saw them with his eyes; nay,
what is it I pray you that seems not a wonder at the first sight? how many
things are judged impossible before they are seen done and effected? and
certes, to speak a truth, The natural proportion of the Feet.
the power of Art over Nature seems incredible, unless a man enter into a
full consideration of the practical force and efficacy thereof.

Howell Epist.
The Spanish women also are observed to have little Feet, but whether they use
any Artifice to advance that beauty, I have not yet discovered. This is so
remarkable in them, that whereas the vote of the Proverb for a handsome woman,
would have her English to the Neck, French to the Waste, and Dutch below: an
observing Traveller adds, for hands and feet let her be Spanish, for they have
the least of any.

Men and women have the greatest Feet in proportion of all Creatures, yet
Females ordinarily in every kind have less and slenderer feet than Males.
Which Ordinance of Nature, the affectation of these people, to their own
disadvantage, has extended beyond her intention. Man only by the advantage of
the straightness of his Legs goes upright, the proper use of the Foot being
to walk, and the action is walking, and therefore the Foot is called
Instrumentum ambulatorium, or a walking Instrument; this walking is, when one
Leg resheth upon the ground, and the other is brought about forward; the
resting is the action of the Foot, properly so called; the reach forward, the
action of the Leg, and therefore an ambulation is made by station and motion,
that is, standing, and proceeding, the Foot it self is the Instrument of the
former, and the whole Leg of the latter. Now for assured, and constant, or
firm station, Man alone, (as he has Palms of his Hands) so he only has
broad flat Soles to his Feet; and also for the accomplishment of those many
motions whereof we stand in need, the structure and figure of the Foot and Leg
is such as we see, for it is divided into diverse joints, Shoes, Sandals, etc
besides nature.
and the Toes are made long and broad, not so long as in the hands, but only as
was necessary to fasten the feet when we would strive to run. For if the Toes
be pressed unto the ground, it is strange with how much strength and security
the body is driven forward: for the Toes being bent, in the going are fastened
upon the ground as so many Anchors, and so commodiously transfer our bodies,
not only upon plain, but also upon ascending and rugged places, as we may
observe in those who live upon mountains, (our mountains of Wales confirm
this) where they go barefoot; from whence we may collect, says Varolius, that
shoes or any other induments of the Feet are besides Nature, and very
prejudicial to the action of the Toes and Feet: Xenophon in Laconum Reipub.
Stobaeus, Sermon. 42.
Which Lycurgus the Lawgiver had respect unto, when he forbid the Spartans to
be shod, as that which in case of any military and civil activity, was a great
hinderance to the actions of the Foot. Some have wondered why man in Comparison
of other Creatures is endued with very great Feet, not considering that man,
who only walks upright, stood in need of two great Feet to sustain the
weight of his body. But the great wonder is, that man upon so narrow soles of
his feet should be kept upright and not fall; it being truly admirable, that so
vaste and erect a body, sustained with two props, to wit, his Legs, whose basis
is so narrow, as the lowest transverse amplitude of the Foot does make, that he
should not for all them slide and fall, but consist upon them, as we see it
happen in other things, which are no better sustained than upon the small basis
of two Feet; which insooth would happen also in the body, unless by the
benefit of Muscles the Feet were retained, The inconveniences of little Feet.
and directed so fixed, that not only when the body is erect and in equilibrio,
but while it receads from it, inclines, and is carried into this and that part,
yet it does not fall; as it happens unto Infants newborn, being yet weak and
feeble, who for a while, until their feet, that is, their Muscles and Tendones
be confirmed, can neither stand nor go. And we may observe that those who have
feet shorter or smaller than the proportion of their body requires, stand very
unfirmely, as not sufficiently supported by so good a foundation, and in their
progressive motion they labor with an uncertain footing. We call those small
feet, which if they be compared with the body unto which they appertain, or to
other of the same kind, and having the same bulk, are defective, and less
quantity of matter rests in them than in others of the same species. For, that
which fails in magnitude is called small, as that which in multitude few:
small feet argue paucity of matter, and where, through this affected
prohibition of growth, the matter of the Foot is less then naturally it ought
to be, the virtue that was ordained to be in that matter cannot be so vivid and
effectual; and if they by this Artifice be brought also to be narrowed in the
soles, the parts must be more confused, and so not distinct, nor so well
articulate, and have small Toes, and there appears no foot-step of bones or
Tendons; which are more pleasant to look upon than serviceable to that office
to which they were appointed, which although they may be accounted delicate,
yet are not simply beautiful, having less corporiety then is required to make
the foot perfect according to Nature. And the foot being one of the extremes of
the Body, wherein naturally the virtue of Earth should prevail, Nations with
Feet of a Cubit long.
a sign whereof there is, that almost all the extreme parts of Creatures, and
which are Feet, or sustain the place of Feet, are harder than the rest, and
that naturally, because they are to sustain the whole body, and therefore they
yield less than the other parts, wherefore since they resist they remain
harder. The other extreme of the Diameter of the Body is the Head, wherein the
watery force is predominant, it being the receptacle of the brain which is
cold and moist: Whereas the fluid element exceeds in the Feet of women, which
makes them so soft and inarticulate, and somewhat unstable.

In India there is reported to be a Nation that have feet of a Cubit long,
Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 2.
but the women have their feet so small, that they are called struthio pedes,
id est, Sparrow footed, And indeed women generally have less and slenderer
feet than men.

In India beyond Ganges there are a Nation called Sciopedes, Munst. Cosm. lib.
5.
that have feet of a monstrous bigness, which when they lie down in the Sun,
One-leg'd Nations.
serves them for umbrelloes to shade them from the Sun, being thence called
Sciopedes from (...) umbra, and (...), pes.

Petr. Apian. Cosmog. pars 2. cap. 3. Solin. in Polyst. cap. 53.
There are also in Asia a certain kind of men which are called Monosceli, and
of others Sciopedae, which have but one Leg, which yet have a wonderful
pernicitie in leaping: (...) is expounded unicum crus habens, a one-leg'd
people.

Sr Joh. Mand. Travel^, cap 51.
In Ethiope are such men as have but one Foot, and they go so fast that it is a
great marvel, and it is a large Foot; for, the shadow thereof covers the
Body from Sun or Rain when they lie upon their Backs; these people according
unto Pliny are not far from the Troglodites. St Aug. lib. 16. cap. 8. de Civit.
Dei.
St Austin witnesses that the Effigies of these Nations were painted in a
Table in the Forum of Carthage, near the Port.

Petr. Apian. Cosmog. pars 2. cap. 3.
There are in a certain Valley of the mountain Imaus, or rather Timaus (as
Aldrovandus says) which Region is called Abarimon, certain wild men who have
their feet turned backward behind their legs, that are of wonderful swiftnes,
that they will outrun a Hare. In other parts of the Oriental Indies, although
the designation of their place is uncertain, we hear of such a Nation who
have eight toes.

Vincent. Spec. Hist. l. 32. c. 16.
There is reported also to be another kind of Monoscelli, or one-Legg'd people,
in some places belonging to the Tartars, which supplies us with another
difference of men, who wander about sustained by one only Leg and Foot, having
also but one Arm; Two of these men undergo the office of an Archer: Whiles
one holds the bow the other shoots the Arrow; Diverse forms of feet.
and there is a wonderful nimblenesse observed in them, for they run with so
great swiftness on their hand and foot, that they will outrun a Horse, and
when they have tired their Arm, then they go only hopping with their foot.
Many Legates and Nuncio's of the Pope, sent unto the Tartars, Vincent. Spec.
Hist. lib. 32. cap. 16.
in their Relations affirm this to be true, and at last Vincentius inserted it
into his History.

The Inhabitants of Guinea have long legs, broad feet, and long toes.

The Men of Egypt and Ethiopia have their feet crooked.

St Austin makes mention of Men borne at Hippo, with feet fashioned like a
half moon, Aug. lib. 16. de Civit. Dei. c. 8.
with two Toes in each foot.

Many of Canton and Quamsi Province have two nails upon their little toes, as
they have generally in Cachin China.

Concerning these and some other properties of Natitions, where I suspect no
Artifice, I am willing to say with Pliny, That no wonder it is that about these
Coasts, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 6.
there be found men and beasts of strange and wondrous shapes, considering the
agility of the Suns fiery heat, so strong and powerful in those Countries,
which is able to frame Bodies artificially of sundry proportions, and to
imprint and grave in them diverse forms. Concerning these Monsters which have
scarce the Figure of any certain Species, and either are not humane, S. Aug
Enchir. cap. 87. Epist. ad vitalem, lib. 22. de Civit. Dei, vid. c. 19.
Bonavent. l. 4. Did. 44.
or partly humane, and partly mixed of diverse; S. Augustine, with whom Lumbard
agrees, denies they shall rise again; or, we are not (says he) to believe
they shall appear so vitiated in the Resurrection, but rather with a corrected
and amended nature, Where they paint their Feet.
and their deformity (be it of what kind soever) recalled to the true Figure of
a humane Fabric; not that there shall any thing perish in the Body which was
naturally in it, but only that which is deformed: God doing that which an
Artificer is wont, who can dissolve again with fire a deformed Statue, whether
it were made so on purpose, or by chance and the error of Art, and introduce a
more beautiful Figure; So, that the same substance shall remain, the first
deformity abolished; for what was extant, expressed, or wanting of featnesse to
that foul Figure, that he either cuts off, or fills up, or adds, that the
dishonesty, filthiness, ill favourednesse, or horriblenesse thereof may be
removed: In like manner we may suppose it will be done in the Resurrection;
for, those monstrous deformities cannot consist with the future felicity of the
Saints; the manner of restitution we must leave to the Creator. But as for the
deformed members of wicked men, which were polluted with sin, and made the
Instruments of iniquity, there is no reason why this should be common with
them, with Innocents, De his vide Thom. Aquin. 4. Con. gentiles cap. 89. Purch.
Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
and the heirs of that life, but as the bodies of the damned shall be
tormented, so they shall suffer with their deformities, yet there is no
certainty, since nothing is expressly revealed in Scripture of this matter.

In Candou Island they have a custom to make the Nails of their Feet red;
this is the beauty of that Country, they make it with the juice and moisture of
a certain Tree, and it endures as long as the Nails.

Idem lib. 7.
The Abassines also color their Feet, which are bare, with the juice of a
reddish-barke.

The Virgins among the Chiribichenses use to wrap the parts of the Calfes of
their Legs and Thighs next the Knees, with Bottoms of yarne, Where they affect
great Hips and Thighs.
Pet. Martyr. Decad. 8.
and bind them hard, to the end that their Calfes and Legs might swell bigger,
and through this foolish device they think they appear finer to their Lovers,
their other parts are naked.

The Cathayans also, as it seems, The Author of the Treasury of Times, vol.
1. lib. 3. cap. 5.
have the same foolish affectation among them.

The Maids in Cumana go naked, only they wear certain bands about their knees,
Linds. lib. 2.
which they bind very hard, that their hipps and thighs may seem thick, which
they esteem for a beauty. Helyn, Helyn. Geogr.
in his Geography, says, that they affect to have very great Thighs; to effect
which they bind the parts below their knee very hard, even from their
Childhood, which forces the blood and humors to move upwards.

The Spanish women, and men, affect great Calfes and full Legs, and are much
ashamed if they be not by Nature or Art so accommodated; and verily all the
Spaniards that I ever saw have had full handsome Legs, Nations affecting great
Calfes.
and the shape of Spanish Stockings sold upon our Exchange, whose shortness
speaks them to have been made for women, seems to intimate that the women
there, have great Legs and very little Feet. Yet a Spanish Merchant, a friend
of mine, tells me the reason of the smalnesse of the feet of Spanish silk
Stockings is, that the Spaniard for the most part cuts off the Foot of his
stockings to foot them with Fustian.

This Nation seems to be of an opinion somewhat contrary to Momus, who
misliked the fashion of the Leg of man, that the belly thereof, or the Calfe,
which was seated behind in a place out of danger, was furnished so with a
defense of flesh, and the shin-bone exposed to all encounters without any
defense at all, never noting that the Eyes were placed before, to secure the
Shins, whereas there was none behind to look to the safety of the Calfe. But
one would think they were aware of that notion of Physiognomy, which
pronounces spine Legs, almost destitute of flesh, to be an argument of one
prompt to venery, Men with one Calfe of their Leg bigger than the other.
as being a sign of a libidinous Nature. A fault commonly noted in women, for
those whose Legs or shankes are lean, and have little flesh, they call them
leacherous and shameful whores, like unto Goats; of which this cause may
perchance be assigned, for that the aliment is retained in the upper parts, and
passes into Seed and spirits, whereupon the Legs become small and lean, which
is manifest in them who want a foot, or by any other way become lame, for to
those lower parts the aliment is not transmitted so copiously as before, all
which persons are therefore very leacherous.

There was a Calfe-swelling punishment inflicted upon those of Meliopore, both
men and women, Herberts Travels. Helyn Geogr:
for their cruel ingratitude to St Thomas, martyred by them. Neirembergensis
calls them, a peculiar Nation among the Mallabars, which from a place of S.
Thomas have their name, and called Pencays, and questions whether it be to be
imputed to Nature or a Miracle. And on the Tribe of Benjamin, who were most
fierce against our Savior; both which to this day have one leg as big again in
the Calfe as the other, this doubled upon them in this humor would have been
kindly accepted, and entertained for a fashion. Yet in some parts of America,
it should seem, they have a contrary affectation, at least if I understand
Appianus rightly, where he says, Aetr. Appian. 2. pars Cosmog. cap. 4. de.
America.
Sanguinem quoque in Lumbis and Tibiarum pulpis comminuunt. Most free from any
affectation in that part, are Neatherland women, who are well proportioned,
especially in their Legs and Feet. Men and Women only have Calves in their
Legs, and their Legs full of flesh; howbeit Pliny says, he has read in some
writers that there was one man in Egypt had no Calfe at all to his Legs, A
Crane-leg'd man.
but was legged like a Crane. Torquato T^sso, in the comparison he makes
between Italy and France, reported to have noted, that the French commonly have
more spiny and slender Legs than the Italian Gentlemen, and he imputes the
cause to the French-mens continual riding and sitting on Horseback; which is
the very same from which Suetonius draws another clean contrary conclusion,
for he says, Germanicus, who had very small Legs, had by the frequent use of
this exercise, brought his to be very big; but he rid without Styrrups after
meat, the humors descending upon their pendulent instability. But the Scythians
by their continual and immoderate use of Horsemanship became the most impotent
and Eunuch-like men in the world, as Hippocrates affirms of them. For they
being ill at ease in their Legs and Hips, by reason of their continual riding
without stirrups, their Legs always hanging, they become subject to the
Sciatica or Hip-Gout, and when the Disease grew strong they were lame, and
their Hipps contracted and crampt; whereupon, as if they would exhibit a
medicine to the Head to restrain the Flux of the Phleagme to the lower parts,
they cut their veins behind the Ear, whereby (indeed) they cured themselves,
but became unfruitful and impotent. And that they became impotent by cutting
those Arteries, Vallesius thinks, happened that the Brain was weakened, being
deprived of the influction of the vital Spirits, wherefore it was no marvel
if they became sloathfull, effeminate, and unable to sustain the shock of
Venus, or sufficiently t^^^^t out the vehement efforts of that act, for, the
Brain at that time is wont to labor vehemently: or else says he perchance
that Nerve is cut with the veins; which Andraeas Vesalius, (...) legs to a
convenient magnitude.
a man most expert in dissection, reports, he has seen in many to descend from
the sixth Conjugation of the Nerves of the Brain, into the Testes and seminary
vessels; of which opinion before him Johannes Langius, a learned Physician of
Germany, seems to have been of, while he writes that the better portion of the
Prolofique Seed flows down from the Brain and spinall marrow by the Veins and
the Arteries of the Temple, the Parotides Veins behind the Ears, to the
Loins and the Seminary vessels, which appears to be so, in that at the
effusion of the Seed, the Eyes twinckle, and that the Brain is dried with
Copulation, whence it is, that hot and fat humor being consumed in that
congression, leacherous men do sooner wax bald. Where the Legs, either by the
lapse of Nature, or by accident are less than the natural and decent
proportion, the Corrective part of Physique justly takes place to increase
them to a due magnitude. Gal. lib. 5. de Tuenda sanitat.
Galen affords us a method in this business, where he speaks of the
correcting, and repairing of members, and he gives an example of a boy of
thirteen years of age, who had small spindle Shankes, who by causing the
Aliment to be moderately drawn to that place, and the parts indifferently
rubbed and chafed, and causing him to use baths and convenient aliment, by this
means brought the little Legs of that boy to a convenient magnitude; a good
notion for Gentlemen Vshers, if they have any mind to have the Leg repaired,
and would save the Charges of Bombasted Artificial Calfes.

We justly account a high pitched Calfe the best proportion, and therefore we
always stroke up the Calfes of our Legs. High pitched and low-pitch'd Calfes
by whom affected
Our Lancashire men are noted by Camden, to have such clean and handsome
shaped Legs.



The Irish who are good Footmen (as I have heard) count a low-pitcht Calfe the
best Leg, and therefore they stroke down the Calfes of their Legs; a high
great bellied Leg, it may be, being found somewhat inconvenient in running of
long Races, but it is thought by some that they do so, The impertinency of
tampering with Childrens weak legs.
because they affect a long full small.

Many times Children about the second year of their Age, when they begin to
go, are wont to vari and go wide and stradling with their Feet, their Knees
inclining to each other. About this feared deformity, their mothers, being
solicitous, crave help of Chirurgions, who for the most part endeavor with
diverse Machins to erect and keep straight their Legs and Thighs, but in vain,
because of themselves, and the just accord of Nature, for the most part about
the time they are three or four years old, their Legs and Muscles grow more
firm and strong, and the parts return to their natural state. Formius River.
obser communicate. fol. 76.
Which over officious tenderness of Parents, and distrust of Nature, is
observed by one famous in that Art, Vide Fabr. ab. Aq. Pend. de varis.
to which the Appeal in this case is made; verily Nature is both careful and
able enough to maintain the strength and straightness of those Columns that
are to sustain the Body, imposing no more weight upon them then they are able
to bear without any durable prevarication. Man oftener by over-charging the
Legs of growing Youth with too early and unfit burdens, Baker-legs how caused.
has occasioned this deformity. Hence it is that we commonly know a Baker or a
Tailor by his Legs, and as some of their misshapen Legs have been called (vari)
id est, wry-legged, so others vati and vatinii, id est, Bon-legged.

Theod. de Bry.
The Brasileans dye their Thighs with a black color, that seeing them afar
off, they seem as if they were clothed in sacerdotall breeches.

In the Province of Cardandam, Purch. Pilgr. 3. lib. 1.
under the Great Chan Tartars jurisdiction; the men about their Legs make
lists, Certain properties of Nations in their Feet.
pricking the place with Needles, and putting therein a black indeliable
tincture, and these lists or marks are esteemed with them a great Gallantry.

In Butto Bo John's Town, Idem.
the women's legs are crooked.

The women of Arupini almost all of them halt, which Eusebius Neirembergensis
thinks to be a secret of Nature.

The Inhabitants of Guinea have long Legs.

In Taprobana and Tartaria they are all short legged.

Many have been deformed and disfigured in their Feet, and thereupon it came
that diverse were surnamed Planci, id est, Flat-footed, Plautici, id est,
Splay-footed; Scauri, id est, Ex narratione Textoris.
with their Ankles standing overmuch out, Pansi, id est, broad-footed. But
horrid and malignant Conformations of Feet have appeared in diverse men. There
was a very old man called Marin, the upper parts of whose body was Humane, and
the lower part Equine, Monstrous deformities of Feet.
for he was reported to have been borne with the feet of a Horse. Verily
Plutarch, according to the mind of Aristotle, has published, that there was a
maid, called Onoscelis, borne of an Ass, who had only the feet of an Ass, the
rest of her body appearing answerable to the humane form, by reason of the
congresse of Aristonymus Ephesius with an Ass. Pucerus l. 4. Chron. Carion^.
Moreover Peucerus has proclaimed, that in the reign of Michael Perpinaceus,
there was such an humane Infant come to light. And we have out of Coelius
Rhodiginus, that at Sybaris, from the congresse of a Shepherd and a young Kid
or she-Goat, there proceeded an Infant who had the Legs of a Goat. Besides,
Anno 1493. a wench unmarried, brought forth a Humane Child with the legs and
feet of a Dog: this monster Cardan and Paraeus make mention of, Lycost. opere
Chronologo.
but first of all Lycosthenes. A deformity not very differing from this,
appeared in the year of our Lord 1545. in a certain Infant born at Aveignion,
with the upper parts correspondent to the Humane form, the lower parts Canine,
wherefore Francis King of France commanded the mother with her deformed issue
to be burnt. Magius in miscellaneis.
In the time of Pius the third, Volateran. in Comment. urbanis.
Pope of Rome, there was a monstrous Production not much differing from the
former, born of a woman in Hetruria compressed by a dog, which therefore for
expiation was carried to the high Bishop of Rome. Lycosthenes.
Other monstrifique births there have been deformed with the feet of other
Animals: For in Germany, near the Town of Lawferburg, in the Borders of the
Helvetians upon the Rhine, Anno Dom. 1274. there was a boy borne with the feet
of a Goose. Pedestrall Monsters.
Aldrovandus.
Aldrovandus speaks of an Hermaphroditicall Monster with the Legs and Feet of
an Eagle, all other parts retaining the Humane form, which perchance because
it could not be taken, was shot to death with Arrows.

In the year 1512. (a little before Ravenna was sacked) there were cruel wars
in Italy: Aldrovand. Hist. monst. Guzman de Alfrage.
And in this very City (I mean Ravenna) there was borne a strange Monster,
which did strike the beholders into great admiration, and caused much wonder:
He had from the girdle upward all his whole body, face and head like unto a
man, saving that he had one horn in his forehead, he wanted his Arms, but
instead thereof Nature had given him two wings like a Bat; he had figured in
his Breast the Pythagoricall (Y) and in his stomach down to his belly a well
formed Cross or Crucifix, he was an Hermaphrodite, both these two natural
Sexes being in a very proportionable manner well and truly formed, he had no
more but one thigh, and to it one leg, with its foot like a Kites, and the
tallons answerable thereunto; in the knotty part or locking joint of the Knee
he had one only Eye. These monstrosities and unnatural shapes possessed men's
minds with extraordinary admiration; and those that were learned men and great
Scholars, considering with themselves, that such monsters in nature were
usually prodigious, and did foretoken some strange effects, did beat their
brains, and exercise the strength of their wit, in the speculation and search
of the signification thereof, Nations with the feet of a Horse.
and what this strange monster might portend; amongst many other, that the home
did signify pride and ambition; the wings inconstancy and lightness; want of
arms, want of good works; the foot of that bird of Rapine, theft, usury, and
Avarice; the eye in the knee, affection to vanities and worldly things; the two
Sexes, Sodomy, and beastly filthiness; in all which vices Italy did then
abound. For the which God did scourge them with his whip of wars and
dissentions, but the cross and the Y were good and fortunate signs: for the Y
in the breast did signify Virtue; and the cross on the belly, that if men
(suppressing their dishonest lusts of the flesh) should embrace virtue in their
breasts, God would give them peace, sweeten his displeasure, and abate his
wrath.

Aldrov. hist. Monst. fol. 371.
Somewhat the like monster Aldrovandus exhibits, saving that it had two feet,
one whereof was like a man's, with an eye in the knee; and the left leg was
scaly and ended in the tail of a fish.

Isidor. l. 11. c. 3.
Isidore writes plainly, that there is a Nation which appears with a humane
body, and the feet of a Horse. Mela, l. 3. c. 3.
And Mela and Solinus do not seem to doubt but that there may be men with
Horses feet; for, Mela says, that in the Islands of Oonae in the Northern sea,
are the Oones, who have feet like Horses, they are called Hippopodes; with whom
Solinus does accord. Solin cap. 21.
The Hippopodes retain the Humane form unto the Legs, but end in Horse feet;
Plin. Not. hist. lib. 4.
And Pliny expressly declares, that there are such men among the Oones, who are
borne with horse feet.

Such kind of Centaures are said to inhabit in certain Islands distant three
days sail from the Scythian shores, called Hippopodes, Centaures and
Onocentaures
although other Writers say, they have the Legs of an Ass, and called Onosceli
from their asinine Legs; Hence (...), a kind of Devils, so called a cruribus
asininis, as Rhodiginus says.

In the Regions of Tamberlaine, in times past called the Great, there were
Centaures found, of such a form, that their upper part resembled man, with two
arms like a Toad, and the other parts a horse.

Among Authors also we read of Onocentaures, representing the forepart of a
man, and the hinder part of an ass, for the Septuagint Interpreters upon
Isaiah render, that the Onocentaures shall inhabit forsaken Babylon, although
the Vulgar Interpreters interpret Vlulas.

In some places of the Region of Peru, Hist. of Peru part 1.
there be certain great Apes inhabiting, with whom the Inhabitants, by the
suggestion of the Devils are mingled, whence there arises Monsters, with the
head and privities of men, but with the hands and feet of Apes, the rest of
their bodies all hairy, which speak not but with howling, after a manner
emulate Devils.

Of some such kind of extraction that Indian Satyr seems to have been
described by Tulpius, Ex Tulpii obser.
that was brought from Angola in his time: and bestowed upon Henry Frederick,
Prince of Orange. And this Satyr was foure-footed: but of the humane kind, as
may be seen by his Effigies. He was called by the Indians Orang-Outang, or a
wild man: The description of a wild man.
Resembling a child of three years old in length, as also one of six years in
thickness. He was neither of a gross nor slender body, but well set, yet very
neat and nimble: but he had joints so straight, and muscles so large, that he
both durst, and could do any thing. He was smooth before on both sides, and
behind hairy with black hairs: His visage resembled a man, but his Nostrils
being flat and crooked upward, was like a wrinkled and toothlesse old woman.
His ears were like other men's, and also his breast, having on both sides a
swelling Pap (for it was of the Female Sex) he had a very large Navell, and his
upper and lower joints were so exactly alike with men's, that you shall hardly
see one egg more like to another. His elbow was excellently joined, neither
was the order of his fingers, nor thumbs different from the humane form; nor
the Calfe of his leg, nor his heel unlike: which neat and comely carriage of
his members, was the reason that oftentimes he would go upright, and also he
would with more ease take up any heavy burden than carry it. When he would
drink, he would take the Cup by the handle with one hand, and put his other
underneath it, then he would wipe his lips, as neatly as we see our gallant
Courtiers do: Which same dexterity he would observe when he went to bed: As
bowing his head upon the pillow, and handsomely covering his body with the
bed-cloaths, and would hide himself just as if some Gentleman had lain there.

Morever King Sambasensis upon a time told a Kinsman of our Author, Samuel
Blomart, Satyrs, and their supposed original.
that these Satyrs, especially the Males, in the Island of Bornaeum, are of
such courage and strength, that they have done violence to armed men, much more
unto an impotent Sex of women and children, whereof they being extremely in
love withal, have stolen away and ravished. For they are earnestly prone unto
venery (which is common to them with the Satyrs of other ancient writers) Yea
sometimes so saucy and leacherous, that the Indian women do therefore shun those
Launes and Forests (worse than a Dog or Serpent) wherein these lascivious
Creatures do lurk and inhabit. All which things are for a very truth related
of this Satyr.

Which makes me remember the conceit of a certain Historian, who describing
the deformed aspects of a Nation: If you beheld, says he, their ugly visages,
you would think that they had no other Sires than the Apes and Baboons of the
neighboring Woods; Unless the frequent beholding of these unlucky things
should by impregnating the imagination of teeming women, produce such a
similitude, as it happened to a Noble man, whom Salmuthus speaks of, Salmuthus
observe. med. cent. 2.
who kept an Ape, which for sport-sake went round about the Table, his wife
being great with child, playing very often with it, afterward at her delivery
she brought forth an Infant from the girdle upwards an Ape, (to wit, as far as
he could be seen dancing above the Table) but below a man; a miserable
spectacle, and the more miserable, that this horrid monster was to be suckled.

This Relation of Tulpius shows this Creature to have been a kind of Ginney
Drill, for it answers very directly the Effigies of that Ginney Drill, which
this Michaelmas Term, Ginney Drils, of what Tribe.
1652. I saw near Charing Cross, the hair of whose head (which was black)
grew very like the hair of a child; it was a complete Female too, not above
eleven months old, and yet it seemed to me to answer the Dimensions which
Tulpius gives of his Angola Satyr. The Keeper of it affirms, it will grow up
to the stature of five foot, which is the ordinary size of little men: He would
go upright and drink after the same manner. Her Keeper intended never to cut
her hair, but to let it grow in full length, like a woman's; in case she should
dye, her carcass was bespoke for Dissection by some Anatomists, who perchance
have a Curiosity to search out what capacity of Organs this Rational Bruit had
for the reception of a reasonable soul, or at least of such a delitescent
reason; which Drill is since dead, and I believe dissected, but of the
Dissectors and their observations I have not received any intelligence.

Of which monster I may say what Jordanus says of the aforesaid Orang Outang,
or Tulpius his wild man, that it proceeded from the wicked copulation of man
and beast, the Devil Cooperating, and Divine revenge (without all doubt)
ensuing thereupon: of the same Tribe and Original were those two children
which the Portugal woman bore to the Great Ape, Castanneda in Annal.
Lusitaniae.
when she was exposed into a desert Island inhabited only by such Apes; a story
well known in Portugal, and is worth the reading in Delrio. And indeed, they
very much resemble them in the Face, especially in the Nose, which is very flat
and Camoyse, with repanded Nostrils; an Ape being called Simia, Which kind of
Ape is most like man.
not from imitation, as some unskilful Grammarians suppose, but a simitate
from this simity of a saddle-like Nose; and it is the opinion of Scaliger, that
these kind of Apes, who have no Tails approach nearer to the similitude of man
than those that have Tails, although they be almost men both in manners and
understanding, which he confesses he had often wondered at.

In Ginney and Binney there are innumerable store of these rational Bruits, and
where they are, they go in herds and companies, but are of two Societies: The
Monkeys always keep by themselves, and great and little as they are only of
that kind consort together, and even in Islands that lie within the River, they
are as frequent as on the Maine, which condemns the report is of them that
they cannot swim, and being in the water will drown presently; for, in my own
knowledge I can affirm, that having bought a Monkey of the Country people, who
use to bring them unto us and sell them for poor things, being got loose in my
boat that rid in the middle of the River, he leapt into the water to swim on
shore, and being pursued by one of our men, who swam after, he did dive under
water diverse and sundry times before he could recover him. But to speak of
the Baboone Which I take to be the Drill, and is without a Tail.
, I must say, it is a wonderful thing to observe a kind of Commonwealth that
is amongst them; they have none but their own kind together, and are in Herds
of three or four thousand in a Company; as they travel they go in rank,
whereof the Leaders are certain of the bigger sort, Baboones and Monkies.
and there is as great and large of them as a Lion, the smaller following, and
ever now and then, as a Commander, a great one walks; the Females carry their
young under their bellies, except she have two, and then one under, and the
other above: In the rear comes up a great company of the biggest sort, as a
guard against any pursuing enemy: and in this manner do they march along; they
are very bold, and as we pass in the River, when we come near their Troops
they will get up into the Trees and stand in gaze upon us, and in a kind of
collerick humor, the great ones will shake the trees, and with their hands
clatter the boughs in that fashion as it does exceed the strength of a man to
do the like, barking and making a noise at us, as if they were much offended,
and in this manner many times they will follow us along, and in the night time
where we ride at an anchor, take up their stands, or lodgings on the mountain
tops, or on the Trees that are above us, where we hear their government: for
many times in the night you shall hear such a noise of many of their voices
together, when instantly one great voice exalts it self, and presently all are
hush and the noise is dashed, so as we were wont to say, Master Constable
speaks; likewise when we are ashore, and meet with these Troops, on a sudden
the great ones will come forward, and seem to grin in our faces, but offer up
a gun and away they pack. One of our people one day as we came near the shore
in our boat, and a troop of these shavers being gazing on us, made a shot and
killed one of them, When Apes began to grow like men.
which before the boat could get on shore the others had taken up betwixt them
and carried quite away; but we have killed of them, which the Country people do
much desire, and will eat of very heartily: wherein I hope never to take their
part. And lastly, let me tell you, that we have seen, in the desert places
where they use, Trees and Plants wound and made up together in that artificial
manner, and wrought together with that thickness over head to keep away the
sun, and shade the ground, which has been smoothed underneath, and all things
in the manner and shape of an excellent Arbor, which place they have only used
and kept for their dancing and recreation; that no man living that should have
come by chance and seen the same, without the knowledge of these unlucky
things, but would have confidently supposed it had and must have been the
handy-worke of man.

And verily it is a most wonderful to consider what rational actions these
kind of Creatures will do. Scaliger in Comment. in Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 2.
c. 83. exercitat. 213.
Scaliger, it seems, was much taken up with the contemplation of their
man-like properties, for he has made a very pleasant recital of his
observations, whose elegant description of their manners, deserves the curious
inquisition of the Ingenious, Camerarius memorabil. mod. Cent. 9.
and which Camerarius has thought worthy to be inserted into the Centuries of
his memorable and wonderful secrets of Nature; Thus as a modern Poet
unhappily sings, When men began to grow unlike the Gods,
Apes grew to be like men --


Seamen, or men-fisher.
That some Fishes resemble men in their faces, hands, and other parts, is no
Fable; for such are not only recorded by the Ancients, but also have been seen
by late Navigators. Lerius saw none of them, yet relates, that an American
fisherman cut off the hand from one of those Fishes, which did offer to get
into his boat, the hand had five distinct fingers like ours, and in his face he
resembled a man. Scaliger writes, that one of those Seamen, or men-fishes was
seen by Hierom Lord of Noricum, which laid hold on the Cable of his Ship; this
story he related as a truth to Maximilian the Emperor. Such a one was seen in
the time of Augustus, another in the time of Tiberius, a third under Nero.
These Fishes were anciently called Tritons, Nereides, and Sirens, one of those
Scaliger saw at Parma, about the bigness of a Child of two years old. It is
written of the River Colhan, in the Kingdom of Cohin among the Indians, Plin.
Aelian. Theod. Gaza. Trapezuntius.
that there are some humane shaped Fishes there called Cippae, which feed upon
other fishes, these hide themselves in the water by day, but in the night time
they come out upon the banks, and by striking one flint against another make
such a light, that the Fishes in the water being delighted with the sparks,
flock to the banks, so that the Cippoe fall upon them and devour them. But
most strange is that we read of in the story of Harlem in Holland, out of whose
Lake was fished a Sea-woman, which by a springtide had been carried thither;
when she was brought into the Town, she suffered her self to be clothed, and
to be fed with bread, milk, and other meats, she learned also to spin, to
kneel before the Crucifix, The opinions of the Learned concerning semi-men,
and semi-beasts.
and to obey her Mistress, but she could never be brought to speak, and so
remained for diverse years dumb.

Indeed, the bodies of other Creatures are not capable of man's soul, because
they are not of that Fabric, temper, and constitution, if they were capable;
yet for want of fit Organs the soul could not exercise her actions, as in this
story of the Sea-woman. And of Apuleius, who could never be brought to speak
or write. Nor are they men, although they have the outward shape, for it is not
the matter nor outward Lineament, but the form, that gives essence and
denomination. Many learned men, as Pindarus, Plutarch, Pareus, and others,
Plut. in lib. inscript. an Brutis ratio insit.
reduce the causes of these horrid deformities and transfigurations of the
humane form to the promiscuous confusion of the seed of diverse Species, whence
semi-men and semi-beasts do often result, wherefore they in a wonderful manner
inveigh against men, who neither fearing God, nor the Laws, become so subject
to their lust, that they put no difference between themselves and beasts,
whilst they dare to mingle with them. Plin. lib. 7. not. Hist.
Pliny where he speaks of the Hippocentaure which was borne in Thessalie, and
after it was dead, by the command of Claudius Caesar, was brought unto him out
of Egypt embalmed in honey, seems to favor this opinion; which opinion is
more established, because upon the dispersing of Nations after the deluge, Lust
lasciviously running a debauched course, through very wickedness, the
licentiousness of inordinate concupiscence, introduced many deformities and
defoedations of the Humane form, yet there are many of the Learned that cannot
wholly embrace this opinion. Since it cannot be according to the Doctrine of
Aristotle, The causes of monstrous deformities.
that out of the permixtion of Creatures very discrepant in Species,
temperature, and gestation of the womb, any issue should result: wherefore
although it is confessed for a truth, that monsters want determinate causes,
because they are effects not intended by Nature, but are only procreated by
accident; yet they are feign to have recourse to other natural causes. Arist.
Lect. 4. problem. 13.14.
The Philosopher has left it upon record, that these monstrous depravations of
the humane form are sometimes occasioned through corrupt seed, but by corrupt
seed he does not understand seed altogether putrified, but only that wherein
the virtue of the whole Species does languish, whereupon either the whole
Foetus, or some parts thereof are produced unlike to the Genitors; for, when
the virtue Formatrix finds the matter of the Foetus rightly disposed, then it
procreates an issue like to the Generator, if otherwise unlike: besides this,
they fetch causes from the Alimentary virtue, from hereditary diseases, and
from monstrous and deformed Parents, the narrowness of the place not allowing
room for two seeds to dilate, for the forming of two, but forcing them to a
coalescence: but to omit all other vicious dispositions which corrupt the
natural principles destined to generation and conformation. Vehement
imagination which possesses the greatest force of hindering the matter of
seed, is commonly the cause of these monstrosities, for even as it happens that
a woman with child imprints the image of that she longs for on the Child she
goes with, so it may happen that a woman impleat with humane seed, if she
afterward lie with a Dog, out of the assiduous cogitation and fear of
bringing forth a Dog, imprints the parts of a Dog upon the fruit in her womb,
Whether Bruits may conceive by Men, and women by Bruits.
and then it is not to be said that the offspring was produced from the Dogs
seed, since there is no convenience observed between the humane and canine
seed. Yet it is not denied that from diverse Animals, being of a convenient
nature and temperament, monsters may proceed, and in such monstrifique
Creatures, when the seed of the Male (if it be a man) is more vigorous in the
supernall parts of the foetus, then, the superior parts result unto a humane
form: and if the seed of the Bruit in the formature of the inferior parts
has a valid operation, then the lower parts of the monster become Belluine. It
is verily a horrid thing to be spoke, that man, the Prince of all Creatures,
and which is more, created in the Image of God, should flagitiously mingle with
a Brutish Copulation, so that a Biformed breed, half men and half beasts are
engendered by the confusion of seed of diverse Species, of which there have come
abominable and promiscuous Creatures, to the horrid abasement and confusion of
the humane form, the effect whereof, although it seem impossible to Galen,
yet to Baptista Porta, Baptista Potta i^ Magica natural. Vide Wekerum de
secretis li. 5. Jacob. Rueff. lib. 5. de Generat. Hom.
who has written of the Art of getting Monsters, and has strange histories of
such productions, it seems not impossible, although difficult, and he annexeth
his reasons; yet in my opinion Jacobus Rueffus gives the best account of this
difficulty, who affirms, that Bruites may conceive by men, and men likewise by
Bruits; which he makes good by three reasons: first, from natural appetite;
secondly, Bauhin. lib. de Hermophrad. Kornman. lib. de mirac. vivorum. Delrio
disquis. Mag.
from the provocation of nature by detectation; thirdly, by the attractive
virtue of the Matrix, which is alike both in Bruits and Men. The curious and
diffident may find the matter of fact confirmed by many examples in Bauhinus,
Kornmannus, and Delrio, and therefore we may spare these testimonies that would
confirm the possibility of the thing. Whether of a man and a beast a true man
may be borne.
And indeed, I do not find the thing absolutely denied as impossible, but
rather that it is questioned, whether such a production be a true man or a
monster. Delrius, who is somewhat incredulous in this point, says, he is
certain that of a man and a Beast, a true man cannot be borne, because a
Beasts seed is void of that perfection which is required to the mansion place
of so noble a soul; wherefore if any thing be borne of such a mixture, it will
be a monster and not a man; for, such an off spring follows the worser
condition of the seed. Eusebius. Neiremberg. in Hist. Naturae.
Eusebius Neirembergensis also puts the question, whether of seed not humane, a
true man may arise, that is, whether by the horrible Copulation of a woman and
a beast a true man may be brought forth, he thinks we ought not liberally to
believe these things, neither thinks he it to be above the power of Nature, if
the woman's seed be efficacious; and he puts the other question, whether any
other womb besides a woman's has been the receptacle of a humane offspring;
and he thinks that if the Issue require the efficacity of both Parents, none
but the womb of a woman can lodge a true man adorned with understanding: but
if the force only of the Male fabricate the Progeny, and the woman only is but
the shop, then he thinks, perchance according to Physicians, it will be
possible after that heinous coition a man may be cherished in a beasts womb,
the Seed of man being before cast therein: but if any thing has been produced
in shape like unto man, it is never without some gage of an irrational nature.

When Nature is impedite, many strange transpositions and deformities both in
excess and defect, Monsters born with many Feet.
have appeared in these fundamental and sustaining parts of the body.

P. Africanus, and Laelius Consuls, Jul. obseq. de Prodig.
at Amiternum, there was a boy borne with three Feet and one Hand.

Appius Claudius, and P. Metellus, Consuls, Idem. eod. lib.
at Amiternum, there was a Boy borne with three Feet, all the other parts of
his body rightly constituted.

Anno Domini 1552. In England, Jacob. Rueffus.
not far from Oxford, there was a Girl borne with two Heads, four arms and
hands, with two Legs on one side, and one on the other, so that she seemed to
abound with three feet; See more examples of these Monstrosities in Scene 18.

At Constantinople there was a Boy borne with four feet. Lycost. lib. prodig.
Anno Domini 601. Jul. obseq. ex Romans Hist.


P. Africanus, and C. Fulvius Consuls, there was a Female child borne with
four feet.

Moreover, Lycost.
there have been little Children borne with four feet.

Before the year of our Redemption 162. Idem.
there was an Infant born, who had four feet, and as many arms.

In the 160 year before Christ's Incarnation there was an Infant borne, at
Caere, Idem.
with four feet.

Anno 132. Aldrovand.
years before the year of our Lord, there was a maid seen endued with four
Legs.

Man when he first attempteth to go, being not as yet sustained by reason of
his weak and feeble feet, is equivocally called Quadrupes, or a foure-footed
Creature, Whether man can go upright, if never taught.
and some there have been found, who have not been instructed how to go, have
gone on all four, like foure-footed Beasts. Plin. lib. 7.
The natural Historian is much scandalized at this Stepdame like trick of
Nature, that man should be so untowardly borne, that the first hope he
conceives of his strength, and the first gift that Time affords him, makes
him no better than four footed Beasts. How long is it (says he) ere he can go
alone? As for all other living Creatures there is not one but by an instinct of
Nature knows this, man only knows nothing, unless he be taught, and cannot
so much as go unless he be trained to it; and to be short, is apt and good at
nothing naturally but to pule and cry. If man by a natural instinct cannot
raise his body and walk upright, but must (unless taught another posture)
crawle on the earth upon all four with other Creatures; to what end was his
upright frame given him? Or how should he deserve the name of Anthropos, and
behold that mansion prepared for him above? And if he cannot stand nor go erect
upon his own account, the Poets have abused him, Ovid. Metamorph.
Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus:
Silius Ital. lib. 5.
Nonne vides hominum, ut Celsos ad sidera vultus
Sustulerit Deus? ac sublimia finxerit ora.
And the Roman Orator to as small purpose, Cicer. lib. 5. de Legibus.
Solum hominem erexit, and ad Coeli quasi Cognationis pristini conspectum
excitavit.

Conrad. Gesner.
In the Forest of Hanseburge in Misnia, there was a Monster found, Manugrades.
having the body of a man, with the Talons of an Eagle, with a yellowish beard,
and hairs resembling a Crest, who went grovelling on the ground after the
manner of foure-footed beasts, who certainly was some Infant exposed and became
a manugrade; through want of teaching he could not speak, but consequently
grew up in these woody places, and was nourished with wild fruits and the
indulgence of wild beasts.

There was also two men, a Male and Female, found going after this manner in
the woods of Germany. And this need not seem so mavelous, Albert. Mag.
Aldrov. hist. monstror.
since in Bononia there was seen a notable Beggar, who going after the manner
of a beast, begged Alms; but the cause of this way of incesse, was an evil
conformation of his hips, which disabled him any way to errect himself. Such a
one was he who was Surnamed Quadrupes, Lycost. lib. prodig. Anno Dom. 651.
borne in the time of Mauritius the Roman Emperor, because his hands
resembled feet, and went after this manner. Aldrovand. Hist. monst.
Not to omit what Aldrovandus relates of hairy men, who by instinct of Nature
go creeping on the ground, and therefore are called by the Latins Manugradi.

Many humane bodies have appeared without feet. Rueffus says, Jacob. Rueff.
lib. 5. concept. and generat. hom. Lycost. lib. prodig. and ostent. Anno Dom.
1537
he has seen many Infants born maimed, through the defect of their members,
wanting feet. Near the Village Nebritz, not far from the Town of Watzen, there
was an Infant borne without feet.

In Picerum, as the Roman History records, Peucer. Tetr.
there were some born without hands or feet.

Monsters without feet.
Jacob. Rueff. lib. concept. and Generat. Hom.
Rueffus presents the conformation of an Infant, that says, he had seen it,
who retained the just and perfect shape of all his body, thighs, and Legs,
wanting only his feet.

Nicholaus Rocheus reports to have seen, Anno Domini 1541. the eighth day of
February, in the Castle of St Amandus Allifer, in the Province of Burbon, an
Infant borne of a woman well known, which from the Head to the Navell resembled
the Image of a man, and afterward in the place of Legs and Feet, there was a
Tail substituted after the manner of Sirens; which monster lived an hour
after the birth. Morever about the year of our Redemption 1552. at
Vuidensbuch, about a mile distance from Schleasing, there was a Monster borne
of a woman, having the Image of an Infant, but without Legs and feet, in whose
place there was a long pyramidicall point produced; which monster was dipped in
the Laver of Christians. Upon which a Quaere might be raised, whether such
horrid monsters ought to be baptized? But this, as being not properly
appertaining to our Design, we shall wave it for the present. This
pyramidicall horrifique monster Aldrovandus makes mention of, which a Potters
wife brought forth Anno Domini 1556. which from the Crown of the head to the
Hyppochondries represented the humane figure, yet with a prominent mouth, a
torn aspect, but from the Navell, leaving the figure of a man, it terminates
in a pyramidall form, resembling in the point, the similitude of a sows
inflected tail, besides, about the Spine of the back another Effigies of a
Navell was seen, and it exhibited no Sex at all. A strange history of a Monster
without feet dancing upon her hands.


But the young Gaul is not to be passed by, about eighteen years of age,
altogether wanting the inferior parts, whom all Bononia saw and admired. Anno
Domini 1594. she was borne in the City Brison, in the Territories of Avenion,
called by name, Catherine Mazzina, of a comely form, and 27 inches and a Palm
over in height, but wanting Hips and Legs, and consequently Feet, her Arms
were perfectly formed, being longer than her breast and trunk, the lower part
of her body did in a manner appear bifid, emulating the bottom of a Harp;
She spoke to purpose, sung, played on a Lute, danced with her hands Spanish,
Mauritanian, Italian, and French dances, in like manner to the sound of Music
she so composed the Gestures of her imperfect body, that they who had seen her
afar off, would doubtlessely have said, she had danced with her Feet. And as to
the endowments of the mind, there was nothing wanting to her which is granted
by Nature to other men. Moreover she was endowed with both Sexes, yet she drew
nearer to a woman, and was more vigorous in that Sex, and therefore was rather
called a woman than a man. Aldrovandus thinks verily that this was the same
Monster which was showed at Rome 1585. for then this monstrifique Youth was
eight years old, for he received Letters, that at that time there was carried
about Rome, a Virgin of eight years old to be seen, who from her original
wanted her Thighs, A monstrous Virgin dancing without feet.
Legs, and Feet, her other members being rightly constituted. Hofman Comment.
de usu partium, li. 15.
And this it may be was the same woman that Hoffman saw at Rome, for the
description of their properties agree.

SCENE XXIIII. Embroidered skins.
Cruel and fantastical Inventions of Men practiced upon their Bodies in a
supposed way of Bravery, and wicked practices both of Men and Devils to alter
and deforme the Humane Fabric.
THe Inhabitants of Mangi, Purch. Pilg. 3. lib. 1.
in the East Indies, both men and women paint and embroider their skins with
iron Pens, putting indeliable tincture thereinto.

They of Sierra Leona in the East Indies, Idem Pilgr. 1. lib. 4.
both men and women raze and pincke over all their bodies, thinking themselves
thereby as fine as five-pence in a shower of rain.

They of the Cape of Lopo Gonsalves, Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 7.
both men and women pincke their bodies in diverse sorts, strange to behold;
Paste-Garments.
wherein they put certain grease mixed with color red, made of red wood, much
lighter than Brasil wood.

In Candou Island, Idem Pilgr. 2. lib. 9.
one of the Islands accounted to Asia, the chief men and women have
skin-prints, as a brave kind of Gallantry, they bruise Sanders and Camphyr on
very smooth and slick stones, which they bring from the firm Land, and
sometimes other sorts of odoriferous wood, which after they compound with
waters stilled with flowers, and overspread their bodies with this paste, from
the Girdle upwards, adding many forms with their fingers, such as they
imagine; it is somewhat like cut and pinckt doublets, and of an excellent
savor, it is a bravery much used to their Wives or Lemons, but they dare not
bring them in these Paste-garments before the King, or into his Palace. The
Cooks here, it seems, are their Tailors.

Idem eodem, lib. eodem.
The black people, or Caffares of the Land of Mosambique, and all the Land of
Ethiopia, and within the Land to the Cape of Bona Speranza, some have all their
bodies rased and seared with irons, and all figured like rased Satin,
Carbonado'd Bodies.
or Damask, wherein they take great pride, thinking there are no fairer people
than they in all the world.

The Great Gaga Calando King of Gagas, Purchase Pilgr. lib. 9.
his body is carved and cut with sundry works, and every day anointed with the
fat of man; his body is always painted red and white.

So that you cannot say but that he is cruel brave; nay, devilish fine! for,
whatsoever is done by abuse of Nature is diabolical; for, as the right use of
the natural endowments of the body is from God, so the abuse of them is from
the Devil.

In the Kingdom of Bemi men and women use to cut three streakes in their
bodies on each side, Idem Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
each streake being three fingers broad, which they do from their shoulders
down to their wastes, which they think to be a great good deed, tending to
their salvation.

The Boys of Siam paint themselves with a Herberts Travels.
Celestial color from top to toe, Slashed bodies like cut leather Jerkins.
and as an augmentation of beauty cut, gash and pinck their naked skins, which
in the Relators (contrarying their) opinion, rather breeds horror than
affectation in any Traveller.

Lindscot. lib. 1. cap. 22.
The people of Cambaia and Sian, that dwell upupon the hills called Gueos, mark
all their bodies with hot irons, which they esteem a freedom.

The Brasileans, Lindscot. lib 2.
such as would be accounted manly and stout, cut great slashes in their
breasts, arms, and thighs, whereby they make the flesh to rise, which they
cover with a certain powder, and make them look black; which color never
goes off during their lives, whereby, a far off, they seem to have cut
leather Jerkins on their bodies, such as the Switzers use to wear.

I very easily see how many of these relations will seem horrible untruths,
but let them think that such narrations which consist with the reason of
depraved nature, are not too sceptically to be entertained; for, because you
have seen no such thing done to withdraw your belief, Bodies painted with
fair branches.
is a sign of singular pride and impudence: and he who concludes that these
actions were done or not done in these places, according to his own froward
opinion and assent, is half mad, and fit to begin a voyage to Anticyra. I
confess, writing of things that seem so strange, a man had need walk with
his Guides, which you see I have orderly done. I have brought many witnesses
that give evidence point-blanck to my purpose; I allege Authorities, and have
said nothing but what stands with some reason, and is made good by the
Relators, the burden of the lie, if there be any, must rest upon other men's
shoulders, and not on mine.

The Brasileans and Florideans, for the most part, are painted over the body,
The Auther of the description, of Nova Francia, lib. 2. Lindscot. lib. 2.
the arms, and thighs, with fair branches, whose painting can never be taken
away, because they are pricked within the flesh, notwithstanding many
Brasileans do paint only their bodies, (without ^^cision) when they list; and
this with the juice of a certain fruit, Artificial Negroes.
which they call Genipat, which does black so much, that though they wash
themselves they cannot be clean in ten or twelve days after.

Purch. Pilgr. 4. lib. 7.
The Brasil women, to make themselves gallant, paint their bodies with the juice
of a certain fruit, wherewith they remain black, making in their bodies many
white strokes, after the fashion of round hose, and other kind of garments;
their children presently as soon as they are borne are painted with red and
black color. Lindscot. lib 1.


The Inhabitants that Sir Francis Drake found in 47 degrees, and 30 minutes,
whose Bay he called Seal Bay, their whole bravery and setting out themselves
stands in painting their bodies with diverse colors, and such works as they
can devise. Black and white Gallants
Some wash their faces with sulphur, or some such like substance; some paint
their whole bodies black, leaving only their necks behind and before white,
much like our Damsels that wear their Squares, their necks and breasts naked;
some paint one shoulder black, another white, and their sides and legs
interchangeably with the same colors, one still contrary to the other; the
black part has set upon it white Moons, and the white part black Suns, being
the marks and characters of their Gods. They wear their hair very long, but
lest it might trouble them in their travel, they knit it up with a roll of
Ostrich feathers, using the same rolls and hair together for a Quiver for
their Arrows, and for a storehouse, in which they carry the most things which
they carry about them; some of them within these rolls stick on either side of
their heads (for a sign of honor in their persons) a large and plain
feather, that shows like horns afar off, so that such a head upon a naked
body (if devils do appear with horns) might very nigh resemble devils. Yet
they have some commodity by painting their bodies, for the which cause they use
it so generally; and that I gather to be the defense it yields against the
piercing and nipping cold, for, the colors being close laid upon the skin, or
rather in the flesh, as by continual renewing of these juyces which are laid
on, and soaked into the inner part thereof, does fill up the pores so close,
that no air or cold can enter or make them once to shrink. They have clean,
Red and black Gallants.
comely, and strong bodies; they are swift of foot, and seem very active.
Neither is any thing more lamentable (in my judgment) than that so goodly a
people, and lively creatures of God, being so wonderful tractable as they are,
should transform themselves into such diabolical appearance. And certainly
they learn these fashions of the grand Deformer who takes delight to abuse
mankind with horrible shapes and figures, such as he uses to appear in, for as
he can transform himself into an Angel of light, so he can turn himself
into the shape of man, and assume and represent a thousand figures, yet
commonly, Delrio Disq. mag.
as Delrio well observes, he, for the most part, appears in the shape of a
deformed man, with some evident mark of horrid monstrosity.

Pet. Mart. Decad. 8. Idem Decad. 3.
The Chiribichenses all dye themselves with diverse juyces of herbs, and he that
seems most filthy and ugly in our eyes, they judge him to be the most neat
and trim.

The people of the Regions Tuia and Maia in the West- Indies (who are of high
and goodly stature, well limbed and proportioned) both men and women, that they
may seem more comely and beautiful, (as they take it) they paint their bodies
red and black with the juice of certain Apples, which they plant in their
Gardens for the same purpose; some of them paint their whole bodies, some but
part, and other some draw the portraicture of herbs, flowers, and knots, every
one as it seems best unto his own fantasy.

Grimston of their manners.
The Inhabitants of St Croix of the Mount, some of them to seem more terrible,
Azure, white, roane, and Tawney Gallants.
paint their bodies.

Thus we read of those kind of Canibals that are called Pories, Purch. Pilg. 4.
lib. 6.
that they paint themselves with red and black.

The Virginians (especially when they enter into Battle) are painted, some
black, some red, Capt Smiths hist. of Virg.
some white, and some party colored.

In the Land of the Labourer, vulgarly called, Tranlopez de Gomora descript.
novi orbis.
De Labrador, both men and women, for ornament, paint themselves with diverse
colors.

In the Island of Dominica, in the West- Indies, Sr Francis Drake.
the Salvage people go all naked, their skin colored with a reddish Tawney,
all very personable and handsome strong men.

As for the Floridians, Ribaults discovery of Florida.
the sore-part of their bodies and arms be painted with pretty devised works
of Azure, Red, and Black, so well, and so properly, as the best Painter of
Europe could not amend it; the women have their bodies painted with a certain
herb like unto Moss, wherewith the Cedar trees, and all other Trees are
covered.

The people of Whitesands Island paint themselves with certain roane colors.
In a narration of new France.


The Margasates in Brasilea paint themselves with black streakes like the
Tartarians. Lindscot. Travels, lib. 2.


The Inhabitants of the Island La Trinidade paint their bodies red and black
with colors made of the juice of herbs, Idem eodem.
and the filthier it shows, the fairer they esteem it to be.

The Romans did anciently paint their bodies with Vermilion (as Pliny says)
Plin. lib. 3. cap. 7.
when they entered in triumph into Rome, Picts, so called from their painted
bravery.
and he adds, that the Princes and great Lords of Aethiopia made great
account of that color, wherewith they wholly painted themselves red: Pliny
lib. 6. cap. 30.
the same Author recites in another place, that the Anderes, Mathites,
Mesagebes, and Hipporeens, people of Libia, did plaster all their bodies over
with red Chalk. This fashion did pass as far as to the North, and thereof is
come the name given to the Picts, an ancient people of Scythia, who were called
Picts, because of the painting they used upon their naked bodies, which (says
Herodian) they would not cover with any clothing for fear to hide and darken
the fair painting they had set upon it, where were set out Beasts of all
sorts, and printed with Iron Instruments, in such sort that it was impossible
to take them off: which they did (as Solin says) even from their infancy: in
manner as the the Child did grow, so did grow those fixed figures, even as the
marks that are graved upon young Pompions. More Gallants of the same
Fraternity.
The Poet Claudian has also given us many witnesses of this in his
Panegyriques, as when he speaks of the Emperor Honorius his Grandfather,
Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit --


And in the Gothic war, -- ferroque notatas,
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figuras.


Some think that the Celtique Poiteveins, called by the Latins Pictones,
though they be not descended of this race, yet had their name given them for
the same occasion of that of the Picts. And as customs once brought in among a
people are not lost but by the length of many Ages: So in Brunzwich they
sometimes grease their faces with painting, and make their Vizage all black;
from whence perchance that word Bronzer may be derived, which signifies in
Picardy, to black. And generally it is believed that all those Northerly people
did use painting when they would make themselves brave; for the Gelons and
Agathyrses, Nations of Scythia, like the Picts, Johan. Bohem. de rit. gent.
lib. 3.
were of this Fraternity, and with Iron Instruments did color their bodies. We
English men likewise, then called Britons, by the saying of Tertullian, Tert.
de veland. virg. Jornand. de bello Gotico. Isidor. lib. 16. cap. 23.
affected the same cruel bravery. The Goths (besides the Iron Instruments) did
use Vermilion to make their faces and bodies red. Briefly, it was a sport in
old time, to see so many Anticks men and women: for there are found yet old
pictures which in the Virginia History you may find, Painting with fair
incisions, an old humor of our Ancestors.
cut in brass, where the Picts of both Sexes are painted out with their fair
incisions, as Herodian describes them. So that you see this humor of painting
has been general in these parts: There being no cause of mocking, if the
Indians have done, and yet do the like. By which things above recited, we may
know, that this hither world has anciently been as much deformed and savage as
any of the Indians, and may come about to the same point of cuticular bravery.



Why some men, and they a mighty and considerable part of mankind, should first
acquire and still retain the gloss and tincture of blackness they who have
strictly enquired into the cause, Enquity how so great a part of mankind became
Black
have found no less darkness in it, than blackness in the effect it self,
there arising unto examination no such satisfactory and unquarrellable reasons
as may confirm the causes generally received, which are but two in number,
that is, the heat and the scorch of the Sun, or the curse of God on Cham and
his Posterity. That the most common imputation to the heat of the Sun in those
Climates is false, is approved by a most unanswerable argument; for, there are
some Nations of this color, although the Pole Antartique in that place be in
the elevation of thirty and five degrees, which is a very strange thing; yea,
the rude people that live among the most cold Mountains of the Moon are black
also, as Pigafetta relates. That Neither of these is the cause, the learned
Enquirer into vulgar Errors has evinced, or at least made dubious; yet how
and when this tincture began it was yet a riddle unto him, and positively to
determine, it surpassed his presumption: seeing therefore, says he, we cannot
certainly discover what did effect it, it may afford some piece of satisfaction
to know what might procure it. It may therefore be considered, whether the
inward use of certain waters, or fountains of peculiar operations, might not
at first produce the effect, Dr Brownes Pseudodoxia Epidemica, lib. 6. cap. 10.
since of the like we have records in History. Secondly, it may be propounded,
whether it might not fall out the same way that Jacobs Cattle became speckled,
spotted, and ring-streaked, that is, by the power and efficacy of imagination,
which produces effects in the conception, correspondent to the phantsie of the
Agents in generation, If the figure of man has been changed, why not his
color?
and sometimes assimilates the idea of the Generator, into a reality in the
thing engendered, whereof there pass for current many undisputable examples.
Thirdly, it is not undisputable whether it might not proceed from such a cause,
and the like foundation of Tincture as does the black-Jaundies, which meeting
with congenerous causes, might settle durable inquinations, and advance their
generations unto that hue which was naturally before, but a degree or two below
it. And this transmission we shall the easier admit in color, if we remember
the like has been effected in organicall parts or figures, the Symetry whereof
being casually, or purposely perverted, has vigourously descended to their
Posterities, and that in durable deformities. This was the beginning of
Macrocephali, or people with long heads. Thus have the Chinese little feet,
most Negroes great Lips, and flat-Noses; and thus many Spaniards, and
Mediterranean Inhabitants, which are of the Race of Barbary-Moores (although
after frequent commixture) have not worn out the Camoyse Nose unto this day. To
omit (therefore) the other conjectures of our ingenious Author, we shall take
leave in the Tenor of his own words to say, that it may be the seed of Adam
might first receive this tincture, and became black by an advenient and
artificial way of denigration, which at first was a mere affectation arising
from some conceit they might have of the beauty of blackness, and an Apish
desire which might move them to change the complexion of their bodies into a
new and more fashionable hue, Nations of a color like Brass.
which will appear somewhat more probable by diverse affectations of painting
in other Nations, mentioned in this Treatise; and that they take so much
content therein, that they esteem deformity by other colors, describing the
Devil, and terrible objects white, for they think and verily persuade
themselves that they are the right color of men, and that we have a false and
counterfeit color: And so from this Artifice the Moors might possibly become
Negroes, receiving atramentitious impression, by the power and efficacy of
imagination. And this complexion, first by Art acquired, might be evidently
maintained by generation, and by the tincture of the skin, as a spermaticall
part traduced from Father to Son. For thus perhaps this which at the beginning
of this Complexion was an artificial device, and thence induced by
imagination, having once impregnated the seed, found afterward concurrent
productions, which were continued by Climes, whose constitution advantaged the
artificial into a natural impression.

I confess Pliny speaks of the Anderae, Plin. Not. hist. lib. 6.
Mathitae, Mesagebes, and Hipporeae, who being all over black, and it seems
disliking that color, do therefore color and paint their bodies with a kind
of red Chalk, or rudle called Rubrica.

The Inhabitants of Florida are of a color, Grimston of their manners.
like Brass, the reason is, for that they anoint themselves with a certain
ointment, which seconded by the heat of the Sun proves effectual to their
design, notwithstanding that they are borne more white.

Nations that affect the plumage of Birds.
The great advancer of Learning well observes, that generally Barbarous people
that go naked, do not only paint themselves, but they pounce and race their
skin that the painting may not be taken off; Lord Bacons not. hist. Cent. 8.
So that it seems men would have the color of birds Feathers, if they could
tell how, or at least they will have gay skins instead of gay clothes. But
their airy affectation has mounted higher, Mand. Travels cap. 89.
even to enjoy the very substantial plumage of Birds. For in an Isle near the
Isle called Pitan, the people are feathered all but the face and palms of
their hands.

The Chiribichensians wash themselves every day, Pet. Mart. Decad. 8.
and for elegancy and neatness, for the most part, they anoint themselves
with a certain slimy ointment, and putting the feathers of birds thereon, they
cover all their body. The Spanish chief Justices bring bawdes or Magicians
forth of the prison after this manner to the public view of men, in reproach
for punishment for their heinous crimes committed. Feathered Nations.


In the Island called Ity, the Inhabitants, Munst. Cosm. Novar. Insul. descript.
who go naked, not only paint their bodies with diverse colors, but they adorn
them with diverse Feathers of Birds.

The Brasileans have many hens like unto ours, Lindscot. lib. 2.
from which they pull the small white Feathers, which with Irons they hack and
make soft, which done they anoint their bodies with gum and strew the feathers
therein.

The Cumanans also dress themselves with feathers as the Brasileans do, which
my Author says is no ill sight. Laet says, Laet. descript. novi orb.
occident. lib. 18. c. 4.
that upon festival days they dawbe their skins over with a tenatious glue,
and then befeather themselves with the small plumage of diverse little birds,
insomuch as they look by that emulation, like unto birds, whereby they look
like new hatched birds, whereof this opinion has risen of some men that have
first gone into those Countries and seen them thus dressed after this manner,
that they were so by Nature: Which puts me in mind what Aulus Gellius cites out
of ancient Authors, to wit, that there are certain men whose bodies are not
rough with hair, but plumed after the manner of birds. However the practice of
these Nations have marred Platoes definition of man, that he was Animal bipes
implume, and has made good the unhappy Irony of the Peripateticks, who threw a
live Cock stripped of his feathers into his school, saying, this is Plato's man,
for in these Countries Plato's definition would be more adequate to cocks and
hens than to men and women; yet if these Nations were stripped of their
borrowed feathers, wherein they pride themselves, Hairy Nations
they would look somewhat like Aesops Jay, of whom the Poet, -- Moveat
cornicula risum,
Furtivis nudata coloribus --


Harecourts voyage to Guiana.
In the Province of Moreshogoro, the Inhabitants have a ruff skin, like unto
buffe leather, of which kind there be many in those parts of Guiana, but is
supposed to proceed from some infirmity of body.

Pliny, Solinus, and Lycosthenes make mention of many hairy Nations, for there
are diverse Nations which are deformed with Hair growing all over their bodies.
Sr Joh. Mand. cap. 171.
Sir John Mandevill describes a certain Island, the Inhabitants whereof have
all their parts, except their face and palms of their hands covered over with
hair. Pigafetta has described hairy men in the Island Buthuam who are fierce
and men-eaters. In the Province Guacaiarina there are also such wild men; Pet.
Mart. Decad.
A portion of the skin of such a savage, a certain Sarmatian sent unto Ulysses
Aldrovandus, and is kept in the Musaeum of the Bononian Senate, Wild men.
which he affirms to be worn in a ring for Convulsions, to the Patients very
great profit. These kind of wild men were first seen at Bononia when the most
illustrious Marchioness of Soranium, coming to Bononia was honorably
received by the Illustrissimo Marcus Casalius, for she brought with her a girl
of eight years of age almost all hairy, being the daughter of a wild man of
forty years old, borne in the Canaries, who not only begot this daughter, but
another of twelve years of age, and a son about twenty years old, Aldrovand.
in monst. hist.
whose hairy Effigies Aldrovandus has exhibited. Eusebius the Jesuit
witnesses, that there are seen both in the East and West Indies, wild men who
were borne smooth, as our Infants are, but in tract of time the hair
increases mightily in most parts of their bodies.

Among other wild men the Cinnaminians are to be admired for their prolix
beards, Aldrovandus.
and the hairinesse of their whole bodies, the women also being all over hairy.

These Relations make me wonder at the opinion of Platerus, Platerus in
Deformatione observe. lib. 3.
who denies that there are any wild men to be found all over hairy, except the
tip of their nose, their knees, and the palms of the hand and feet, as they
are usually painted and conceived of by the Vulgar; which that it is false, we
may hence, says he, collect, that Cosmographers, who have described the whole
world, make no where mention of them, when yet notwithstanding they have not
omitted the wildest people, the Amazons, Canibals, and Americans, and others
which go naked, The cause of pilosity.
and yet are not hairy, and those hairs that naturally break forth, they
pluck forth and eradicate.

It is observable (and makes to our purpose) that savage men are more hairy
than those that are civil, degenerating by their Brutish kind of life into
the nature and resemblance of beasts, who are more hairy than men: Besides the
general examples of all barbarous Nations, we have a particular demonstration
of this Brutish Metamorphosis in the transformation of Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 4.
and more lately in the story of John of Leiden, mentioned by Sir K. Digby in
his Treatise of the soul. The cause of the natural smoothness in men, is not
(as my L. Bacon notes) any abundance of heat and moisture; Lord Bacons not.
hist. cent. 7. exp. 680.
though that indeed causes pilosity; but there is requisite to pilosity, not
so much heat and moisture, as excrementitious heat and moisture; for,
whatsoever assimilateth, goes not into the hair, and excrementitious moisture
abounds most in Beasts, and Men that are more savage. The head indeed of man
has hair upon the first birth, which no other part of the body has: The
cause may be want of perspiration; for, much of the matter of hair in the
other parts of the body, goes forth by insensible perspiration. And besides,
the Skull, being of a more solid substance, nourishes, and assimilateth less
and excerneth more, and so likewise does the Chin; we see also that hair
comes not upon the Palms of the Hands, nor Soles of the Feet, which are
parts more perspirable. And Children likewise are not hairy, for that their
skins are more perspirable.

Many have been born abounding with shagged hair, almost like unto
water-Spaniels; Men borne with shagged hair like a water Spaniel.
we read first of Esau, that he was the first of this Tribe; Genesis cap. 27.
Majolus in Colloquiis.
and Majolus recites a story, that in the Town of Pisa, named Petrosancta,
there was borne, of a smooth woman, a Virgin covered all over with long hair,
whose image Aldrovandus has exhibited, the cause of which effect Authors refer
to the Picture of St John Baptist, painted after the usual manner clothed in
Camels hair, whose image hanging in her Chamber the mother had wishtly beheld.

All rugged with hair, having paws like a Bear, was that Infant which was
borne 1282. Lycosthenes.
of an illustrious Matron, Martin the fourth being then Pope of Rome, by whose
command all the Pictures of Bears, which were found in that Ladies house, were
blotted out and defaced, a manifest argument of the received imagination of the
Effigies of the Bears, in Conception. Peucerus.
Peucerus seems to confirm this production by another such like case,
declaring, that Anno 1549. he saw a Child covered over with a Bears skin;
Moreover Columbus confesses, Columbus.
that he saw a certain Spaniard beset with long hairs in all parts of his
body, except his hands and Face. Julius Caesar Scaliger.
Scaliger remembers a certain little Spaniard covered with white hairs, which
he reports to have been brought out of India, or to have been borne of Indian
Parents in Spain. Also Henry the second, Boscius.
King of France, at Paris, caused a young man, who was no less hairy than a
Dog, to be instructed and bred up a Scholar. And of late in the Palace of the
Duke of Parma there were hairy men kept, Nations that wind their bones like
Sinews.
who were brought from other parts, to wit, as I conceive, Platerus in D
format, obser. lib. 3.
from France; for Platerus, who denies that there beany hairy Nations, yet
allows that there are many of both Sexes more hairy than others, confesses
that he saw at Brasil, Anno 1583. (being then to be transported into Italy) the
Children of this hairy man begotten of a smooth woman, to wit, a boy of nine
years, and a girl of seven years old, who together with their mother had
been sent into Flanders to the Duke of Parma.

Purch. Pilgr. 1. lib. 1. Jo. Bohem. de rit. gent. lib. 3. Geor. Draud. com. in
Solin. Magin. in Geog. Indiae orient. Maffaeus hist. ind. lib. 1.
In the Island of Iamuli, the Inhabitants, who exceed us four Cubits in
stature, and the holes of whose ears are much wider than ours, wind their
bones this way and that way, as they please, like sinews; so do the Nairoes
also. Maginus and Maffaeus both say, that after their seventh year they are
prepared to an incredible agility and dexterity, by often anointing their
whole body with the oil Sesamum, whereby their nerves and bones are so suppled
and relaxed, that they can easily wind and turn their body, and at pleasure
bow it to what part they please; afterward they accustom themselves with all
care and diligence in corporal exercises, and learn nimbly to handle their
Arms. The Author of the descript. of Nova Francia lib. 2. cap. 10.
And the Author of the description of Nova Francia says, that these Nobles and
Warriors of the Malabars, the Nairoes, to make themselves such, they help
Nature, and their sinews are stretched out even from seven years of Age,
which afterward are anointed and rubbed with the oil of Sesamum, which makes
them handle so well their bodies at will, that they seem to have no bones; Art
used to make maids fat.
Schenckius thinks without doubt they have nervous bones: Schenck. obser. de
cap. 355.
Yet they who should see our Funambuli and Tumblers, who have been brought up
from their youth to their feats of activity, would think as much of them, whom
we have seen to twist and wind their bodies very strangely, as if they had no
bones.

The Mangones, Hier. Merc. de decoratione 14. Galen Method. cap. 16.
that they might make their bodies more fat for sale, were wont to whip their
buttocks and loins with rods, and so by degrees make them more fleshy, which
is noted by Galen as no contemptible stratagem to attract the nourishment to
the outward parts. And there be nations out of the Tropicks, who by exercise
and Art, come to such agility as the Nairo's have.

Among the Venetians, the maids, when they are to be coupled in marriage, they
are kept very daintily, to the end they may become more fat, well-liking, and
in good plight, they use dish't wheat with milk, they sleep longer in the day
time, they live very idly close cooped up, that at length they may grow fat
as crammed Capons; therefore they feed upon unctuous and sweet meats, Why all
men cannot befranked or made fat.
that they may more daintily, and with a more trim grace be dedicated to their
Bridegroom. This Artifice is used to accommodate the Fancy of the men of
that Nation; for, the Italians desire to have their women thick, well set, and
plumpe. The contrary to which is practiced by the Spanish women; for the
Spaniard loves a wench that is lean; the German prefers one that is strong,
the French one that is soft, delicate, and tender, the Indians a black one; we
commonly judge that woman to be beautiful which is of a white complexion, and
soft and tender; clean contrary to the judgment of Galen, who says, that
those are the signs of a false and counterfeit beauty, and that true and
native beauty consists in the just composure and symetry of the parts of the
body, a due proportion of flesh, and the goodness of the Color. Turpis Romano
Belgicus ore color. But the Venetian Dames have the harder task to please:
For, all bodies may be made lean, but it is impossible to fatten where a
vehement heat or dryness is by nature; for one may easily substract from
Nature, but to add to Nature is difficult, when virtue does not cooperate:
among the rest, they who have great Livers are very difficultly improved with
flesh. All other Creatures, if they have sufficient and proper food, will grow
fat and befranked, whereas men, although they have the best aliment exhibited
to them, will not in like manner be fat, the chief cause whereof, as to man,
is imputed to his temperament; but there are three causes found which impedes
the fatting of man: Corpulency, where in great esteem.
The first is, the great variety and dissimilitude of meat, to which
appertains, that many men observe not a certain time of repast, whence there
arises unequal concoctions; the other cause is immoderate venery, or
venerious cogitations; but the third, and chiefest cause, is to be attributed
to the sollicitous cares of his mind, which dry his very bones.

The Gordians, Bruson Facet. and Exempl. l. 7.
when they appoint one to be their Chief, they choose one of the most corpulent
amongst them; for corpulency with them, contrary to the opinion of Epaminondas
the Theban, is held a corporal virtue, whereas he could not endure a corpulent
Soldier, saying, that three or four shields would not suffice to cover his
belly, who had not a long time seen the witnesses of his own Virility.

The Goths would not elect any man to be their King except he were tall,
gross, and very corpulent. On the contrary, the Sarazens would have no King to
command over them, except he were little, lean, and low of stature. Opinions,
although opposite, yet well considered, neither side may be void of reason. The
Author of the Treasury of Times, vol. 1. lib. 3. cap. 17. Jo. Bohem. de morib.
gent. li. 3.
Reasons pro and con you may find in the Treasury of Times, which are too long
here to insert.

The ancient Gauls, through their assiduous labor and exercise, were all
lean and spare bodied, and their bellies very little set out, for they did so
abhor a paunch, that young men whose bellies exceeded the measure of their
Girdles were publicly punished.

Marcus Aurelius was wont to say, that hogs and horses fatness did well become
them, Monstrous fat men.
but that it was more commendable in men to be lean and slender; for that your
gross men are commonly gross witted, besides, they have a filthy wallowing
gate; they are unfit to fight, either for themselves, or their friends; they
are a kind of unweildy lump, an unprofitable mass of flesh and bone, being not
able to use any manly exercise, whereas we see it is quite otherwise in those
that are lean and not laden with fat.

Many such monstrous fat and gross men have appeared in the world. It is
wonderful what Pliny does report how Lucius. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 37.
Apronius, sometimes Consul of Rome, had a Son so fat, that he could not go, so
heavy was he laden with grease, insomuch that they were feign to take some of
his grease forth of his body, and so discharged himself of that immovable
burden, and become lighter. Joan. Vasaeus, in Chro. Hisp.
Vasaeus delivers a story of a King of Spain, the Son of Ranimirus, and the
Father of Ordonius the third, who from the weight of lard wherewith he was
oppressed was called Crassus, who was more safely cured. He being impatient of
his Load of fat, when he had left nothing unntride that might give him ease, by
advice of Garcias King of Navar, making a peace with Abderamen, he went to
Miramolinus King of Corduba, and was honorably entertained by him, Marc Donat.
de med. hist. mirab.
among the experiments of Physicians, whereof there was great store at
Abderamen, Cardan de subtle. ubi de plant^s.
he was cured by the virtue of a certain herb. Yet we read in Cardan of a
certain King of Spain to have perished, by attempting to procure a deposition
of his fat, by the use of a certain herb, which Cardan says, was called
Birds-tongue. Athenaeus l. 2. Dipnosoph.
There is a story in Athenaeus of Dionysius the over-fat Tyrant of the
Heracleots, who was detained with so profound a sleep, that they could not
awake him but by pricking him with needles; which by the counsel of his
Physicians he had made for this purpose of diverse lengths, according to the
thickness of his body. Aelian. var. hist. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Aelian says, this son of Clearchus was so fat that he could scarce breathe,
that the Physicians thought of this stratagem to consume his fat, although
others say, he was cured by the use of Leeches applied to his whole body;
Mercurial. lib. de Decorat. c. 6.
but Mercurialis takes these for mere trifles, and that these helps were vain
and supervacaneous. Fallopius writes, Gabr. Fallop. lib. de Decorat. cap. 7.
that he saw the skin so incrassated in a very fat man, that he lost his sense
by reason of the overmuch impaction of the Nerves. Tulpius obser. med. l. 3. c.
55.
Tulpius speaks of a Boy brought out of Gelders and put into a balance at
Amsterdam, who weighed a hundred and fifty pounds, for he was of so large and
fat a body, Fat Folks, where in disgrace.
that his loins could not be girt but with a girdle of an Ell and half wide,
whose buttocks did luxuriate with so great a bulk of flesh, that they seemed
quadruple, and his exuberant nature had put such strength into his arms and
hands, that he struck Tulpius his hand with no less force than if he had been
twenty years of age. Marc. Donat. de med. hist. mirab.
Marcellus Donatus says, he saw a young Englishman carried every where about
Italy to be seen for money, whose Image representing his naked body, his Lord,
the Prince of Mantua and Montifferrat had, in good sooth of a monstrous
thickness and pinguidity. About twenty years ago, I remember I saw a Vintner,
who kept the Dog-Taverne in the new Palace at Westminster, whose name was
Master German, who so wallowed in his grease, that he was a burden to himself,
a man of a strange Kidney, for when he was cut up, and his fat took out, his
Kidney weighed about sixty pounds.

Among the Lacedaemonians fat folks were not only in disgrace, but they did
punish them by most severe Laws made against them; For Lycurgus appointed a
small Diet to the Lacedaemonians, on purpose that their bodies by that straight
diet might grow up more in height; for, the vital spirits not being occupied
to concoct and digest much meat, nor yet kept down, nor spread abroad by the
quantity or over-burden thereof, do enlarge themselves into length, and shoot
up for their lightsomenesse, and for this cause they thought the body did grow
in height and length, having nothing to let or hinder the rising of the same.
It seems (says Plutarch) that the self same cause made them fairer also.
For, Over-fed bodies encounter Nature
Plut. in the Life of Lycurgus.
the bodies that are lean and slender do better and more easily yield to
Nature, which brings a better proportion and a form to every member, and
contrariwise it seems, these gross, corpulent, and over-fed bodies do
encounter Nature, and be not so nimble and pliant to her, by reason of their
heavy substance. As we see it by experience; the children which women bring
before their time, and be somewhat cast before they should have been borne, be
smaller and fairer also, and more pure, commonly, than other that go their
time, because the matter whereof the body is formed, being more supple and
pliant, is the easier weilded by Nature, which gives them their shape and
form, the natural cause of which effect he gives place to them, dispute it
who will, without farther deciding the same. And indeed, as Levinus Lemnius
observes, it is confirmed by daily experience, that children who do much
Gormandize grow up less comely, neither shoot up to a just and decent
longitude; for the Native heat is suffocated and overwhelmed with too much
moisture, that it cannot shape the body to a comely taleness of stature, whereas
they who are fed moderately and use a sparer diet, and feed only at certain set
times, become not very gross, neither increase in flesh or grow fat, but their
bones thereupon increase in length. So we see young men and children in long
continued sicknesses to grow lean and slender, yet their bodies to shoot out in
length, and to increase in stature, which Lemnius should think happens by
reason of dryness; for, the bones, since they are dry, Men growing Giants by a
disease.
they are nourished with an aliment familiar and agreeable unto them, seeing
that in sick men the humors and aliment received, through heat and the
dryness of the body become dry, the bones are extended in length, and by
reason of the somewhat dry nourishment, they gain some advantage in stature,
especially when man is in such an age wherein his body (as soft and ductile
Potters clay) may be formed and produced in length. Remarkable examples of this
truth are to be found; for they have been seen whom a Quartan-Ague has raised
into a Giant-like bulk and stature. Spigelius has a story of one Anthony of
Antwerp, who lived in his time, who being borne a little and weak Infant, of a
sudden, through a disease, became a great Giant. Such with the Greeks are
called (...), in whom there lies hid the Seminary of a disease, which calls
forth a prodigious augmentation, with an untimely death. Salamine the son of
Euthemen, in three years grew up to the height of three cubits, as Pliny
reports. In like manner a son of Cornelius Tacitus, the Noble Historian, died
young. Every man has a certain and determinate time set to his growth,
wherein by degrees and tacit augmentations he attaineth either to a legitimate
or Dwarfish stature; and that power of increasing whereby the body happens to
be enlarged in longitude, is seldom produced beyond the five and twentieth
year, but for the greatest part is terminated within one and twenty years;
but to grow fat, and corpulent, happens not to be done in certain spaces of
time, but by reason of nutriment when it is plentifully taken in, which may be
either in the achma or declination of our age; for although one be crammed, The
cause of all stature.
his body is not erected in length, but is dilated in bulk and breadth; for,
the faculty whereby the body is nourished is one, and that whereby it grows
up is another; for truly that is conversant about the plenty of aliment, this,
about the solid parts of the body, to wit, the Bones, Nerves, Cartilages, etc.
Which if they increase and are stretched out in length, the Creature also
attaines unto an increment, although it be wasted with leanenesse and consumed
away. Therefore Nature in producing the bones, whence the height of man
proceeds, uses the force of heat, whereby she not a little dries the humors,
and accommodates the aliment for the nourishment of the Bones. Therefore it is
the Amplifying force or Faculty which forms out in length the bones of
Febricitants as wax; by virtue and heat of the seminall excrement, which in the
vigor of age is very valid and efficacious for the performance thereof: For
truly, if young men and boys are accustomed to milk from their very Cradles,
and given to exercise, they will have taller bodies, and prove of a more decent
and comely stature; because by the drinking and use of milk, the bones are
nourished, which is a kin to seed, and an elaborate and exactly concocted
blood. Moderate feeding, and at set times, with a discreet allowance of
competent food, without pinching, Salmuthus cent. 3. obs. 70.
may be the cause whence tallness of body may arise. Salmuthus in his
observations, speaks of a certain mother (rather to be called a Step-dame)
who chid her daughter, who was a married wife, for giving her Children too much
meat, Means to accelerate growth or stature.
that distended their stomachs and guts, whence in process of age, they would
grow more greedy and not easy to be satisfied: Upon which occasion he calls to
remembrance a contention which arose in his presence between some of the
Court-women and a Physician, whether Children of Princes about the sixth or
seventh year of their age were to be allowed their Bevers, or afternoons
Nuncians? which he denied; they on the contrary were very earnest and
importunate with him, arguing, that the native heat should not be permitted to
lie idle; at length, after much disputation, one, and the chiefest among them,
objected to the Physician the abject stature of his body, whereas if he had
been brought up by his mother with a fuller Diet he had grown up into a just
tallness of Stature. But let us hear what the Oracle of Humane Learning says
to this purpose: Lord Bacons not. hist. cent. 5.
To accelerate growth or stature, it must proceed, either from the plenty of
the nourishment, or from the quickening and exciting of the natural heat; for
the first, excess of nourishment is hurtful, for it makes the child
corpulent, and growing in breadth rather than height. And you may make an
experiment from plants, which if they spread much are seldom tall. As for the
nature of nourishment, first, it may not be too dry: And therefore Children in
Dary Countries do wax more tall than where they feed more upon bread and flesh.
There is also a received Tale, that boiling of daisie roots in milk (which it
is certain are great driers) will make dogs little. But so much is true, that
an over-drie nourishment in Children puts back stature. Secondly, Means of
increase of stature.
the nourishment must be of an opening nature; for, that attenuateth the juice,
and furthereth the motion of the spirits upwards; neither is it without cause,
that Xenophon in the nourture of the Persian Children does so much commend
their feeding upon Cardamomum, which (he says) made them grow better, and be
of a more active habit. Cardamomum in Latin is, Nasturtium, and with us
watercresses, which it is certain is an herb, that, whilst it is young, is
friendly to life. As for the quickening of natural heat, it must be done
chiefly by exercise. And therefore (no doubt) much going to school, where they
fit so much, hinders the growth of Children, whereas Country people, that go
not to School, are commonly of better stature. And again, men must beware how
they give Children any thing that is cold in operation, for even long sucking
does hinder both wit and stature; this has been tried, that a whelpe that has
been fed with Nitre in milk, has become very little, but extreme lively; for,
the spirit of Nitre is cold. And although it be an excellent medicine in
strength of years for prolongation of life, yet it is in children and young
creatures an enemy to growth, and all for the same reason; for, heat is
requisite to growth, but after a man is come to his middle age, heat consumes
the spirits, which the coldness of the spirit of Nitre does help to condense
and correct.

This Corpulency or obesitie is a deformity which hurts the beauty and actions
of the body; that which is first affected by the immense grosnesse being the
form; Fatness when it does prejudice Nature.
which is but a Symptom, when it only hurts the beauty and form, but it is a
disease when it does not only prejudice the beauty, but offends the actions of
the body; for, this superfluous burden of flesh, which as Avicen speaks, is as
a fetter and clog unto them, hinders motion, deambulation, operation, and
respiration, and even the actions which appertain to the conservation both of
the Species, and Individuum. Now since this immense fatness or store of flesh
arises not from any preternaturall matter, but out of a natural, yet so, that
by reason of abundance, it proves offensive; this disease of Figure is coupled
with a disease of Magnitude; and it seems worthy of a doubt, whether in
obesity, which is a Disease according to Magnitude, be also a Disease in
Figure; the truth is, Obesity does not necessarily vitiate the figure, after
that manner whereby diseases are made according to it; the form indeed and
beauty is vitiated, but not the rectitude, nor the Cavity, neither any other
things which constitute that which is called Figure by Physicians. I speak not
of natural fatness, but of that which is ascititious and accidental to those
who through gurmandizing voracity and ease become ventrose, and Tenter-bellied
All-Panches, which are allied to the Eat-alls and Drink-alls, who swim up the
River Sauce to the famous Flesh pastinople, who look as if their hands (as the
Proverb speaks) had put out their eyes; these Epicure Hellio's stand in need
of Cosmetique Diet to reduce them to that just proportion, and true term of
Latitude and profundity, which in a well proportioned body ought not to exceed
the measure of a Cubit, The natural magnitude of the body.
Joan. Gorop. Becan. in Gigantomachia.
according to the standert of Goropius.

As to the Magnitude of the Body it is threefold, according to the tripple kind
of Dimensions, to wit, Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, and these consist
in a due proportioned mediocrity, not declining from it in excess or defect,
which again may be more or less. But that we may more perfectly comprehend it
in our minds, in the first place we must explain what magnitude man is wont to
have when he satisfies the Law of Nature in all perfections, and is not
defrauded of her just Donatives by the deceitfulness of a conceited education;
that we may have a body, which as to a certain statue of Polycletus, all
others may be diligently examined: for so we shall easily understand, who is to
be called Tall or Low, Gross, or Slender, Broad or Narrow. Such a one in this
our Europe shall that be esteemed, which in Longitude is six foot complete, and
in Latitude or thickness one foot only and a third part; they who decline now
from this proportion are called unproportioned, although this very excess or
defect is not to be defined to so strict bounds, but they who only descede from
this exact rule may yet be accounted among the number of proportioned men. By
this account he will be a tall man who is seven foot (or somewhat less) in
length, and in breadth and thickness is most conformable to a proportioned
body; on the contrary, he is a little or low man whose length falls short of six
foot, in the other Dimensions correspondent to a well proportioned body: An Art
to make men by Art.
In like manner they are gross, who when they are of a due height, which
comprehends six feet, yet the Diameter of Latitude exceeds one foot, or the
compass, or circumference of the breast and lower belly, contains above three
feet, whereas in a well proportioned body it exactly equals three feet, and so
equal to the half of the Longitude of the whole body: on the other side, if
they attain not to these, they are to be called lean and slender men,
Hippocrat. in Epidemicis.
such as Hippocrates calls (...), whom he declares to be very obnoxious to a
Consumption. But this Magnitude, although it be thus defined by the observers
of Nature, because for the most part it is wont to be such, yet it is so
unequal, that according to Age, Sex, Region, and Diseases, it much differs.
They say, that Rhases and Albertus had invented a way to get little men by Art.
Julius Camillus rashly affirms, that a true man may be produced by a way not
instituted by Nature, out of urine or other humor decocted by fire or the Sun,
in glass vessels. Thomas Garzonus unadvisedly believed it to be fecible, and
some attribute this invention to Arnoldus Villanovanus. Paracel. lib. 1. de
rerum natura.
Paracelsus boasts, that he had received this secret of secrets from God;
affirming, that if the Sperm of a man do putrify in a sealed Gourd, to the
highest putrefaction of horse-dung, forty days, or so long until it begin to
live, and to move, and be stirred, which is easy to be seen, after that, it
will be in some time like unto a man, yet pellucid and without a body: Now if
afterward it be daily, warily and prudently nourished, and fed with the secret
of man's blood, The opinion of learned men touching this artifice.
and conserved for forty weeks in a perpetual and equal heat of horse-dung,
it will thence become a true Infant, having members as those that are begot on
women, but it will be far less; Then it is diligently to be brought up until
it grow a stripling, and begin to understand and be wise. And this secret is
known to the Nymphs of the Wood, and the Giants which are sprung from thence;
for, there are also great and miraculous men made, who are Conquerours, and
skillful in secrets, because they are borne by Art, therefore Art prevails in
them; for it is borne in them, but they are not taught of others, being called
the sons of Woodmen and Nymphs, because in respect of their virtue they are not
like men, but spirits.

Campanella, Campanella de sensu rerum.
though he confesses experience had not as yet brought him to the
understanding of this mystery, and therefore after some scanning of the matter
doubts not of the effect, yet he dares not deny it: for where there is
something like unto the womb, and Intelligence, if it become a humane body,
God denies not to enfuse a mind: but where God reveals not, he is silent; as
for Paracelsus his conceit, that Giants and Nymphs were artificially borne,
that he says is false; for the first ought to be borne without humane Art: and
that they used Art to the Generation of men and not Nature seems irrational
and false, unless the Intelligences, the Executrices of Gods providence have
used this Art in some Region; as God in the forming of Adam, which is
uncertain; besides, says he, I think it false, that those that are gotten by
Art are more prudent than those who are gotten the natural way, The Pigmies of
Paracelsus.
and their Teachers, for Nature is wiser than Art, since Art is but her
Disciple.

Thus have we heard of the Pigmies of Paracelsus, that is his non-Adamiticall
men, or middle natures, betwixt Men and Spirits; wherein he has gone some way
to meet their wish who desire to propagate the world without conjunction with
women. The ground of whose Vote is supposed to be, that they had sensibly
observed an impotency or total privation of that which Eunuchs by Nature have,
prolongeth life, they living longest in every kind, that exercise it not at
all, Castrated Animals in any kind, as well as Spado's by Art, living longer
than they that retain their Virilities; for, the Generation of bodies (as one,
once of this Sect said) is not effected, as some conceive of Souls, that is,
by Irradiation, or answerable to the propagation of Light, without its proper
diminution, but therein a proper transmission is made materially from some
parts, and Ideally from every one, and the propagation of one in a strict
acception, is some minoration of the other. The Generation of one thing is the
corruption of another, although it be substantially true concerning the form
and matter, is also dispositively verified in the Efficient or Producer.
Hereupon they are most unjustly afraid to lessen themselves, though to gain a
kind of immortality. Surely, as the Marquess of Malvezzi says, They who
believe that woman was not made against the intention of Nature, that she is
not an Error or a Monster, The Commensuration of woman's body vindicated.
must confess she is made for Generation, and if she be made for this end (as
indeed she is) it is necessary she be endued with parts that move unto that
end; for hence it comes to pass, that so soon as she is represented unto us,
if there be not first a habit formed, or that at the very instant there be not
some great resistance made, man does by Nature hasten to contemplate her for
the end to which she was made by Nature; which natural instinct (as the
Philosopher calls it) of Generation, has prevailed so far with some of the
Ingenious, as to reduce them to a practical recantation: whereas some more
malicious, in hatred to women, have mingled Copulation with beasts. Somewhat
akin to these are they who have not slighted the natural use of the Sex, yet
have looked asquint upon the body of women, (a building of a more excellent
frame than the fabrique of man, in the opinion of some Divines) as if it were
unproportioned, and not according to the Laws of Symetry, making always the
collation unto the body of man: whereas in knowing and judging of
commensuration or incommensuration of a body, the Comparation or Reduction
ought not to be made either to the Masculine or Feminine, but they should
propound a humane body best disposed according to nature, as to the use, habit,
and constitution of those members, and so to confer with that, what is to be
judged: For, that which is best organized and constituted according to Nature,
is justly said to be the proper Measure, Rule, and Index of all others of that
kind; for, although these two bodies exist in the same Species, The History of
Pigmies maintained.
they are yet diverse one from another, and therefore ought to have different
measures: if therefore the body of Woman seem unproportioned, compared to the
body of man, so will the body of man appear defective in its Symetry, if
compared with the woman, which affords a sufficient conviction of this error
in the Mathematiques and Laws of Symetry.

The Story of a nation of Pigmies is not a mere Fable; and although some make a
small account of them, yet they ought not so to be despised, as to be passed
over invisibly; certainly, scarce in any narration of humane monsters, ancient
Writers do more conspire, and seriously declare themselves; nay, even
Philostratus, who out of Apollonius says, all other Monsters of men are
fabulous; he excepts Pigmies, affirming that they live, and that the Relation
is not vain. And when of old it was held somewhat doubtful, Homer added some
repute and authority to the History, in making mention of them; Aristotle
seriously, and data opera, taking notice of them, concludes it is no Fable,
whose ipse dixit is enough to gain belief, when so great an Interpreter of
Nature, a man every way most prudent, and not only a sedulous, but a true
searcher out of all things that exist in Nature, shall afford so weighty a
testification.

Sir Jo. Mand. in his Travels, cap. 64.
Sir John Mandevile, whose Relations deserve more credit than formerly they have
had, reports, that a little beyond the City Chibens there is the Land Pigme,
where are men of little stature, for they are but three spans long, and they
are very fair both men and women, though they be little, Nations of little men.
and they are married when they are half a year old, and they live but eight
years, and he that lives eight years is held very old; these small men are
the best workmen of silk and cotton, and all manner of things that are in the
world, and these men travel not, nor till Land, but they have among them great
men, as we are, to travel for them, and have great scorn of those great men,
as we would have of Giants, or of them, if they were among us; And we may draw
out of many modern Writers sufficient Testimonies of such a Nation. Iovius
says, Jovius in Muscovita Legatione:

Olaus de gent. Septent. l. 2. Neiremb. in Hist. Not.


there are Pigmies beyond Lapland. Olaus also affirms, that in the Isle
Gronland there are Pigmies.

In a certain Epistle sent unto the Pope, there is report made of small men,
no higher than little Children. The Portugals also have now discovered many
Dwarfes in Tartary. Pigafetta. Jonst. Thaumatograph. Artic. 2. admirand. Hom.
Antonius Pigafetta found them in the Island Aruchetto, among the Moluccas,
affirming withal, that there are such little men among the Moluccas in the
Isle Caphicos; and Argensola appoints them the same place. Odoricus de rebus
Indicis lib. 1.
Odoricus says, he found among the Indians Pigmies of three palms high, who
get Children at the fifth year of their age, and are short lived. And indeed
there is for the most part a mutual connection between age and stature,
(whence it may be in the Greek, the same word signifies both) so as that race
of men which is tallest and strongest, commonly holds out longest, which may
be supposed to be the ground of the short duration of the lives of Pigmies.
Petrus Simon writes, that they were found beyond Andes by Johannes Alvarez
Maldonatus, More proofs of Pigmies.
when he discovered some new lands in India. Delrio says, that Anno 1600. in
Peruvia there was found a Province of Dwarfes, and that notice was given
thereof in the Letters of Ruizius, which in the year 1601. he himself read.
Gemma Frisius writes a Narration of a Boat of Pigmies which were seen, being
driven by a tempest to the Kingdom of Norway. Photius out of Ctesias says,
there are Negroes in the midst of India, whom he calls Pigmies, who are at the
most but two Cubits high, and most of them but one Cubit long, few exceeding
the Altitude of one Cubit and an half, of which the King of that Country
entertaineth three thousand Archers for his Guard. Paracelsus his Pigmies or
Fairies are such a kind of Nation under ground, who are thought by some not to
live idly there; for, in Lusatia, and the parts thereabout, where there are
often found Urnes, dug out of the ground, the Vulgar are of opinion that
they are made by the subterranean Pigmies; and that in winter they lie twenty
foot deep, but about the Feast of Penticost, not above a fathom from the
superficies of the earth. Notwithstanding all this cloud of Witnesses, there
are some Authors, which either deny this verity, or detract from the credit
thereof; and others who by their incredulity endeavor to merit an opinion of
Learning, and by a severe, and rather an unjust than true judgment, would
seem to be veridiciall Relators or precise tell-troaths, which savours of
little ingenuity; for, as in manners a moderate behavior is better than a
rough carriage, so in passing judgment, The History of Pigmies asserted.
it advantageth not to be partial, but moderate, and aptly inclinable to all
parts of the opinion, supported more by reason than resolution. We allow men to
wonder at these Relations, but not to deny them, for every thing that is
wonderful is not a lie; you may perchance wonder at the reports made of
Giants, yet you will not deny that there ever was, or are any, although you
never beheld any such Colossus of flesh with your Eyes. Why, pray you, then is
this little Nation to be denied, since the Lapse of Nature, and the defect of
things is less marvelous, and what should hinder that there should be a Race
of Pigmies as there is sometimes of Giants? Examples enough in all ages there
have been of such Dwarfishnesse of stature, in nothing but the exiguity
monstrous and deformed. Panaretus and Philipides were of so small a stature
that they became a Proverb^. Alex. Niceph^ lib. 12. Eccles. Hist. cap. 37.
Nicephorus delivers, that in the reign of Theodosius, there was a man borne
in Egypt so little, that he was like a Partridge. Philetas the Heroic Poet
was so little, that he was feign to fasten lead unto his feet lest the wind
should blow him away; and there was another, whom Athenaeus speaks of,
Athenaeus.
who was so little ut ad obolum accederet; a story so strange, that the Printer
(as one says) might be accused, did not the account of Aelian accord unto it.
Aelian de var. Hist. lib. 10.
And it seems, Wit is a commodity that will lie in a little room; for, not
only this Archestratus and Philetas, but Sannizion, Melitus, Cinesias, and
Hipponactes (little wights that Aelian speaks of) were all Poets. In Spain,
not long since, there was an example which would much facilitate the belief of
Pigmies: There was a Dwarf of a very good constitution of members, More
proofs of Pigmies.
Neiremb. hist. Not. l. 5. c. 16.
who being borne with Teeth, never shed them; he came from his mothers womb
with a hairy Pubes; at seven years of age he had a beard, and at ten years of
age he arived at his full strength, and begot a Son.

Joan. Cassinon de Gigant. p. 76.
Johannes Cassinon saw at Lions two Dwarfes of a Cubit high, one of them having
a long beard appeared in form elegant enough. Jonst. Thaumatograph. de
Pigmaeis, sol. 529. Bartholinus de Pigmaeis, c. 6
Ionstonus saw at Falcoburge a she-Dwarfe about the same stature. Bartholinus
speaks of the Sceleton of a Pigmy not a Cubit long, which is to be seen at
Dresda in a Tower of the Elector of Saxony, so little in all its proportions,
that one might suspect it for the bones of an Embrion; Leonhardus Turnheuserus
lib. 7. cap. 84. Plater. in deformat. observe.
and Leonhardus Turnheuserus makes mention of such another Sceleton found in
Lusatia. Platerus can give you an account of three Dwarfes of a straight and
perfect form, between two and three foot high; and if we will not shut our
eyes, we may see such an object now and there occur among us, such an
Homuncio was Master Iefferies the late Queens Dwarf, and my Lord of
Pembrookes Page, and some others. You shall find in Aldrovandus many examples
of Dwarfes, Aldrovand. lib. de monstror. hist. fol. 39.
or little men, which have been kept by diverse persons of worth in all ages.
For there are two kinds of Pigmies: one, those that are got by chance, as
monsters, and brought up for sport in great men's Palaces: the other sort are a
Nation, which either is, or has been somewhere. Cardan therefore is forced to
allow that there are such little men for a miracle, although not for a Nation;
And the diversity of their habitation is alleged to argue the vanity of the
History. For, Pigmies without all question.
Pliny places them in Thrace near Gerania a Nation which the Barbarous there
call Calizos Mela in the inner Arabia. Plin. lib. 4, 5, 6. Not. Hist.
Are Giants therefore a Fable because they are reported to be in diverse parts
of the world? Scaliger therefore denies Pigmies, because in these times now all
the World is discovered, they are found in no Angle of it, whose error is
sufficiently confuted by the abovenamed testimonies of late discoveries; but
if it were not, by this argument I will deny that there are Giants, and if it
did not appear that there were any such Nation remaining, yet none but a
Mercury could rashly deny that there never was any such Nation. Some Authors
(indeed) that make mention of them write that they are now no where extant.
Pomponius says, that they now fail; Solinus says, they have been driven out
of their habitations, where therefore should Scaliger find the old Pigmies
after so many ages? Strabo is diffident in this matter, enduced by this reason,
for that in those places where Aristotle places them, there be small
Creatures, whence the lapse was easy, that the same pusillity was transferred
to men; yet this very reason makes the History of Pigmies more probable; for,
if the great heat of those Regions did so lessen and contract other Animals,
why not also men? To conclude, this discourse of Pigmies or Dwarfish Race of
people, or lowest diminution of mankind, which make up an aggregated
habitation; although the learned Enquirer into vulgar and common Errors is not
fully satisfied, yet concludes not an impossibility; and Cardan will allow
Pigmies to be perfect men, Dwarfes made by Art.
because their form and shape is perfect: For as God and Nature (or rather God
by Nature) his instrument and handmaid, has fashioned the body of man into
those proportions, so has he limited the dimentions (as likewise those of all
others, both Vegetive, Sensitive, and Insensible Creatures) with certain
bounds. Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum. So that though the
Dimensions of men's bodies be very different in regard of several Climates, and
Races, and that it is not defined in what Dimensions the soul may exercise her
faculty: Yet was there never any Race of men found to the bigness of
Mountains, or Whales, or the littleness of Flies or Ants, because in that
quantity the Members cannot usefully and commodiously, either dispose of
themselves, or exercise those functions which they were by their Maker
assigned. It is to this purpose a good and proper axiom: Datur maximum and
minimum in utroque genere, there is in every kind some such greatness as
cannot be exceeded, and some such littleness as cannot be contracted.

Cardan de subtle. lib. 11.
Cardan writes, that one may make Dwarfes, even as we make little Dogs for
women to play with, for they will be engendered of a little Father and Mother,
then let them be girt in with swathe-bands very straightly, and bred up with a
spare Diet; and would to God (says he) this invention were as profitable as
facile.

Aristotle, The Reason of Dwarfish stature.
enquiring the reason why men become of a Dwarfish stature, Arist. Problem.
Sect. 5.
he says, there may be a double cause rendered thereof; for, either the place,
or the aliment does it if it be small, which some after the birth endeavor to
do, as they that bring up little whelps in small boxes.

It is reported, Lord Bacons not. hist. Cent. 1.
(says my Lord Bacon) by some of the Ancients, That whelps, or other
Creatures, if they be put young into such a Cage or Box, as they cannot rise to
their stature, but may increase in breadth or length, will grow accordingly as
they can get room; which if it be true, and feasible, and that the young
Creature so pressed and straightened, does not thereupon dye; It is a means to
produce Dwarfe-Creatures, and in a very strange figure. Thus Apples before they
have obtained the full growth if they be put into straight vessels, being
prohibited of their natural liberty of increase, will grow accordingly, as
they can gain room; for, if as the Philosopher says, Locus sit forma locati;
there is a necessity that that which is contained in narrow places, and
deprived of the liberty of motion, must thereupon be less; which is the reason
that the Children that are borne of women whose wombes are narrow figured,
prove small according to the mould they are cast in. This is certain and noted
long since, that the pressure or forming of parts of Creatures, when they are
very young, That the Devil may make Pigmies.
does alter the shape not a little, as the stroaking of the Heads of Infants
between the hands, was noted of old to make Macrocephali, which shape of the
Head, at that time, was esteemed; and the raising gently of the Bridge of the
Nose does prevent the deformity of a saddle Nose; which observation well
weighed may teach a means to make the persons of men and women in many kinds
more comely and better featured than otherwise they would be, by the forming and
shaping them in their Infancy; As by stroaking up the Calves of the Leg, to
keep them from falling down too low, and by stroaking up the Forehead to keep
them from being low foreheaded. And it is a common practice to swathe Infants
that they may grow more straight, and better shaped. And young women by wearing
straight Bodies keep themselves from being gross and corpulent. From these
premises I am enduced to suspect, that Pigmies and Dwarfes, sunk below their
species, were at first occasioned by some artifice or affectation; for, you see
it lies within the reach of Art, and the hand of man's Invention. And if man's
hand were too short, yet the Devils power can reach to such a conclusion; for,
even as sometimes Dwarfes and Giants may be naturally procured, so the Devil
with more facility can, by divine permission, promote the decrease or increase
of the humane stature, by applying Actives to Passives, Jordanus de eo quod
divinum and supernaturale est in morbis humani corporis.
which is the judgment of Iordanus and others. Delrio says, there is no doubt
but that the Devil may make Pigmies, and prohibit men from ever coming to the
just stature of a humane body, as we see by man's artifice, to wit, by giving
them burnt wine, and enclosing them in little pots, those little dogs wherewith
women are so delighted, are procured: and parents greedy of gain, very
wickedly, with certain medicaments cause their childrens growth to be stunted,
that they prove Dwarfes. But he cannot make a Giant of a Pigmy; For, he thinks
that the Devil cannot so extend the bones of a little man, to make them of a
Giant-like magnitude, and therefore (says he) Petrus Chieza accounts that a
Fable which the Indian Cichorani brag they can do with certain herbs. Chieza
p. 2. Hist. Peru c. 42.


Some have entertained a settled opinion that there was never any Giant, which
is a conceit very absurd; for although many of the Ancients did suppose that no
man could by growth exceed the longitude of seven feet, Giants.
because this was the Altitude of Hercules his stature, as they affirm; and
Gellius alleges Varro's opinion, that the utmost point of man's growth in the
course of Nature is seven foot. Joh Gassanion his Treatise of Giants, cap. 6.
And Gassanion says, there is no man rightly featured who exceeds six of his
own feet. Yet there was one Gabbarus, Polyhist. c. 32.
brought out of Arabia, who as Pliny reports, grew to the height of nine feet
and so many inches; this is confirmed by Solinus, who writes, that the Syrbotae
of Aethiopia grew to the height of twelve feet; and in another place, that
there was certain people of India so great, that they easily ascended
Elephants. Onosicrit. c. 5.
Onosicritus reports, that in certain places of India, where there are no
shadows, there are men of five Cubits and two Palms high; Olaus Mag. lib. 5.
cap. 2.
Olaus Magnus places such men also in the Northern parts, and especially in
the Kingdom of Helsingori, which is under the command of the King of
Swethland, he makes mension of a Giant that was nine Cubits high. Isidore
confesses that there are men to be found of twelve foot high; Isidorus
Etymolog. l 11. c. 3. Isid. lib. de rerum nature.
but in another Tract he delivers a strange report of an admirable procerity,
in these words: In the Western parts (says he) there was found a maid, whom
the raging waves of the sea had cast up from the Ocean, unknown, and wounded in
the head and dead, who was fifty Cubits long, and between the shoulders four
Cubits broad, clothed in a purple garment, which thing seems incredible,
Vincent. hist. Not. l. 31. c. 125. Korn. ex Odoric.
yet some Historians of credit subscribe unto it. Odoricus reports, that he saw
with the Great Cham a Giant of twenty foot high. In former Ages, to wit,
She-Giants.
Zonarat in Iustino.
under Justin the Thracian, a certain woman of Cilicia appeared Giant-like,
both in tallnesse of body, as also in proportion of the other members, for she
exceeded the height of the tallest men a Cubit, with breasts and shoulders
above the usual manner broad, all the rest, as the Voice, and Face, and
firmness, and magnitude of her Arms and Cubits, and the thickness of her
fingers, and other parts, answering to her Longitude and Latitude. Saint Austin
has left upon record the memorial of a Giant-like woman, St Aug. de Civitat.
dei, c. 23.
which to the great admiration of all men was seen at Rome, before the City was
sacked by the Goths. The Author of the Book, entitled, De natura rerum, makes
mention of a remarkable stature found in the Western Regions; such tall
Viragoes were the Bradamantes Marfisa, and our long Meg of Westminster; but of
many of these we may say, they are rather mountains of flesh than men.

The Question is, why such men of such vast bodies and strength are not found
in our days? many reasons are alleged for it, but the most rational is the
luxury and lasciviousness of the times, which hardly suffers Nature to get any
thing perfect; not that there is any decay in Nature, but it may well be, that
in these parts of the world, where Luxury has crept in with Civility, there
may be some diminution of strength and stature, in regard of our Ancestors.
And here I cannot but take occasion to condole the injury done to Nature; in
the generative procacity to Rathe marriage used in England, and elsewhere,
which is the cause why men be now of less stature than they have been before
time; The cause of small stature.
Arist. polit. lib. 7. cap. 16.
for we observe not the rule of Aristotle in his Politiques, who would have men
so marry, that both the man and the woman might leave procreation at one time,
the one to get Children, the other to bring forth; which would easily come to
pass, if the man were about eight and thirty years of age when he married,
and the woman about eighteen: for the ability of getting Children in the most
part of men cease at seventy years, and the possibility of conception in
women commonly cease about fifty; so the man and the woman should have like
time for generation and conception: But this wholesome rule is not followed, but
rather the liberty of the Civil Law put in practice, that the woman at twelve
years of age, and the man at fourteen are marriageable. Which thing is the
cause that men and women, in these days, are both weak of body, and small of
stature: yea, in respect of those that lived but forty years ago in this Land:
much more then in comparison of the ancient Inhabitants of Britain, who for
their talenesse of stature were called Giants; so dwarfed are we in our
stature, and fall short of them, that that of the Poet is verified on us, Terra
malos homines nunc educit atque pusillos. Which thing is also noted by
Aristotle in the same place. Est adolescentium conjunctio, improba ad filiorum
procreationem. In cunctis enim animalibus juveniles partus imperfecti sunt: Et
feminae crebrius quam mares, and parva corporis forma gignuntur: The cause of
tallnesse of stature.
quocirca necesse est hoc idem in hominibus evenire. Hujus autem conjectura
fuerit, quod in quibuscunque civitatibus consuetudo est, adolescentes mares
puellasque Conjugari, in iisdem inutilia, and pufilla hominum corpora existunt.

In Florida they are not joined in marriage until forty years old, Hier.
Giran. Cosmogr.
and they suckle their Children until twelve years, or until they can
provide for their own sustentation.

But if we cast our eyes abroad upon those Nations which still live according
to Nature, though in fashions more rude and barbarous, we shall find, by the
relation of those that have lived among them, that they much exceed us in
stature, still retaining, as it seems, the vigorous constitution of their
Predecessors, which should argue, that if any decay be, it is not universal,
and consequently not natural, but rather adventitious and accidental: For
proof hereof, to let pass other stories of Giants of late years, as that
which Amatus Lusitanus speaks of, Amat Lusitan. Curat. 95.
borne in Senogallia Parsons, Evans the late Kings Porter, etc. We will content
our selves with the Indies, Melchior, Nunnez, in his Letters where he
discourses of the affairs of China, reports, that in the chief City, called
Paguin, the Porters are fifteen foot high; and in other letters written the
same year 1555, he does aver, that the King entertaines and feeds five
hundred such men for Archers of his Guard. In the West- Indies, in the Region
of Chica, near the mouth of the Streights, Ortelius describes a people, whom
he terms Pentagones, from their huge stature, Nations of Giants.
being ordinarily of five Cubits long, which make seven foot and an half,
whence their Country is known by the name of the Land of Giants. Americus
Vesputius, who searched into the unknown parts of the world, found out an
Island, at this day called the Island of Giants, it may be them which Ortelius
describes. Sir Francis Drake his voyage about the world.
Magellane (as the great Encompasser of the World observes) was not altogether
deceived in naming of them Giants, for they generally differ from the common
sort of men, both in stature, bigness, and strength of body, as also in the
hidiousnesse of their voice: but yet they are nothing so monstrous, or
Giant-like as they were reported, there being some English men as tall as the
highest of any that we could see, but peradventure the Spaniards did not think
that ever any English man would come thither to reprove them, and thereupon
might presume the more bolder to lie: the name Pentagones, five cubits, viz.
seven foot and a half, describing the full height, (if not somewhat more) in
the highest of them; but this is certain, that the Spanish cruelties there
used, have made them more monstrous in mind and manners, than they are in body.
Master Pretty, Hackluit in his English voyage.
a Gentleman of Suffolk, in his discourse of Candish, his voyage about the
world, being himself employed in the same actions, tells us, that measuring the
print of an Indians foot in the sand, not far from the Coast of Brasill, he
found it to be eighteen inches long, by which computation the Indian himself
in proportion could be no less than nine foot. Cassanion likewise
acknowledges, that in the Land of Sammatra, and near the Antartick Pole, Men
of very tall stature.
some are found of ten or twelve foot high. Lastly, Anthony Pigafetta a great
Traveller in his time (as testifies Goulart) affirms, Goularts memorable
histories of our Time.
that he had seen toward the same Pole, so tall a Giant, as other tall men did
not reach with their heads above his Navell; and others beyond the streights of
Magellane which had their necks a Cubit long, and the rest of their body
answerable thereunto: Hereunto may be added the Collections of Master Purchase
in his Pilgrimage; The Spaniards, says he, which with Magellane first
discovered the Streights, saw Giants on this Coast, of which he carried away
one with him to sea, where after for want of sufficient food he died. And
besides, that some of our own at another time measured the print of men's feet
eighteen inches in the sand. Oliver Noort, in his world-compassing voyage, had
three of his men slain by men of admirable stature, with long hair, not far
from Port-Desire, about forty seven degrees of southerly Latitude, and after in
the Magellane streights discomfited a band of savages, which neither would
yield, nor flee from their wives and children, which were in a Cave just by,
till every man was slain. Four Boys the Hollanders carried away, one of
which learning their Language told them of three Families, or Tribes, in those
parts, of ordinary stature, and of a fourth which were Giants, ten or eleven
foot high, which warred upon the former.

Sebalt de Weert being detained five months in the streights by foul weather,
sent his men to fish for their provision, (which exceedingly failed) who there
were suddenly assailed by seven Canoes of Giants, Over-talnesse of stature a
deformity.
which they guessed to be so high as is mentioned, who being put to flight by
their pieces, fled to land, and plucked up trees in their rude manner,
barricadoing, and fortifying themselves against further pursuit of the
Hollanders, who were no less glad, that they were rid of such company. And in
another place he says, that whole Families of those monstrous men are found at
this day in America, both near to Virginia, as Captain Smith reports, and
especially, about the streights of Magellane, near which he found Giants; and
in the same streights were such seen of the Hollanders ten foot in height,
whereas yet other Families were but of the ordinary greatness; one Thomas
Turner told me (says he) that near the River of Plate, he saw one twelve foot
high: Joh. Laureat. Anania Tract. 4 Cosmogr.
To which we may add those Giants, called Patagones, of nine or ten foot high,
which inhabit within a certain Region of America, who paint their faces with
the juyces of certain herbs. Not to reckon the women of Selenitis, Lycost.
Ravis. Textor, and Aldrovandus.
who, contrary to the manner of other women, lay Eggs, which being hatched by
them, and disclosed, there come forth men, which increase to a Giant-like
stature. These bodies that so exceed and run out in longitude, lose the beauty
of proportion; for that thereby they become Giants, a deformity not to be
cured, unless we should do as that Robber in Galen, who cut off the feet of
men that were too tall.

Concerning the original of Giants, and the cause of their vast procerity of
body, much might be collected out of sacred Writers, The original of Giants.
As Just. Mart. in Apol. ad Senate. Romans and in alia Apol. ad Antonium pium.
Tert. lib. de habitu mulier. Lactant. li. 2. de orig. her. cap 15. Eusebius. lib.
5. de prapar. Evang. cap. 4. Philo in lib. de Gigantibus. Ambrosius l. 1. de
Noe. and Arca. cap. 4. Clem. Alex. Sulp. Severus. Isidor. Gyrald. Francisc.
Mirandul. Genesis 6. v. 2, 3.
and approved Historians; for some of the Fathers seem to think that the
Giants which preceded the Deluge were borne of the Congresse of Angels with
Women; they seem to favor that opinion that the Angels sinned with women,
taking that of Genesis in this sense, Then the Sons of God saw that the
Daughters of men were very fair, and they took them wives of all that they
liked, and there were Giants in the earth in those days; yea, and after that
the Sons of God came unto the Daughters of men, and they had borne them
Children, these were mighty men, which in old time were men of renown. And
however some take the Sons of God, here spoken of, to be the degenerated sons
of Seth: Yet Kornmannus thinks that he is more in the right to think that
these were Angels and spiritual substances, who being allured by the beauty of
the Daughters of men, lay with them, Jo. Lauren. Ananias in lib. de Not.
daemonum, l. 2.
from whence Giants were procreated. When then the sons of God fell foul upon
the Daughters of men, the flames of lust always increasing, that almost all,
or very few excepted, deviated from the right path, the fear of God quite
exploded from the Earth and set at naught, at length by the nefarious arts of
Devils, Giants were every where produced with a vast and incondit bulk of
body, little becoming the humane Nature, these Giants, puffed up with pride
and arrogance, assumed to themselves the names of the sons of God, contemned
others in respect of themselves, whom they called the sons of men; at length
they drew upon themselves, and the the whole world, divine vengeance, that they
all perished in the Deluge except Noah. The supposed original of Heroes.


The Heathen likewise, for the most part, derive their Heroes and mighty men
from the like original. Nay, there are yet many Nations which count it an
honor to derive their Pedigree from Devils, Kornman. de mirac. vivorum Jo.
Nyder in Form. car. lib. 5. cap. 10. Joan. de Barros.
who had the company of women in the shape of men. The Pegusians, and Sianitae,
people of India derived their original from women impregnated by Devils. The
Neffesoglions, among the Turks, are thought to be borne of such Inculi or
Succubi. The history of the Occidentall Kingdoms do evidently declare, that
the Nation of the Hunns were generated from Incubi; and fame reports, that the
Island of Cyprus was wholly depopulated, and inhabited by the sons of Incubi.
Bonfinius.
Bonfinius deduceth the original of the Huns from such Incubi spirits; for he
says, that Filimerus, the King of the Goths, expelled all the whores out of
his Army, and drove them into solitary places lest they should enervate the
mind and bodies of his Soldiers; to these afterward the Incubant Spirits
resorted, and by their Congresse with them, the most cruel Nation of the Huns
were descended, whose manners not only, but their Tongues and speech, was so
fierce and barbarous, Mart. Delrio disq. mag. Jordanus de eo quod divinum and
supernaturale est in morbis Kornman. de vivor. mirac. Bauhinus lib.
Hermaphrodit.
that it degenerated from all humanity. Histories of such Congresses with
Incubusses and Succubusses, you may find in Kornmannus, Bauhinus, and others,
and of their nefarious Issue. Among others, Apollonius Tyanaeus, and Merlin,
who were supposed of this extraction, participated most of the subtilty of
their Ancestors; but the better to show that Devils, according to Delrio, may
produce many strange monsters. Whether Devils may have to do with women.
The strangeness of another History calls for admittance in this place; It is
reported, that in Brasile, from the copulation of a barbarous woman with an
Incubus, there was an horrid monster procreated, which grew to the height of
sixteen Palms, Kornman. de mirac. vivor.
his back covered with the skin of a Lizzard, with swollen Breasts, Lions Arms,
staring and rigid Eyes, and sparkling like fire, with the other members very
deformed, and of an ugly aspect. And the birth of such monstrous mixtures must
needs be monstrous; Tostatus truly observes, Tostatus in 6. Genesis Quaest. 6.
Talibus conceptibus robustissimi homines and procerissimi nasci solent; of
such conceptions are wont to be borne the strongest and talest of men.
Vallesius de sacra Philosoph. cap. 8.
And Vallesius having given the reason hereof at large, which (for fear of
offending chaste Ears) I list not to produce. At last concludes, Robusti
homines, ergo, and grandes ut nascerentur, poterant ita Demones procurare.

Yet enquiries have been made among the Learned, first, whether Devils may have
to do with women? Secondly, whether examples of this Congression can be
produced? Thirdly, whether they may conceive by the Devil, and a Child be
borne? Fourthly, How they are impregnated, and of the seed of the Devils?
Fifthly, whether examples be granted of progeny of a demoniacall Succubus?
Sixthly, whether men may also engender with demoniacall Succubusses, and
Children be borne of them? Learned and subtle discourses of these subjects the
Curious may find in Bauhinus. And verily, Bauhin. lib. 1: de Hermaphr.
although these things are incredible, yet they are true, that evil spirits
endowed with bodies, That Devils may exercise venerious acts with women.
exercise venerious acts with women, and also generate. St Augustine seems to
be fully persuaded of the truth hereof; D. Aug. de civitat. dei, l. 15. cap.
23. Et l 1. Quaest. super Genesis 43.
it is commonly reported, (says he) and many affirm, that either themselves
have found it by experience, or heard it from those, of whose credit there was
no doubt to be made, who had themselves experienced it, that Satyrs and
Fairies, whom they call Incubi, have been often lewd with women, lusting after
them, and satisfying their lusts with them; and that certain Devils, whom the
Gauls call Drusii, daily do attempt and perform the same filthiness, See
Aquin. pars 1, 9, 11. Art. 3. ad Sext. Et Zanch. de oper. dei, lib. 4. cap. 60
In These. and Francisc. Georg. Tom. 6. Prob. 32. c. 33.
such, and so many affirm, as to deny this were a point of impudence. Many of
the Ancients were also of this opinion, as Josephus, Tertullian, Lactantius,
Eusebius, Thomas Scotus, and others.

How they become the Artificers of such an effect, or their manner of
operation, the inquisitive may find in Kornmannus and Vallesius; Kornman. de
mirac. vivor. Vallesius de sacra Philosophia.
for my part, I conceive, were these Queries justly held in the Affirmative,
man's inventions whereby he has endeavored as much as in him lies to Diabolize
himself, might have been spared; for as Paraeus out of Wierus speaks: If the
faculty of generation had been allowed to Devils, the world had been long since
full of Devils. How many monsters from the beginning of the world had the
Devils brought forth to us? What prodigies had they produced by conveying every
where their seed into the wombs of women? For, it is the saying of
Philosophers; As often as a faculty and will concur to the same thing, the
effect is necessarily produced, and is wont to appear. That Devils cannot
generate upon women.
But there was never wanting a will to Devils of disturbing mankind and the
order of this world; for, the Devil is, as they say, our Enemy from the
beginning; and as God is the Author of order and beauty, so the Devil, adverse
to God, is of confusion and turpitude. Therefore if to this evil mind and
disposition, if to the most full will of this wickedness and envy a like power
had accrewed, who can doubt but the utter confusion of all things and
speciesses, and the greatest deformity had invaded the count and beautified
neatness and honesty of Nature, with monsters every where arising. And you
should long since have heard of men miserably transformed into Diabolical
Changelings; blessed therefore be the Creator of man, who has secured his
beloved Creature from the malice and unappeasable rage of such an Enemy and
Deformer. As Chrysostom. Nazianzen, Hierom, Theodoret, Cyrill; and of the
modernes, Philippus, Broideus, Cardanus, Baptista, Porta, and Remigius. For,
what a repugnancy would it be, as one says, both to Religion and nature, if
the Devils could get men? when we are taught to believe, that not ever any was
begotten without humane seed except the Son of God. The Devil then being a
spirit, having no corporal substance but in appearance, and therefore no seed
of Generation; to say that he can use the act of generation effectually, is to
affirm that he can make something of nothing, and consequently the Devil to
be God; for, Creation solely belongs to God alone. Again, if the Devil could
assume to him a dead body, That Monsters may be made by the Art of Natural
Magique.
and enliven the faculties of it, and make it able to generate (as some affirm
he can) yet this body must bear the image of the Devil; and it is against
Gods glory to give permission so far unto him, as out of the Image of God to
raise up his own offspring. In the school of Nature we are taught the
contrary, viz. that like begets like, wherefore of a Devil man cannot be
borne. Yet it is not denied, but that Devils, transforming themselves into
humane shapes, may abuse both men and women, and with wicked people use the
works of nature. Yet that any such conjunction can bring forth a humane
Creature, is contrary to Nature and Religion. But although by a natural way of
generation, the Devil cannot propagate the wicked as well as he can
spiritually promote and increase wickedness and monsters, yet monsters may be
produced by Art magique, and Creatures made double membred, or dismembered; and
the viler the Creature, the sooner brought to monstrous deformity, which in
more noble Creatures is more hardly brought to pass, and consequently most
difficult to be imposed on man the noblest Creature; yet I believe, the Devil
has attempted and furthered the production of such real monstrosities; as for
the conclusions and wonderful experiments of natural Magique, which are done
only in appearance, Vide Jo. Bapt. Neopolitan. Mag. Not. Scot in his discovery
of Witchcraft, l. 13 c. 18.
they are very many. To set an Horses or Asses head on a man's neck and
shoulders, cut off the head of a horse or an Ass (before they be dead,
otherwise the virtue or strength thereof will be less effectual) and make an
earthen vessel of fit capacity to contain the same, Why the Amazons did lame
their Male children.
and let it be filled with the oil and fat thereof, cover it close, and daube
it over with lome; let it boil over a soft fire three days continually, that
the flesh boiled may run into oil, so as the bare bones may be seen; beat the
hair into powder, and mingle the same with the oil, and anoint the heads of
the standers by, and they shall seem to have horses or asses heads. If beasts
heads be anointed with the like oil, made of a man's head, they shall seem to
have men's faces, as diverse Authors soberly affirm. If a Lamp be anointed
therewith, every thing shall seem most monstrous. It is also written, that if
that which is called Sperma in any beast, be burned, and any bodies face
therewithal anointed, he shall seem to have the like face as the beast had.
But if you beat Arsenick very fine, and boil it with a little Sulphur in a
covered pot, and kindle it with a new candle, the standers by, will seem to be
headless. Aqua Composita and salt being fired in the night, and all other
lights extinguished, make the standers by seem as dead. They therefore who
upon this Question, whether Devils can generate? defend the Negative, are most
to be credited.

The Amazons were wont to lame their Children, and to abuse them to carnal
copulation, supposing to have made them more fit for that employment by
mutilation. It is true, that they had an intent withal in that feminine
Commonwealth of theirs, to avoid the Domination of men, to lame them thus in
their Infancy, both in their arms, legs, and other limbs, An Art pretending to
new-make a man.
that might any way advantage their strength over them, and made only that use
of them, that we in our world make of women.

Some have taken upon them an Art which pretends to new make a man decayed by
age; their way is to cut a man in pieces, and then put him into a putrifactory
vessel, which they report, the Marquess of Villena resolved to practice upon
himself. But Campanella dares not trust so great a work to an Artificial
vessel, and to spirits gotten by putrefaction; and indeed, (says he) in men
thus slain, the order of things seem to stand against it, not enduring a
regress from a privation to a habit, and the fable of the re-creation of old
Father Jason in Ovid is as vain.

Yet, although Art fails in performance, Nature, as says the Refuter of
vulgar Errors, works wonders in this kind, making old men to become young
again, there being many examples of this Renovation. Delrio disq. mag. l. 2.
Delrio shows out of Torquenda that in the year 1511, an old man at Tarentum
of an hundred years old, having lost his strength, hair, nails, and color
of his skin, recovered all again, and became so young and lusty, that he lived
fifty years after. Another example he brings of a Castilian, who suffered the
same change, and of an old Abbatesse in Valentia, who, being decrepid, suddenly
became young, her rugged skin grew smooth, her gray hairs became black, and
new teeth in her head. Maffaeus hist. Ind. lib. 1.
Maffaeus speaks of a certain Indian Prince, who lived 340 years, in which
space his youth was three times renewed. Ambrose Parry speaks of a woman, Man's
Metamorphosis.
Ambr. Parry lib. 24.17. Lang. Epist. med. 79. Petr. Mart. Decad. 11. l. 10.
Gaudent. Merrula lib. 1 memorab.
who being eighty years old, lost her hair and teeth, which grew again.
Besides Cardan, Langius speaks of a well in an Island, called Bonica, the
waters of which, being drank, changes Age into Youth.

Concerning the Metamorphosis of man transmigrating into the shape of Wolves,
Asses, or other Creatures, many hold it not impossible, and that it may happen
by a natural reason, infinite authorities and examples are brought to confirm
these kinds of Transmutations. As for the Transformation of Apuleius, St
Augustine dares neither deny it, nor affirm it; he thinks, and judges it
(indeed) to be a fascination, which Lycanthopie is not against the Tenants of
Divines, who, for the most part, teach that all things were created of God,
insomuch that not the evil spirits indeed can change their form, since not
the essential form of man, that is reason, but the figure only is changed;
for if we will confess that men have a a faculty to make a Cherry-tree bring
forth Roses, and a Colewort Apples, if he can turn Iron into Steel, Silver
into Gold, and can make a thousand artificial forms of stones that shall vie
luster and beauty with natural Gems; Shall it seem wonderful that Satan, to
whom God has granted a very great power in the elementary world, should
commute or change the figure of one body with another? All which things are
confirmed by Aquinas, where he says, Aquin. Sentent. l. 2. did. 7. art. 5.
All good and evil Angels, out of a natural virtue, have a power of
Transmuting our bodies. As for those things that Magicians do for fascination,
they are but momentany; Whether men can be transformed into beasts.
but the Transformation of man into a bruit Animal does sometimes last seven
years, as Nebuchadnezars did, to which Bodinus adds the actions and labor of
an Ass, which three men cannot undergo, the magnitude, incesse, eating of
grass and thistles, which cannot agree with the humane body; moreover, the
swiftness and other properties of Wolves, which agree not with the nature of
man. Neither has that any show of truth (says Bodin) which some bring, that
God has not given this power to Satan; for, the Counsel of God cannot be
comprehended by men, neither can the power given to the Devil be known, since
in the book of Job it is said, There is not any power in earth that can
withstand him. But as concerning these Transmutations, Creations, re-creations,
transformations, and transubstantiations of men into beasts. One says, they
might put us in doubt that every Ass, Wolf, or Cat that we see were a man, a
woman, or child; and he marvels that no man uses this distinction in the
definition of a man; whereas the truth is, none can create any thing but God;
and the Canons and opinions of Divines who hold this position are to be
embraced. The very words of the Canons are, Whosoever believes that any
Creature can be made or changed into better or worse, or transformed into any
other shape, or into any other similitude, by any other than by God himself
the Creator of all things, without all doubt is an Infidel, and worse than a
Pagan; and therewithal this reason is rendered, to wit, because they attribute
that to a Creature which only belongs to God the Creator of all things.
Whether Witches have power to transubstantiate others.
As for that distinction, that the Devil cannot alter the form of man, Non
essentialis forma (id est ratio) sed figura solum permutatur; The essential
form, (to wit, reason is not changed) but the shape or figure: Thereby it is
proved easy enough to create men or beasts with life, so as they remain
without reason; howbeit he thinks an easier matter to turn a man's reason
into the reason of an Ass, than his body into the shape of a sheep; and if the
Devil and Witches should have power to transform or transubstantiate others;
yet what an easy matter it is to re-substantiate an Ass into a man? For,
Bodin says, upon the word of Apuleius, that if the Ass eat new roses,
annise, or bay leaves out of spring water, it will presently return him into a
man; which thing Sprenger says may be done by washing the Ass in fair water:
yea he shows an instance, where, by drinking of water, an Ass was returned
into a man. But others declare that no Creature can be made or transmuted into
a better or worse, or transformed into another species or similitude, by man,
or devil. And Saint Augustine believes, that the body of man cannot any way,
by the Art or power of Devils, be truly and really converted into the members
and lineaments of a beast, but only the fantastical appearance of a man; and
Martinus Delrio the Jesuit accounts this degeneration of Man into a Beast to be
an illusion, deceptive and repugnant to Nature; for, the soul of man cannot
inform a beasts body, as a soul of a Lion cannot the body of a Horse, That
the soul of a man cannot inform a beasts body.
nor the soul of a Horse a humane body, because every substantial form, as
it gives suum esse informando, requires peculiar properties and dispositions
convenient unto it, and a proper organization of body; therefore the soul is
defined to be an act of an organicall body; whence it is that a Beasts soul
can neither inform a humane body, nor a humane, a beasts. Therefore the soul
of man cannot migrate into the body of a beast to inform it; As for that which
is alleged, that such who are wounded in these bodies, when they are
restored, they find themselves to be wounded in the humane body; Bodin grants
that this is sometimes done, and may be done; and Satan may at the same time
inflict a wound upon the humane body, and sometimes he compasses about the
humane body with a more aeriall effigies of a beast, placing about members to
members, as the similitude requires, accommodating head to head, mouth to
mouth, belly to belly, foot to foot, arms to arms, etc. And here a fit
opportunity offers it self, with Kornmannus, to put the Question, Whether
Nebuchadnezar was substantially transformed into a beast? Nicol. Remig. in
Daemonol.
Remigius thinks he was reduced to the lowest order of Animals, for his
affecting divine honor, yet that he never was deprived of the habit of his
Face and Countenance, but that only for some years using the same pasture and
harbor with them; through the injury of heaven he contracted such hairs and
nails as Nature is wont to cover and arm bruits withal. Martin Delrio is of
opinion that even the humane figure did in some part degenerate into a ferine.
Transubstantiation denied.
And Bodin, a man of great judgment, thinks, Joan. Bodinus.
that the humane form was in very deed taken from him; and he demonstrates,
that he is able to prove it out of the Text it self, where his Transformation
is threatened; out of the very words, whereof it is easily (as he says)
collected, Dan. 4.5.
that he was changed into a beast. Spondanus, Peucerus, Phil. Camerarius, and
some others, think that it was a true and real Metamorphosis. And God could
work this miracle upon that wicked King, that he should be metamorphosed into
a beast, as well as he turned Lots wife into a pillar of salt. Genesis 19.
And least any one should think this King was not truly changed into a beast,
Dorotheus and Epiphanius in Synopsi in vita. Dan.
some of the Ancients teach us, that in the forepart of his body he
represented the shape of an Ox, but in his hinder part the form of a Lion,
giving thereby to understand, that in the former part of his life he was much
given to his belly and lust, and in the latter part thereof to immane cruelty,
rapine, and manslaughter. Hence it is that an ancient Father said not without
cause, B. Gre. l. 5. moral. cap. 8. Pet. Thyraeus de spirit. appar l 2. cap.
15. in sin.
that Nebuchadnezar the King was changed into an irrational Animal. And
Evilmeradach the Son of Nebuchadnezar, after his death gave him for food to the
fowls of the air, lest he should rise again from the dead, who before had
returned from a beast unto a man, so that it is very likely they did not doubt
of his real metamorphosis.

A notable smart writer against these acts of transubstantiation, Scot. in his
discovery of Witchcraft.
wonders most how they can turn and toss a man's body so, and make it smaller
and greater, Man's transformation into an Ass questioned.
to wit, like a Mouse, or like an Ass, etc. and the man all this while to
feel no pain; Danaeus in Dialog. cap. 3.
neither is he alone in this maze: for Danaeus says, that although Augustine
and Apuleius do write very credibly of these matters, yet he will never believe
that Witches can change men into other forms, as Asses, Apes, Wolves, Bears,
Mice, Cardan de variet. rec. 15. c. 80
etc. And Cardan says, that how much Augustine says he has seen with his
eyes, so much he is content to believe. The Question will be, where a man's own
shape is all the time wherein he was made an Ass? For it is a certain and
general rule, that two substantial forms cannot be in one subject simul and
semel, both at once. The form of the beast occupies some place in the air,
and so I think should the form of a man do also; for, to bring the body of a
man, without feeling, into such a thin airy Nature, as that it can neither be
seen nor felt, it may well be unlikely; for it is very unpossible, for the
air is unconstant, and continues not in one place, so as this aerie Creature
would soon be carried into another Region. But indeed, our bodies are visible,
sensitive, and passive, and are endued with many excellent properties, which
all the Devils in Hell are not able to alter; neither can one hair of our head
perish, or fall away, or be transformed without the special providence of God
Almighty. Another Question is put, whether that man was an Ass all the while,
or that Ass a man? Bodin says (his reason only reserved) he is truly
transubstantiated into an Ass, so as there is no part of a man but reason,
remaining in that Ass. And yet Hermes Trismegistus thinks he has good
authority and reason to say, The Apulcian Metamorphosis questioned.
Herm. Trism. in suo Periand.
Aliud corpus quam humanum non capere animam humanam, nec fas est in corpus
animae ratione carentis, animam rationalem corruere; that is, a humane soul
cannot receive any other than a humane body, nor yet can light into a body that
wants reason of mind. Another Question is put, whether if a man should die
(as his hour might be come) what should become of the Ass, or how he should
be restored by the Witch to his shape, or whether he should rise at the day of
judgment in an Asses body and shape? For Paul says, that that very body which
is sown and buried a natural body is raised a spiritual body. The life of
Jesus is made manifest in our mortal flesh, and not in the flesh of an Ass.
God has endued every man, and every thing with its proper nature, substance,
form, qualities, and gifts, and directs their ways. As for the ways of an
Ass, he takes no such care; howbeit, they have their properties and substance
several to themselves; For, 1 Cor. 6.19. verse. 15, etc. ver. 2, v. 13.
there is one flesh (says Paul) of men, another flesh of beasts, another of
fishes, another of birds, and therefore it is absolutely against the ordinance
of God (who has made me a man) that I should become an Ass in shape: insomuch
as if God would give me leave I cannot do it; for it were contrary to his own
order and decree, and to the constitution of any body which he has made.

What a beastly assertion is it, that a man, whom God has made according to
his own similitude and likeness, should be by a Witch turned into a Beast? The
impiety of Transubstantiation.
What an impiety is it to affirm that an Asses body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost? Or an Ass to be the Child of God, and God to be his Father, as it is
said of man? Which Paul to the Corinthians so divinely confuteth, who says,
that our bodies are the members of Christ. In the which we are to glorify God;
for the body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. Surely he means not
for an Asses body; since even into these our bodies, which God has framed
after his own likeness, he has also breathed that Spirit, which, Bodin says,
is now remaining within an Asses body, which God has so subjected in such
servility under the foot of man; of whom God is so mindful, that he has made
him little lower than Angels, Psalm. 8.5, 6, 7, 8
yea than himself, and crowned him with glory and worship, and made him to
have dominion over the works of his hands, as having put all things under his
feet, all Sheep, and Oxen, yea, Wolves, Asses, and all other beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, etc. Ovid, whose
Metamorphosis makes so much for Transfigurations, says to this fantastical
imagination, Os homini sublime dedit coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad fidera tollere vultus.
The effect of which verses is this,
The Lord did set man's face so high
That he the heavens might behold,
And look up to the starry sky
To see his wonders manifold.


Now if a Witch or Devil can so alter the shape of a man, Changlings.
as contrarily to make him to look down to hell, like a beast, Gods works
should not only be defaced and disgraced, but his ordinance should be
wonderfully altered, and thereby confounded.

A great Sceptique in this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Scot in his
discovery of Witchcraft, lib. 5. cap. 1.
marvels (if the Devil can transform and transubstantiate himself into
diverse shapes of man and beasts, etc.) whether the Devil creates himself
when he appears in the likeness of a man? or, whether God creates him when
the Devil wishes it? And he unhappily notes, that a man of such a
constitution of body as they imagine of these Spirits, which make themselves,
are of far more excellent substance than the bodies of them that God made in
Paradise, and so the Devils workmanship does exceed the handy-worke of God the
Father and Creator of all things. The Devils essence and form, in the opinion
of some, is proper and peculiar unto himself, as he himself cannot alter it,
but he must needs be content therewith, as that which God has ordained him and
assigned unto him, as peculiarly as he has given to us our substance without
power to alter the same at our pleasures; for, we find not that a Spirit can
make a body, more then a body can make a Spirit, the Spirit of God excepted,
which is omnipotent.

There is an old Tradition concerning liberi suppositi, or Changlings, and many
stories are confidently told, of some Children that have been surreptitiously
taken away, and others put in their room, The Legerdemaine of Changlings.
which have been deformed Innocents, which we commonly call Changlings; the
Author of Religio Medici confesses, that of all delusions wherewith the
Devil abuses man, he is most puzzled with the Legerdemaine of Changlings. This
power the Devil has to put Changlings in the place of other Children, one
brings as an argument to prove that he or his instruments can transfer and
transform themselves and others: Yet a learned Divine of ours thinks a
Changling is not one Child changed for another, but one Child on a sudden much
changed from it self. Howbeit, I find that Thomas Aquinas allows Conjurations
against the Changlings. Whether the Devil may have a power of stealing,
transferring, subborning, or putting one in the place of another, and of
Changling Infants, needs not much be questioned, for that sometimes some such
thing is done, is not by his power, but by the permission of God for the sins
of men, as the Learned hold; especially, when wicked Parents, neglecting all
religious care of their Children, do not arm them with godly Benedictions, but
overwhelme them with Demoniacall execrations; All men therefore may learn
hence, to order their Children religiously, and to consecrate them to God, and
not to cast them away by Demoniacall maledictions.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, Exhibiting the Pedigree of the English Gallant.
Upon the Relation of this intended Practical Metamorphosis, I perceived that
all men thought me to be necessarily engaged to touch upon the transformation
and deformity of Apparel; the thing offering it self so naturally, every
Scene almost affording some emergent occasion or other for such a Discourse.
Which conceit, I confess, I had admitted, but that I desired to keep close to
my proper Argument. A little therefore to answer expectation, I thought good to
annex this Appendix, wherein I shall a little explain this Proverb, God
makes, and the Tailor shapes.

Freely to deliver my opinion of this vanity of Apparel, I conceive it to be
the same itch, and the same spirit of Contradiction and Phantasticalnesse
working in the Children of vanity, and the same abuse put upon Nature; only a
tergo, being a kind of backbiting mockery, proceeding from man's petulant wit
and invention. Neither do I think it difficult, out of the preceding Treatise
to produce a pedigree of our English Gallants; The design being the same in
both, to wit, to labor to ground a persuasion in others that they are so
shaped by Nature, as they would appear; although their affected shapes makes
them seem far from that they really are. And I think it were not impossible to
prove, that there was never any conceit so extravagant, that ever forced the
Rules of Nature; or Fashion so mad, which fell into the imaginations of any of
these indicted Nations, that may not meet with some public Fashion of Apparel
among us, and seem to be grounded upon the same pretended reason. Hence spring
those Fashions that are in Credit among us; and what is out of Fashion is out
of the compass of reason, as we (God knows how for the most part unreasonable)
judge. And verily one might wonder that at such distance of time and place
there should be a sympathy, similitude, correspondency and jumpings of so many
wild and popular opinions in this matter of Extravagancy, which no way seem to
hold with our natural discourse; and therefore the worser vices, because they
shock our natural knowledge, and give such a blow to the ordinary sottishness
of our judgment.

I pray, what were our Suger-loafe Hats, so mightily affected of late both by
men and women, so incommodious for use, that every puff of wind deprived us of
them, requiring the employment of one hand to keep them on? Was it not the same
conceit that the Macrones of Pontus, and the Macrocephali once had, among whom
they were esteemed the best Gentlemen who had the highest head? So our Gallants
(then) to be different from the Vulger head, chose, for a token of their
Nobility, to have sugar-loafe-like Hats; insomuch as he was no Gentleman then
who had not such a Hat, it being the same affectation; and surely some of the
most affected of them could have been content to have altered the very mould or
block of their Head, had they had patience or time to do it, or could they have
thought the Fashion would have lasted so long, that it had been worth the
corrupting of Midwives and Nurses to contribute their assistance unto the work.



What were the Square-Caps, which Montaigne gives us among the most
fantastical inventions, but the same fancy with those square-headed
Gallants of India, in the Province of Old-Port and Caraqui, and as much
affected by them who desired to be accounted solid men, and Capitis Quadrati?



And the City flat-Caps imitate the Brasilean Flat-head, and is no other than a
Grecian or Gallo-Grecian Round-headnisme.



Our women's French-hoods (that vain Model of an unruly member the Tongue) an
abusive invention might be derived from some unicorne-like dress of hair
among the Barbarous Indians.



Those Rackets or Periwigs which Ladies use in these parts, the invention
thereof they seem to have borrowed of the Brasileans, who make Frontlets of
Feathers, which they tie and fit in order of all colors.

Maskes perchance were derived first from the Numidians, who cover their Faces
with a black Cloth with holes, made Maske-like to see through.



Painting and black-Patches are notoriously known to have been the primitive
Invention of the barbarous Painter-stainers of India.





And our Pendents and Auricular bravery came first from the Hell-hound-like
long eared Gentlemen of the same remote Provinces.



Indeed it is hard to derive the abominable Pedigree of
Cob-web-Lawn-yellow-starched Ruffs, which so much disfigured our Nation, and
rendered them so ridiculous and fantastical: but it is well that Fashion died
at the Gallows with her who was the supposed inventrix of it.

The bombasting of long Pease-cod-bellied Doublets, so cumbersome to arm, and
which made men seem so far from what they were, was sure invented in emulation
of the Grobian, or Allpaunch Family; and the same affectation with that of the
Gordians and Muscovites, and other Gorbellied Nations.



The slashing, pinking, and cutting of our Doublets, is but the same fancy
and affectation with those barbarous Gallants who slash and carbonado their
bodies, and who pinke and raze their Satin, Damask, and Duretto skins. I saw
in Paternoster Row, the day this sheet came as a proof unto me, the Picture
of Francis the first King of France, drawn in full length, who was painted in a
Jerkin-like doublet, slashed in the Breast downwards toward the Belly, which
for the curiosity of the workmanship, and the singularity of the habit, was
valued at two hundred pounds.





These Gallants might be put to school to the Cynocephalus, who as Rhumelius
says, Rhumel. Philos. Animal.
Ipse Cynocephalus se velat pelle ferarum
Tristis, si nudum se sine vest videt.
Quanta sed humanos vexat dementia mores,
Dum nudo cerni corpore membra volunt?
Segmentis variis lacerant and tegmina vestis,
Vt vix rimosa vest pudenda tegant.


When we wore short-wasted Doublets, and but a little lower than our Breasts,
we would maintain by militant reasons that the waste was in its right place as
Nature intended it: but when after (as lately) we came to wear them so long
wasted, yea, almost so low as our Privities, then began we to condemn the
former fashion as fond, intolerable, and deformed, and to commend the later as
comely, handsome, and commendable. A kind of madness or selfe-fond humor that
giddieth (as one says) our understandings, so new fangled and sudden, that all
the Tailors in the world cannot invent Novelties sufficient; one selfsame
judgment, in the space of fifteen or twenty years, admitting not only two or
three different, but also clean contrary opinions, with so light and
incredible constancy, that any man would wonder at it. The waste (as one notes)
is now come to the knee; for, the Points that were used to be about the middle,
are now dangling there, and now more lately the waste is descended down toward
the Ankles.

Those filthy and Apish Breeches, that so openly showed our secret parts, with
the vain and unprofitable model of a member, which we may not so much as name
with modesty, whereof notwithstanding we made public show and open
demonstration, was the shadowed imitation of the real bulk of the great Privy
Membred Guineans. Or else this fashion seems to have been derived from the
Indians of the Island La Trinidad, Lindscot. Trac. lib. 2.
who bear their members in a Gourd or Reed, as it were in a sheath, letting
their stones hang out; before the Spaniards came into the Country they wore
such kind of Codpieces bordered with Gold and Pearl, which Custom the
Spaniards made them to leave. And these Ribband-bushes that our modern
Gallants hang at their Cod-piece, want nothing but Bells instead of Tags, to be
allied in their Fancy to the yardballs of those of Aga, Pegu, Siam, and the
Bramas, who delight in such gay bables and Codpiece music. Bombasted paned
hose were, since I can remember, in fashion, but now our hose are made so close
to our Breeches, that, like Irish Trowses, they too manifestly discover the
dimensions of every part.

What would Turks say to an English man thus strictly clothed, who detest our
little and straight breeches as dishonest, because they too much express our
shameful parts.

At the time when the fashion came up of wearing Trunk-hose, some young men
used so to stuff them with rags, and other like things, that you might find
some that used such inventions to extend them in compass with as great
eagerness, as the women did take pleasure to wear great and stately
Verdingales, for this was the same affectation, being a kind of Verdingall
Breeches. The Author of the Spanish Gallant tells us a story of what happened to
one that thought he excelled so much in this fashion, that he stuffed a Follado
of Velvet, that he did wear, with branne, and being set in seemly manner
amongst some Ladies, to whom he desired to show his bravery and neatness, as
he was talking merrily of something that pleased him, he was so excedingly
taken with delight that possessed him, that he could not take notice of a small
rent which was made, with a nail of the chair he sat upon, in one of his two
pockets of branne (who though the harm was but in his hose, yet he found it
after in his heart;) for, as he was moving and stroaking himself (with much
gallantry) the bran began to drop out by little and little, without his
perceiving it, but the Ladies that sat over against him and saw it (it being by
his motion like meal that comes from the Mill as it grindeth) laughed much
at it, and looked one upon another, and the Gallant supposing that his good
behavior, mirth, and sporting, was pleasing to them, laughed with the Ladies
for company; and it so much pleased him, that the more he strove to delight the
company, the more the Mill did grind forth the branne; the laughter by little
and little increased, and he appeared as confident as a man that had shed much
blood by a wound, until he espied the heap of branne, which came out of his
hose, and then he began to recall himself, and dissembling his shame, he took
his leave and departed, to mend the mischief that lay in ambush for him, as
the Proverb goes, You may find out blood by the footsteps. Better profit than
this did a Prisoner make of the linings of his breeches, who being to go before
the Judge for a certain cause he was accused of, it being at that time when
the Law was in force against wearing Bays stuffed in their Breeches, and he
then having stuffed his breeches very full, the Judges told him that he did
wear his breeches contrary to the Law: who began to excuse himself of the
offense, and endeavoring by little and little to discharge himself of that
which he did wear within them, he drew out of his breeches a pair of Sheets,
two Table Clothes, ten Napkings, four Shirts, a Brush, a Glass, and a Comb,
Night-caps, and other things of use, saying, (all the Hall being strewed with
this furniture) your Highness may understand, that because I have no safer a
storehouse, these pockets do serve me for a room to lay up my goods in, and
though it be a straight prison, yet is is a storehouse big enough for them,
for I have many things more of value yet within it. And so his discharge was
accepted and well laughed at, and they commanded him that he should not alter
the furniture of his storehouse, but that he should rid the Hall of his
stuff, and keep them as it pleased him. This was the garb of the old English
Gallantry, Hollingshead Chron.
of whom a Chronologer of ours says, that they bestowed more cost of their
Arses than they did on the rest of their whole body.

That upstart impudence and innovation of naked breasts, and cutting or
hallowing down the neck of women's garments below their shoulders, an
exorbitant and shameful enormity and habit, much worn by our semi-Adamits, is
another mere piece of refined Barbarism, as if it were done in design, as
one says, whose thoughts were near upon contemporary with my conceit, to
facilitate an accommodation with those American Ladies in the Court of King
Atabiliba, or Pocahuncas; and having once bandied there, it may hazard them
upon a shrewd prospect of Heresy, and by degrees and insensible insinuations,
hint them upon the dangerous approaches of a full Brutish Adamitisme, so
natural it is for error to beget error, and to transmit it self from bad to
worse, and of Fantastical to become Dogmaticall.

Jo. Bohem. de ritibus gent. lib. 3.
The women of Germany, as Bohemus observed in his time, although then their
Garments were honest and comely enough, as having nothing that could be justly
reprehended, if by some of them they had not been hallowed too much above. The
common Censure that these Pap and shoulder point-baring Semi-Evites usually
incur, is, that they seem to have some tacit design to provoke lustful
appetite, and to invite the cheapning eye of Carnal Chapmen, otherwise they
would not so openly expose their flesh, as it were, to sale. Which prostitution
differs more in the Scene than the obscenenesse from that insolent Custom of
the Taxilanian Virgins, who when they are in the flower of their age, and their
Parents want means to prefer them in marriage, are brought by sound of Trumpet
into open market, and there discover their nakedness first a part post humero
tenus, afterward presenting their fore-parts, and by this stratagem, pleasing
some, procure themselves husbands. I hope my zeal to reformation will excuse
the breadth of this or any other Historical plainness. Nor is this custom
among us only a sin against modesty, but it proves many times prejudicial to
health; for I have observed some Ladies who by this inconvenient Garb of
nakedness have lost the use of their hands, which have been resolved and hung
Changeling-like, through a refrigeration of the original of the Nerves, which
from the Neck send those Nerves to the Hands which enable them with motion, to
which mischief some Mercuriall Dealbation (which this fashion usually
requires) might perhaps contribute. Yet this fashion may change, and Ladies may
cease to be so open breasted, for it is not an age since these parts began to
be so enclosed, that amorous Gallants were excluded from such an alluring
object, which made one of them in those times complain to a Lady, against the
Custom of so injurious a concealment, who was wantonly answered by a
question, why men, to the prejudice of their contemplation, had left off their
great Codpieces? Bohemus reports, Jo. Bohem. de rit. gent. l^b. 3.
that the Venetian Matrons, who a while ago bared their arms, breasts, and
shoulders, in his time grew more modest, and covered all those parts.

Our late great Verdingales seem to have proceeded from the same foolish
affectation which the Chiribichensian Virgins, and women of Cathai have at this
day. And the Author of the Treasury of Times observes, that there are some
maids and women now adays, who he thought were persuaded that men desire they
should have great and fat thighs, as the Cathaians did, because they labor to
ground this persuasion in men by their spacious, huge, and round-circling
Verdingals. And that this Hip-gallantry ordinarily moves such apprehensions in
others, will clearly appear by this Relation. I have been told, that when Sir
Peter Wych was Ambassador to the Grand Signeour from King James, his Lady
being then with him at Constantinople, the Sultanesse desired one day to see
his Lady, whom she had heard much of; whereupon my Lady Wych (accompanied with
her waiting-women, all neatly dressed in their great Verdingals, which was the
Court Fashion then) attended her Highness. The Sultanesse entertained her
respectfully, but withal wondering at her great and spacious Hips, she asked
her whether all English women were so made and shaped about those parts: To
which my Lady Wych answered, that they were made as other women were, withal
showing the fallacy of her apparel in the device of the Verdingall, until
which demonstration was made, the Sultannesse verily believed it had been her
natural and real shape.

Senecio the Orator (who because he affected to have all things great, was
called Senecio the Grandee;) among other his affectations of Greatness, he
would ever wear his shoes bigger than his Feet. A fashion which we of late
have generally taken up, to wear our forked shoes almost as long again as
our feet, not a little to the hinderance of the action of the foot, and not
only so, but they prove an impediment to reverentiall devotions; for, as one
notes, our boots and shoes are so long snouted, that we can hardly kneel in
Gods house. Surely herein we have a mind to imitate the Sciopedae, a Nation in
India beyond Ganges, or would be thought at least to be descended from them,
and to have feet of a monstrous bigness. Although of late we seemed rather to
be Chinoise women, and to affect little short feet as they do in China, much
Art being used to make the foot show as foreshortned, a short foot being
thought then more handsome and fashionable. In the time of Queen Mary square
Toes were grown in Fashion, insomuch as men wore their shoes of so prodigious
a breadth at the Toes, that if I remember aright, there was a Proclamation came
out, that no man should wear his shoes above six inches square at Toes. If
the reduction and moderation afforded such a Latitude, what was the
transgression and extravagancy? We may remember also when sharp piquant Toes
were altogether in request. Surely, were it not for the sense of pain, men
would deal with their feet as Procustes with his guests, if they were too
long, cut them to the length of their Phansies. It was a good world, and men
trod more upright, when our Forefathers wore their shoes after the shape of
their feet, before upright shoes, which pretend another shape finer than the
natural, were grown in use.

The Germans also affect this pedestrall vanity, as much rejoicing in
adventitious and new forms of Vestments, especially, the Italian and French
Garb. The men, who a few years ago wore obtuse shoes, in the memory of
Bohemus, Jo. Bohem. de ritibus gent. lib. 3.
wore them snouted as we now do. And indeed we both had this from the French;
for when Sabellicus was a boy, all the Courtiers then wore their shoes
protended in the forepart in the fashion of a little horn or crescent of half
a foot long, which fashion is now seen in your French and English Gentry, but
afterward the moon changed, and the French Gallants wore their boots and
shoes exceedingly expansed in the Toe in manner of Bears, but drawn into a
narrower form behind, that is scarce capable of containing the heel, like the
overpar'd, uneasy, and Gig-like heels of our ill-set up Gallants, which puts
them into so tottering a condition, that when they have spun a while in the
streets, usually come hobling down, and in this fashion are emblematically
presented to be unstable in all their ways. This false and lying appearance is
a fault very ordinary in Spain, where women, for the most part, (if not all)
thus dissemble; which made a Traveller say, that in Spain (almost) all the
women were tall either by Nature or Art, who commonly prove no more but half
wives, for at the wedding night it may be perceived that half the Bride was
made of gilded Cork.

What a prodigious affectation is that of Choppines, wherein our ladies imitate
the Venetian and Persian Ladies.

The affectation of increasing of height, was, it seems, an ancient vanity,
noted by Tertullian, who in his time complained of it, marvelling at the
audatiousnesse of man, which sets himself against the word of our Savior,
that it is not in us to add any thing to the measure or height that God has
given to us: And notwithstanding Ladies endeavor themselves to do the
contrary, by adding upon their heads strong inventions of Tiara's, which may
serve for a lesson to the women of our Times, who raise themselves up at the
feet, to a delusive apparition of stature, beyond the natural procerity.

This ridiculous Folly of affecting new shapes, or rather disguises of
apparel, has been taken notice of, and condemned by many; The Author of the
Navis stultifera cries out against them.

Omores hominum, corrupta o tempora and atra!
Nemo nefas censet vestes gestare plicatas;
Atque habitus curtos nimium tinctosque color,
Vnde palam apparent genitalia membra, pudore
Deposito; and nullo conduntur tegmine clunes,
Quid tunicas memorem Varias? quid pallia narrem?
Pimbria quae croceo vestit circundata Lymbo?
Quidve pedum referam vestitu usque probrosos?
Moribus Assirios sequimur, Turcosque Prophanos
Et Recutitorum pejores ritibus: Eheu,
Talia cur pateris pugnax Germania? pelle,
Pelle inquam ritus media de gente pudendos,
Neve tuam perdas famam, Deus ultor acerbus
Hos premet e quorum nascuntur Crimina vita.
Quisquis amat ritus proferre and fingere inanes
Instituens populos sic novitate rudes,
Is mala dat cupidae Ludibria multa juventae,
Et stultum manibus stultior ipse trahit.
These, we see, are the heaviest lading in the ship, of all those that
fraighted the ship of Fools, by the Master whereof (of old) they were invited
a shipboard by this Poetical summons.

Draw near ye Courtiers and Gallants disguised,
Ye counterfeit Caitives that are not content
As God has you made, his work is despised,
Ye think you more wise than God omnipotent;
Unstable is your mind, that shows by your Garment.
A fool is known by his toys, and his Coat,
But by their clothing now we may many note.
Apparel is apaired, all sadness is decayed,
The Garments are gone that 'longed to honesty,
And in new sorts new fools are arrai'd,
Despising the Custom of good Antiquity;
Man's form is disfigured with every degree,
As Knight, Squire, Yeoman, Gentleman, and Knave;
For all, in their going, ungodly them behave.
The time has been, not long before our days,
When men with honest ray could hold themselves content,
Without these disguised and counterfeit ways,
Whereby their goods are wasted, lost and spent.
Few keep measure, but excess and great outrage,
In their apparel; and so therein they proceed
That their goods is spent, their Land laid to morgage,
Or sold outright; of thrift they take no heed.
Having no penny to succor them at their need.
So when their Goods, by such ill wastefulnesse, is lost,
They sell again their Clothes for half they cost.
Young men descended of worthy Auncestry,
Which go full wantonly in dissolute array,
Counterfeit, disguised, and much unmannerly
Blazing and guarded, too low, or else too high,
And wide without measure, their stuff to waste thus go'th,
But other some they suffer to die for lack of cloth.
Some their necks charged with collors and Chains,
As golden withes their fingers full of Rings,
Their necks naked almost unto the Raines,
Their sleeves blazing like a Cranes wings:
Thus by this delusing such counterfeit things,
They disforme that figure that God himself has made,
On pride and abusion thus are their minds laid.
For this counterfeit abusion and misshapen fashions of Fools thus abusing
their raiment he calls -- To ship Gallants, come near, I say, again,
With your set bushes courling as men of Inde;
You counterfeited Courtiers, come with your flying brain,
Expressed by these variable Garments that ye find
To attempt chaste Damsels, and turn them to your mind;
Your breast you discover and neck, thus your abusion,
Is the fiends bate, and your souls confusion.
Come near disguised fools, receive your fools hood;
And ye that in sundry colors are arrai'd,
Ye guarded Gallants wasting thus your Good;
Come near with your shirts bordered and displayed
In form of Surplois: forsooth it may be said
That of your sort right few shall thrive this year,
Or that your Fathers wear such habit in the Queer.
And ye Gentlewomen whom this lewd vice does blind,
Laced on the back, your peakes set aloft,
Come to my ship, forget ye not behind
Your saddle on the Tail, if you list to sit soft;
Do on your Deck-Slut, if you purpose to come often,
I mean your Copin-Tanke, and if it will do no good
To keep you from the rain, ye shall have a fools hood.
By the Ale-stake know we the Alehouse,
And every Inn is known by the sign,
So a lewd woman and a leacherous
Is known by her clothes, be they neat or fine,
Following new fashions not granted by doctrine.
The Butcher shows his flesh is to sell,
So do those women, damning their souls to hell.


And then showing they are not content with the shape that God has made.

Alas thus all Estates of Christen men declines,
And of women also disforming their figure
Worse than the Jews, Turks, or Sarazins.
Ah England, England, amend, or be you sure
Thy noble name and fame cannot endure;
Amend, lest God do grievously chastise
Both the beginners and followers of this vice.
The Lenvoy of Alexander Barclay the Translator.

Reduce Courtiers clearly unto your remembrance
From whence this disguising was brought wherein ye go,
As I remember it was brought out of France.
This is to your pleasure: but pain ye had also,
As French pox, hot ills with other pains more;
Take ye in good worth the sweetness with the sour,
For often pleasure ends with sorrow and dolor.
What difference there is betwixt the complexion of these and that lazy Lubber
in the Comedy, who so strangely detesteth the troublesome vanity of apparel.

Lupa. I would the Tailor had been hanged for me
That first invented clothes. O Nature, Nature!
More cruel unto man than all thy Creatures!
Calves came into the world with doublets on;
And Oxen have no breeches to put off.
The Lamb is borne with her freeze-coat about her:
Hogs go to bed in rest, and are not troubled
With pulling off their hose and shoes, in the morning
With gartring, girdling, trussing, buttonning,
And a thousand Torments that afflict humanity.
Rise, and make one ready!
Two works of that, your happy birds make one;
They when they rise are ready; blessed birds!
They, fortunate creatures, sleep in their own cloths
And rise with all their feather-beds about them;
Would nakedness were come again in fashion;
I had some hope then when the breasts went bare
Their bodies too would have come to it in time.
Montaigne would willingly excuse man for having no other pattern or rule of
perfection but his own Customs, and his own Fashions; for it is a common
vice, not only in the Vulgar, but, as it were, in all, to bend their aim, and
frame their thoughts unto the fashions wherein they were borne. Yet he bewailes
the particular indiscretion, that men suffer themselves to be blinded, as to be
deceived by the Authority of present Custom, and that if Custom pleases, he
is ready to change opinion, and vary advice every month, nay, every day, and
judges so diversely of himself. And so remarkably uncertain and giddy headed
herein are we, that whereas all grave Nations are constant to their habits, and
may be described by them, they use to paint an English man naked, with a pair
of Sheeres in his hand, to fit his own uncertain humor, and undeterminate
shape.

The Germans better then we and the French, have kept the Quality that Tacitus
gives them, and that which Ammianus recites; In so great a number of men,
says Tacitus, there is but one fashion of Garments. And although these are but
superficial faults, yet they are of evil presages, and we are warned that the
maine summers of our houses fail and shrink, when we see the Quarters bend,
or walls to break. Plato in his Laws, thinks there is no worse plague, or
more pernicious in his City, than to suffer youth to have the reins of Liberty
in their own hand, to change in their attires from one form unto another, and
removing the judgment, now to this, now to that place, following new fangled
devices, and regarding their Inventours. Aristippus (indeed) being of a
contrary complexion to Plato, thought, that no Garment could corrupt a chaste
mind. But all Civil Nations have justly thought this spreading mischief, when
it grew high, worth the restraining: the prodigious and ridiculous vanity of
these times (if ever) calling for sumptuary Laws to repress the Apish
Fantasticalnesse of apparel, in the luxurious use whereof men seem neither to
understand the times, themselves, nor others. The Mode being now held the only
thing of consequence our Gallants fix their judgments upon; for, they note
the Garb and Demeanor of men; they view his Boots, and his Hat, and according
as it complies, or fails in conformity to theirs, so they mark and pronounce
what manner of man he is; as if man consisted merely of an outside.

This very phantasticality being a reproach even unto Christianity. Sir Jo.
Mand. Travels, c. 45.
The Souldan of Cairo told Sir John Mandevill upon a day in his Chamber, asking
him how Christians governed themselves in our country, and he answering, right
well thanks be to God; He said secretly nay, for among other things he
objected, he said they were so proud that they wist not how to cloth them; now
short, now long, now straight, now wide, and of all fashions, whereas they
should be humble and meek. The simplicity of the Bragmannian women condemns
the luxury of ours, who are not adorned to please, neither know by increasing
their beauty to affect more than they have got, their members are clothed with
modesty, without the precious vanity of apparel.

To conclude, touching these indifferent things, as clothes and garments,
whosoever will reduce them to their true end, must fit them to the service and
commodity of the body, whence depends their original grace and comeliness,
which can no way better be done then by cutting them according to the natural
shape and proportion of the body, as we may probably imagine the skin-garments
were, wherewith the Lord God, who best knew their shape, first clothed the
nakedness of our first Parents. What use is there of any then Arming sleeves,
which answer the proportion of the arm? Or to what end are our breeches as
wide at the knee as the whole circumference of the waste? Or, why so long, do
they make men Duck-leg'd? Or, why so strained outwith an intolerable weight
and waste of Points and Phansies? To what end do Boots and Boot-hose Tops
appear in that circumference between our Legs, that we are feign to use a
wheeling stride, and to go as it were in orb, to the no little hindrance of
progressive motion, which the stradling French basely imitates, to the
disguises of the foul disease. It is a wonderful testimony of the imbecility
of our judgments, that when we have hit of a convenient fashion we cannot keep
to it, but we must commend and allow of Fashions for the rareness or novelty,
though neither goodness nor profit be joined to them.

FINIS.
A Table of the chief matters contained in these Scenes. Locally disposed
according to an Alphabet. of the parts of the Body.
A
Arms. BLack marks or lists upon the Arms esteemed a great Gallantry. 286
Arms oakered and dyed with red, black, white black and yellow, Striped like
unto panes ibid. Proud women where they paint their Arms. 287 Arms branded
for love of each other ibid. Many borne without Arms 300 Many borne with 4
Arms, ibid. 301, 304 Nations with 2 Arms on their right side 301 Many endowed
with 6 Arms ibid. A Nation that has but one Arm 301, 302 A child born
without Arms 302 A relation of one seen lately in London, who was borne without
Arms and Hands ibid.
B
Beard. BEard-haters 193, 202, 203, 204. What art they use to eradicate and
destroy their Beards ibid. Beard-lesse Nations. 204, 205 Nations with very thin
Beards 204, 205. Men with Beards like Cats ibid. The plantation of Hair about
the mouth, and the dignity of the Beard maintained, and all the Cavils against
it answered. 193, 194, 195, 206 Where they shave the upper lip only 195 The
honor of the Mustacho's, or hair on the upper lip, vindicated against those,
who offer this indignity and despite to Nature 195, 196, 197 Uses of
Mustacho's 197 Nations that shave the chin and other barball parts and nourish
the Mustacho's ibid. or 198 That custom condemned, not only as an act of
indecency, but of injustice and ingratitude against God and Nature ibid. etc.
199, 200 Cutting off Beards where a punishment 200, 201 Where the men wear
half their Beards shaven, the other half long ibid. The use of the Beard and
the ends to which it naturally serves 206, 207 The Beard the sign of a man 208
Lovers of a Beard 209. Nations that affect very long Beards 210 Formal Beards
affected 211 Where Batchelours dare not wear a Beard 211, 212 Beard diers
ibid. The vanity of dyed Beards 213 214 Bearded women 215, 216
B
Breasts. Breasts loathsome, lovely-long reaching down to the wast; where
esteemed for a goodly thing 310, 311 Where they have them under their Waste,
and unto their knees 310 What force they use to draw out their Breasts to this
length 311 Where they cast their Dugs over their shoulders, and so the child
sucketh as it hangs ibid. That this is a device contrary to the intention of
Nature. The inconvenien^es attending these goodly sagging Breasts or
Pap-fashions ibid. or 313 The proportion of the Breasts in women 312 Natures
provision against the flagging of the Breasts, so low ibid That they sin
against Nature, who never tie them up, or forcibly draw them out ibid Great
Breasts no way commendable 314 A remarkable History of one that had great
breasts 313 Very little Breasts affected 316 Cosmeticks allowed, contrived by
Art, to restrain the extuberancy of overgrown Breasts, and to reduce them to
their natural proportion ibid. That it is a crime in women not to afford their
Breasts to their own Children. 317 Histories of many men having great Breasts
bearing out like unto women, and that give suck unto their own Children ibid.
Male Nurses 318 The business of men's having milk in their Breasts, and
giving suck, enquired after and stated 318, 319, 320 How men come to have milk
in their Breasts 320 Whether the Breasts of men were to have any milk in them
320 Whether the Breasts of Men generate milk according unto Natures ibid. The
reputation of Nature in this business vindicated 321 Right hand Amazons, who
of old, scared off their right Breasts 322 Left handed Amazons who now scare
off their left Paps ibid. Their reasons of these Customs 321, 322, 323 The
History of the Amazons no fable 323 These Viragoes taxed for losing the
complete proportion and representation of the Chests Ornament, for this
unnatural convenience 324 What penalty they are like to incur by this
mutilation or numericall offense ibid. The Breasts, why two, and their use 323
The temper of those men who have great Breasts, bearing out like women that
give suck 324 Where, as a singular piece of gallantry, the men have their
Breasts piersed from one side to another, and where they have them both
pierced, and what they carry therein 325 The absurd Cavil of Momus, against
Nature, for not making a window in the Breast of Man, exploded 325, 326 The
walls of the Breasts depraved by Nurses 327 The inconveniences of straight
swathing the Breasts of Children ibid. The Judgment of Physicians against this
Custom ibid. The perverse Custom in England of swaithing Children, and
swathing their Breasts, noted 330 The miserable inconveniences occasioned
thereby ibid. and 331 That Consumptions and the Rickets, wherewith we only are
molested, proceed from this fond Custom 332, 333 334 Cautions in ordering
Infants 329 The natural proportion of the Breasts 331 Those Nations commended
who desiring rather a broad, then a narrow Breast, a full then a slender,
involve rather then swathe their Infants, in a light swath-band 336 The opinion
of our modern Physicians, touching the too soon leaving off of swaith-bands to
be the cause of the Rickets 337 The too early coating of Children conceived to
be another ibid. The mature time of coating Children 338 The Judgment of our
Physicians, in reference to the Rickets, touching the constant and foolish
Fasciation, used to Children 332, 333, 334 National Examples, proving, that it
is a better way to bring up Children without swaddling, or binding them up in
swaith-bands 335, 336 That where there is no swaithing, there is no news of the
Rickets 335 What kind of swaithing our Climate calls for 336 The pernicious
Custom of straight lacing used by our Virgins 338 The mischief that ensues by
this deadly artifice of reducing the Breasts to such straights 339, 340 That
this was a fashion of old ibid. The errors of Nurses in ordering Infants;
tending to this mischief 340 The commendation of those Nations, who never lace
themselves: but affect a round and full wast 342, 343 The art they use to this
purpose. 344 Where the Breasts are accounted shameful parts. 315 The reason in
Nature, why women should have a modest regard of their Breasts. ibid
Breech-Gallantry. 409
WHY Man naturally has no tail. ibid. Diverse tailed Nations. 410, 411, 412
Tailed Monsters. 412 How a tale comes to be monstrously added to a humane
offspring 413 Sodomiticall abusers of this part noted and condemned. 413, 414,
415
Body.
NAtions that embroder their skins with Iron pens, and sear, race, pinke, cut,
and pounce their Bodies. 455, 457, 458, 469, 466 Where they have skin prints
and past Garments for their Bodies 456 Where they paint their Bodies red,
white, black, blew, tawney, and other colors in works, such as they devise.
457, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 465, 469 Enquire about Negroes, and how
so great a part of mankind became black. 466, 467, 468, 469 Nations that
affect the plumage of Birds, and dress their Bodies all over with their
feathers. 470, 471 Hairy Nations. 472 The cause of Pilosity. 474 Men borne with
shagged Hair, like a water Spanell 475 Nations that wind their bones like
sinews. 476 Art used to make maids fat. 477 Why all men cannot be franked or
made fat. 478 Corpulency, where in great esteem. 479 Monstrous fat men. 480,
481 Fat folks, where in disgrace. 482 Overfed-bodies, encounter Nature. 483
Men growing Giants by a disease 484 The cause of tall stature. 485 Means to
accelerate growth or stature. 486, 487 Fatness when it does prejudice Nature.
488 The natural magnitude of the Body. 489 A way to make men by Art. 490 The
opinion of learned men, touching this Artifice. 491 The Pygmies of Paracelsus.
492 The Commensuration of Woman's Body, vindicated. 493 The Historyes of Pigmies
maintained. 494, 496, 497, 488 Nations of little men. 495 Pigmies without all
question. 499 Dwarfes made by art. 500 The reason of dwarfish stature 501 That
the Devil may make Pigmies. 502, 503 Histories of Giants. 503, 504 She Giants.
505 The cause of small stature. 506 The cause of tallnesse of stature. Nations
of Giants. 508 Men of very tall stature. 509 Over-tallnesse of stature a
deformity. 510 Whether Devils may have to d^e That Devils may exercise
venerious acts with women. 514 That Devils cannot generate upon Women. 515 The
Original of Giants. 515 The supposed Original of Neroes. 516 Why the Amazons
did lame their Male Children. 517 An Art pretending to new make a Man. 518 That
Nature sometimes works wonders in this kind. ibid. 519 That Monsters may be
made by the Art of natural Magique. 520, alias 516 Man's Metamorphosis. 519,
alias 521 Whether Men can be transformed into Beasts. 502, alias 522 Whether
Witches have power to transubstantiate others. 521, alias 523 That the soul of
Man cannot inform a Beasts body. 522, alias 524 Transubstantiation denied. 523
alias 525 Man's transformation into an Ass, questioned. 524, alias 526, 525,
alias 527 The inpiety of transubstantiation. 526, alias 528, 527, alias 529.
Changelings and the Legerdemane thereof. 527, 528, alias 529, 530.
In the Introduction.
THE unimitable curiosity and exact perfection of the structure of man's Body,
maintained against the error of Epicurus. That it does appear, that the
humane form has been altered ^^a^ ways, both by art and diurnall succession.
The audacious art of new mould^ng the body, reprehended, and the inconveniences
thereof noted. Midwives and Nurses, by their unskilfulnesse or neglect, the
causers of the ill figure of the Body. That every part of the newborn Infants
Body, is to be formed according to the most advantage of Nature. That this is
the end of Cosmeticall Physic. Mercurialis his complaint, that this most
noble art of Cosmetiques is grown out of use.
C
Cheek. NAtions, who bore holes in their Cheeks for a Gallantry. 163, 164
Where they make lines above their lips, upon their Cheeks, with certain Iron
Instruments. 164 Cheek-markers condemned. 165 Inscisions upon the Cheek, of
old forbidden
E
Ears. NAtions, whose Ears do reach the ground, and who use their Ears, for
a couch to sleep on. 141, 142, 143 Nations with Ears so large, that they cover
the rest of their Body with them. ibid. An infant borne with such large and
great Ears. 143 Nations with their Ears hanging down to their shoulders, and
lower. 144, 145, 146 By what art and industry they attain unto so great Ears.
145, 146, 147 Nations that bore, pierce or slit the lappet of their Ears, and
load them with ponderous Jewels. 145, 146, 147, 148, 149 Where the greatest
Ears are esteemed the fairest, and they accounted more honorable that have
them. 146, 147 The deformity introduced by the artificial great Ears. 157 The
use of the lobe or lower lappet of the Ear. 156 Where the wider the holes are,
the more noble they esteem themselves to be. 146 The prodigious wideness of
their Eare-holes measured. ibid. Nations with their Ears bored full of holes.
149 Where long Ears are held such a note of Gallantry, that they call them
Apes, that have not their Ears long. 145 Where their Gallantry is to wear
pegs of wood, slender like knitting needles, a finger long, and make them look
like hedge-hoggs. 149 Large Eared shee-Gallants. 148 Prodigious kind of
Earings, and Pendants, worn by most Nations. 148, 150, 151, 152, 153 What
beauty it was, that Nature invented in the outward Ear. 155 Men with Asses
Ears. 159 Where People have the nether part of their Ears cut into a round
circle, hanging down very low upon their Cheeks. 151, 152 Why man had less
Ears assigned him then other Animals. 157 The natural proportion, symetry,
and beauty of the Ear. ibid. and 155 The prodigious vanity of Earrings noted,
and exploded. 154, 155 The use of the outward Ear. 156 That this horrid
affectation of great Ears, in this pack of large Eared hell hounds, savours of
more then the ordinary vanity incident to mankind. 157 Where they affect to
have a small Ear standing close to their Head. 158 What artifice and industry
Nurses use to form Infants Ears unto their mind. ibid. The inconveniences of
little Ears, and the vanity of man in this supp^sed beauty, and the damage
proceeds hence to the action of the Ear. 158, 159 Monsters with very large,
double and round Ears. 160 Nations, the holes of whose Ears are much wider
then ours. ibid. Nations who have no Ears at all, and yet hear most exactly.
ibid. Infants borne without Ears. ibid. The sad condition of those, who are
deprived of the outward Ear. 160, 161
Eyes.
NAtions, with one Eye planted in their forehead. 101, 102, 103, 104 A
Monocular child born. 104 Why man has naturally two Eyes. 101 Children borne
without Eyes. 104 Nations without Eyes. ibid. 240 Men with four Eyes. 105 Men
that have Eyes in their Shoulders. ibid. 240 A man with two Eyes in the hinder
part of his head. ibid. An Infant born with Eyes seated in the shoulders. ibid.
An Infant borne which had his Eyes in his breast. ibid. Sundry kinds of Eyes,
peculiar to many Nations. 105, 106, 108, 109, 110, 111 Red circles painted
about the Eyes, among other notes of fearful bravery. 106 Where they make one
Eye white, and the other red and yellow. ibid. Three streeks under the Eye,
where, a note of distinction of People. ibid. Where the women have blew strokes
about their Eyes. ibid. Where they have certain marks between their Eyes, made
only for a bravery, with a cold Iron. 107 Where they put between their Eyelids
and their Eye, a certain black p^wder, the better to set out the whiteness of
the Eye. 107 Where they judge those most beautiful, that have great rolling
Eyes. 109 Where the greatest Eyes like sawcers, of hue black, are accounted
the most beautiful and excellent. ibid. Narrow Eyes, where, so esteemed a
national beauty, that when they would portraict out a deformed man, they paint
him with broad Eyes. 108 The natural magnitude of an Eye, proportionable to
that Face, wherein it is lodged, what it ought to be. 109 That Eyes which
exceed the natural mediocrity, being less or greater then this measure, cannot
be really beautiful, in a natural acceptance. 110 Man only has his Eyes
enameled round with diverse colors. 111 Whence this diversity proceeds. ibid.
That since Nations are much mingled, we know not what rareness to choose, for
the beauty of the Eyes, for many love one color and some another. ibid.
Eyebrows.
Where the Women tie up their Foreheads so strict with fillets, that they
cannot move their Eyebrows. 86 How the Eyebrows are hindered hereby in their
most significant operations. ibid. Beetle Brows in fashion. 87 Where they pull
out and eradicate, all the hairs of their Eyebrows. ibid. What inconveniences
this despightfull prevarication, brings upon them, who thus wilfully deprive
themselves of these Ornaments of the Face. 88 The natural use of the Eyebrows
asserted. ibid. Diverse ways of correcting and painting the Eyebrows practiced
by diverse Nations. 89, 90, 91 That this Geometry exercised in the Eyebrows, is
not allowable. 92 That blacking them, when Nature has produced them of another
color, is destructive to the knowledge of complexions, and prejudicial to the
cautionary art of Physiognomy. ibid. Triangular and high arched Eyebrows. 91
Eyelids.
Where they turn their Eyelids backward, toward the forehead. 93 What damage
is inferred to the important operations of the Eye, and what intended benefits
of Nature are frustrated by this device. 94, 95 The use of the Eyelids. 95
Nations whose Eyes are very much covered with their Eyelids. 96 Eyelid
painters. 99 Where they eradicate the hair growing on their Eyelids. 96 The
inconveniences following upon this unnatural depilation. 96, 97, 98 The uses
of the hair on the Eyelids, vindicated. 97 Where they color the hair of
their Eyelids, and whether if they did it to a natural end, it were more
excusable. 99, 100 An example of one, who having gray eyes, and somewhat white
hairs on his Eyelids, as often as he black'd them with Ink, he saw better. 100
That all endeavor to advance the Eye above it is natural perfection and
beauty, is vain. 99, 100
F
Face. A Smoth, plain, broad or platter Face, where in request. 239 What
artificial violence they use to their Infants, to procure this figure. ibid.
Other Nations, with broad flat Faces. 240 Men having plain flat Faces, without
Nose, Eyes or lips. ibid. That these artificial Faces cannot be commensurate.
240 Platter Faces condemned. 241 The true Symetry of the Face, vindicated
against this artificial perverseness of these Face-moulders. 240 That the
eminency, and extant Majesty of the Face is hereby perverted and destroyed.
240 A long thin face where affected. 13, 242 What Artifice they use to extend
their Faces, to that long ovall figure. ibid. Square Faces, where affected. 14,
242, 243 That the formal appearance of the Face, is generically reposed in the
chin alone, as that which makes the final judgment of the face of man. 244
The absolute perfection of a woman's Face. 132 The natural and comely Face of
man agreeable to proportion, and according to humane nature. 243, 244 Men with
Dogs Faces. 17 244 245, 246 The artifice these Cynoprosopi use, to mould their
Faces to this concave figure. 246 This invention condemned. 246, 247 Where they
cut streaks and make holes in their Faces, in way of gallantry. 247, 248, 249,
250. 251 The cruel gallantry of the Turks. 248 Stigmatizers of the Face. 250
251 Where a torn and bloody Face is the Woman's beauty. 250 Where they pounce
and race their Faces, putting indeleable colors therein. 250, 252 Nation
Painters. 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261 Spotted Faces affected. 261
Black patches noted and exploded. 261, 262, 263 Painting an old trade. 264 The
vanity of painting. 265 Painting in a man, odious. 263 Painters admonished. 268
Painting, a base invention, and condemned. 267, 269 The use of the cuticle of
the Face. 266 The providence of Nature imitated by the industry of these
Artizans (or rather Curtezans) who smooth and polish it. ibid. Musi^ians
accounted among them, that corrupt and deform the face 273 That that motion
which offends the Face, produces no harmonious sound, or does not accompany it
proportionably. 274 The figure of the Face, into what differences generally
distinguished 129 The figure of the Face, and that which Critiques in beauty
call the form set out. 130 That beauty resides in the form. ibid. That it is
not the graphicall constitution of parts, but the concord and Agreement of
parts; that makes a beautiful or comely face. ibid. The absolute form of a
man's Face. 131 The absolute form of a woman's Face. ibid. 132
Forehead.
Where they are adjudged most beautiful who have little low and short
Foreheads. 74 By what artificial means they labor to have such Foreheads.
ibid Somewhat the like affectation in men and women, observed in a fashion,
lately used by us. ibid. The gross indignity they offer unto Nature, who
endeavor to have such Cat-like Foreheads. 75, 76 The inconveniences of little
Foreheads. 76 What artificial violence, was probably used to the conformation
of such a little Forehead, by a perversion of the natural form. 76, 77 How
Nature has circumscribed the Forehead. 74, 75 Very high foreheads affected.
77, 78 What they do to obtain such Foreheads. ibid. Where they love a broad
Forehead. 78 What art is used to have it so. ibid. What is properly a broad
Forehead. 79 Whom it may become. ibid. That it is not a figure much differing
from the natural. ibid. Where they use great care to have exporrected
Foreheads. 79 Where a prominent Forehead is affected, as a sign of a valiant
man. 80 How they endeavor to represent this gibbosity of the Front. 80 That
frontall affectation exploded as fallacious and not conferring to their ends.
ibid. Wherein Nature is damnifyed by this affectation. ibid. 81 The regular
beauty of the Forehead vindicated, and the natural magnitude and proportion
thereof set out. 81 That the Forehead ought to draw nigher to a plainness then
a convexity or concavity. 82 That a front disposed according to Nature, comes
into a natural mediocrity. ibid. The reasons of both these. ibid. That the
front alone may be varied 765 ways. 130 Where they have cloudy Foreheads made
so by art 82 Wherein this affectation crosses the intention of Nature. ibid.
83 Where they have generally smooth foreheads. 82 Stigmatized Foreheads, where
accounted a grace, and a note of generosity. 83 Frontall Characters, where
familiar and esteemed great ensigns of honor and nobility. ibid. This
fantastical prevarication exploded. 84 Nations, that spot and paint their
Foreheads. ibid. Wherein they affront Nature by this devise. 85
Fingers.
SEdigiti, or men with six fingers upon a hand. 304 Monsters borne with six
fingers on each hand. ibid. 305 A sixth finger unprofitable for the most part
but not always. 305, 306
Foot.
Where they are accounted the finest and properest women, who have small feet,
which are held a great grace. 416, 417 What artifice their mothers use from
their Infancy to have them remain small. 417 Another supposed original of
this custom. ibid. The force of this custom. ibid. How the action of the foot
is prejudiced by this custom. 416, 417, 420 What women in Europe have the
least feet. 418 Where women have their feet so small that they are called
Sparrow-footed. 421 What feet are properly called small 420 Little feet more
pleasant to look upon than serviceable unto the body, and although they may be
accounted delicate, yet not beautiful. ibid. Where the women are well
proportioned in their feet. 431 The natural use of the Foot. 418 That it is
truly admirable, that man supported upon two narrow soles of his Feet should be
kept upright and not fall. 419 Whence it is that he stands so firmly upon so
narrow a Basis. 419, 420 That shoes, or any induments of the Feet are besides
Nature, and very prejudicial to the action of the Toes of the Feet. 419
Nations with feet of a Cubit long. 421 Nations that have but one monstrous
broad foot, conjecturally, enlarged by Art. 421, 422 Nations that have but one
leg and foot, and one arm. 422, 423 Wild men who have their feet turned
backward behind their legs. 422 Such another Nation with eight Toes. ibid.
Where they have long legs, broad feet and long toes. 423 Nations with crooked
feet. ibid. Monsters borne with four feet 300, 301 Monsters borne with three
feet. 301 Nations with one foot. 422 Men with feet fashioned like a half
moon, with two toes on each foot. ibid. Where they have generally two nails
upon their little toes. ibid. Whether any such Monsters shall appear with
their deformities in the Resurrection. 423, 424 Where the beauty of the Country
is to color their feet red. 424 Where they color the nails of their feet
red. ibid.
H
Head. THat the natural mould or figure of the Head has been tampered with,
and altered by Art. 1 That Midwives and Nurses in all Regions have a great hand
in forming of Childrens Heads after their births. 2 The first head-moulders we
read of where found, and how named. ibid. Where they were esteemed the best
Gentlemen who had the longest sugar-loafe like Heads. ibid. The Artifice
discovered whereby they did constrain their Heads to grow into this figure.
ibid. 3 That this artificialnesse in process of time was converted into
Nature, insomuch as thenceforth the Art and diligence of the Midwives therein
became superfluous. 3 That when Nature was left to her liberty, without
oppressing her any longer by Art, she turned by little and little to recover
the figure which she had before. ibid. What Nations besides the Phoxi of
Hippocrates, were noted of old to have high turbinated heads. 3, 4, 6 Where
this figure of the Head is in fashion at this day, and held a note of great
gentility, and a gallant spirit. 4 The Artifice used by them to introduce this
form of the Head. ibid. From whence they received this custom. 5 That this
compulsive force of Art is many times very injurious to Nature and her
operations, but not always. ibid. When this figure proves a disease, when not.
ibid. This by Bauhinus accounted a fifth figure of the Head, contrived by Art.
38 The property that these sugar-loafe-like Headed Gallants have in the word
(...) maintained against those Physicians and Anatomists that have questioned
it. 36, 37, 38 That Nature has many times mocked Art in producing this figure
of the Head in some Monsters. 5 Nations affecting a long Head. 7 By what
Artifice they are brought unto it. ibid. What inconveniences attend this
affectation practiced upon supposition of conferring beauty on children. 8
Short-heads, and Flat-heads by what Nations affected. ibid. The Art whereby
they attain unto that figure of the Head. ibid. The inconveniences that many
times ensue this affected fashion of the Head, with the reasons and examples
thereof. 9 Roundheads by what Nations affected of old, and at this day. 10 The
art by which they acquire and nourish this figure of the head, in their
Children. ibid. 11, 12 The damage they sustain by thus forcing their heads,
to a sphericall form or thorough roundnesse. 11, 12 A round head why commended
by Albertus Magnus. 12 Broad Heads by what Nations affected. ibid. 13 What art
they use to cause this affected deformity. ibid. ibid. A very long, thin ovall
Head where affected. ibid. By what art they attain to this deformity. ibid.
Square Heads, where in fashion. 14 What Art is used to bring their childrens
Heads to this fashion. ibid. The violation of this Artifice not practiced, nor
this fashion of the Head known in the time of Gallen. ibid. That Gallen
reckoning up the four non-naturall figures of the Head, and amongst the rest
this, though that this could not possibly be found. ibid. Vesalius his
authorities and experience opposing Gallen in this matter. 15 Hofmans opinion
concerning this being accounted among the non-naturall, or invaletudinary
figures of (...) Head. ibid. The damage that these Gallants suffer in their
intellectualls by this affectation. ibid. 16 An example of a child borne with a
kind of angular head, by the physical Corrector reduced to the natural shape.
16, 17 Cynocephali, or Nations affecting the form or figure of a Dogs-head,
holding it a singular beauty in them. 17, 18, 245 That they have this
resemblance not naturally, but artificially, and how they bring their newborn
Children to this fashionable deformity. 20, 246 A kind of Physiognomy to
discern all Nations by the figure of their Heads. 6 The regular beauty and
honesty of Nature vindicated from these depravations of Art. 34, 35 The
natural figure of the head stated. 36 Its legitimate magnitude. 35 The four
equal reciprocal lines required, that the parts of the head should agree
among themselves. ibid. and 36 What inequality of these lines in their just and
natural constitution make a Head long, short, broad, accuminate, or (...). 36
That all figures of the Head are not equally natural, as Columbus supposes.
38 That that figure of the Head is natural, which is for the most part, which
also is commodious to the actions of Nature, such being that which constitutes
the natural figure. ibid. What natural benefits they enjoy, who have this
figure with a decent magnitude. ibid. Why this laterally compressed sphere
should be the most proper and natural figure of the head, and the final
causes thereof enquired. 39, 40 41 The Nurses in those nations commended, who
have been tender in this point of offering violence to nature; leaving her free
to her own course, not using any thing to hinder the natural growth of the
Head. 41 A private example of the benefit received by a renunciation of all
artificial contrivance, formerly practiced on the Head, upon imaginary
conceits of beauty and generosity. 42 A strange History of an artificial
Hydrocephalos. 30, 31 Horned Nations. 28, 29 By what art some of them come to
have horns on their Heads. 30 Children born with horns on their Head, and men
and women cornuted by a disease. 28. 29 Ricipites or men with two Heads. 31,
32, 33 The birth of such monsters ever held prodigious. 34 The reason of such
strange productions. ibid. Acephali, or headless Nations. 20, 21, 22, 23 The
doubt of their original resolved, and that they are of Adams progeny. 24 25
The final cause of those prodigious apparitions. 25 Why such monsters concur
not to the perfection of the universe. ibid. A reason given of this monstrous
alienation from the humane form. 26 Infants born without Heads. ibid. That
reason may persuade us, that it is not impossible, that the instruments of
Nature may perform their office, although the head be not advanced above the
shoulders. 26, 27 The artifice which is supposed they use to reduce their Heads
below their shoulders. 27 That the donation of Nature in the use of the Neck,
is lost by this artifice. 27, 28 Nations who use art to alter the substance and
temper of their Heads 42 Block Heads and Logger Heads where in request. ibid.
By what several artifices they purchase this property of a hard head. 43 That
by the concurrent temper of the Climate, and this artifice, their sutures do
grow together, and are obliterated, their skuls growing solid. ibid.
Soft-heads, where a term of reproach. 42 That it is inconvenient to keep the
Head to warm. 44 Where the women have the suture Coronalis loose, and how they
defend it from the injury of the air. The mistake of Celsus, affirming these
hard-Headed Gallants heads to become hereby more firm, and safe from pain;
moderately expounded by Fallopius. 44, 45, 46 That although they gain a defense
against outward injuries, more then the ordinary provision of Nature does
afford; yet that they thereby become more obnoxions to internal, to wit,
diseases arising from the retention of fuliginous vapors. 44 That their thick
skuls may render them more indocile and oblivious. ib. The justice and wisdom
of Nature about Sutures, suffering in the opinion of Celsus, experimentally
vindicated by Columbus. 45, 46
Hair.
NAtions esteeming the Hair upon the Head a very great reproach, therefore
affecting baldness. 47, 48 Where women shave their Heads, and not men, and are
accounted fairest when their heads are shaven. 48, 49 The Hair maintained an
ornament of the Head, against those who would have it an abject excrement,
which Nature never intended for an ornament. 49, 50 The Hair no excrement, and
why ibid. The natural uses of the hair set out. 50, 51 That they who cut them
wholly, away, do not only bring a deformity upon Nature but afford an
occasion of defluxions. 50 All the ways of decalvation practiced by the
ancients to the prejudice of Nature condemned. 51 Cosmetiques commended as
laudable, which preserve Hair for the use and intention of Nature. ibid. That
shaving the Head is a disgrace put upon Nature. ibid. That an indeleable
character of infamy, cleaves to his name, who first suffered the Hair of his
Head to be shaved. ibid. That his wit was misimployed who took upon him to
commend baldness. ibid. Nations who shave the foreparts of their Head. 53, 54
Nations that shave the hinder part of their Head only. ibid. Long dangling
Earelocks worn before, where a renewed fashion, and a pestilent custom. 54
Nations who wear their hair long on the right side of their Head, and shave
the left side. ibid. That these men deprive themselves, in a manner, of half
the benefit intended them by Nature. 55 The vindication of Nature from this
affront. 57, 58 Where the women use to cut their hair, and the men wear it
long. 56 That the Hair was given women for a covering. 57 That Hair hanging
down by the Cheeks of women, of it is own Nature, is not contrary to the Law of
Nature, or unlawful. 58 For a woman to be shorn is against the intention of
Nature. ibid. For men to nourish long hair, is quite contrary to the intention
of Nature. 58, 59, 60 That such long hair would hinder the actions of common
life. 60 Tonsure necessary. 59 The regulation of the hair of man, according to
the rules of decorum. ibid. 60 What long Hair, it is, that is repugnant to
Nature, against her law, and above and besides the natural use. 60 The decency
of hair stated. 62, 63 Nations extremely affecting black Hair. 63, 64 By
what art they make it come so. ibid. The practice of blacking gray Hairs
ridiculous. 63 Nations which of old did, and at this day do affect yellow
Hair. 65, 68 By what means they introduced this color. ibid. How they were,
and are punished for this their lasciviousness. 65 66 67 Tincture of Hair,
both in men and women, a shameful thing, and dishonorable to Nature. 66, 67,
68, 69 How the indulgence and license granted unto women in matters of
ornamentall dresses of Hair, is to be moderated. 69 Painting of Hair an
ancient custom with the Indians. 68 Inconveniences supposed to happen to
women, by the affected beauty of the Hair. 69 Nations that anoint their Hair
70 The like vanity observed in our gallants. ibid. The effeminate powdering of
Hair exploded. 70, 71 Frizling, and curling, and plating the Hair with hot
Irons, an old vanity 71, 72 Periwigs an ancient vanity. 72, 73
Hands.
LIttle Hands where in fashion, and accounted a great beauty in women. 287 What
art they use to have them so. ibid. What women are noted to have the least
Hands of any women in the World. ibid. Nations that paint their Hands red. 288
Where they make their Hands of a golden tincture. ibid. Hands painted with a
tawney color. ibid. Hands painted with flowers and Birds. ibid. Monsters borne
with 4 Hands. 301 Monsters born with three Hands. ibid. Nations with two Hands
on the right side. ibid. Nations with six Hands. ibid. Monsters borne with one
Hand. ibid. Nations that have but one Hand. 301, 302 Monsters borne without
Hands. 302, 303 The strange recompense such Monsters find. 303 Nations that
want Hands. 306 A strange story of one born with 2 stones in one Hand, and one
in the other.
L
Leg. NAtions, that have but one Leg. 422 Long-Legg'd Nations. 423, 433
Certain People, where the women affect to have their thighs hips and Legs very
thick. 425 What art they use to accommodate their fancies in this business. ib.
The folly of this custom derided. ibid. Other people, where the men and women
affect great Calves and full Legs. 425, 426 The absurd Cavil of Momus against
the frame of the Leg of man, exploded. 426, 427 A Calfe-swelling punishment
inflicted upon some Nations. 427 A Crane Legged man. 428 Little Legs in women,
what sign. 427 Where the women are well proportioned in their Legs. ibid. A
way to bring Legs to a convenient magnitude. 429 Low-pitch'd Calves, where in
request. 430 What industry they use to have it so. ibid. High pitched Calfes
where in request. 429, 430 What means they use to advance the Calfe. ibid. The
impertinency in tampering with Childrens weak Legs. 431, 432 Their opinion
confuted by experience, who think Children would have distorted Legs, unless
they were diligently involved and constringed in swaithbands. 336 That this
indiscreet swaithing of Children, is many times a cause of the crookedness of
the Legs. 334 The crookedness of the Knee and Leg bones in the Rickets how
sometimes occasioned. 328, 229 A Tailors and Bakers Legs how caused. 432
Nations that make lists or marks on their Legs, which are esteemed with them a
great gallantry. 433 Where the women's Legs are crooked. ibid. Where the women
almost all of them halt. ibid. Short-legg'd Nations. ibid. Centaures and
Onocentaures. 437 Men with the Legs of other animals. 433, 434, 435, 436
Monsters with the Head and privities of men, but with the hand and feet of
Apes. 437, 438 Their original. 437 Satyrs and their original. 439 Gynny Drils
of what Tribe. 440 Monsters with four Legs. 300 Which kind of Ape is most
like man. 441 When Apes began to grow like men. 443 Seamen, or men fishes. 444
The opinion of the learned, concerning semi-men, and semi-Beasts.
Lips.
Where they brand their Lips, with red hot Irons, especially their upper Lips,
and so make streaks and lines in them. 176 Nations that bore holes in their
Lips to set precious stones, rings, and other things therein. 176, 177, 178,
179, 180, 181 The use of the Lips set out. 181, 182 What uses are hindered or
frustrated, to the prejudice of Nature, by the boring and lading the Lips with
Jewels and other things. 182 Nations that seem not to understand the natural
uses of Lips. 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192 Nations that
have flat mouths without lips. 170 Nations that have copp'd fastigiated Lips.
ibid. Where there are men who have Lips of a monstrous bigness. 174 Imputed to
a prevarication of art. ibid. Where they love those that have thick lips. ibid
That great Lips redound to the prejudice of Nature in her operations. 174 175
Where they have Lips propendent a cubit low, which they nourish instead of a
beard. 171, 172 That they are hereby dumb. ibid. Nations that have their lips
about their mouth so great, that when they sleep in the sun, they cover all
their faces with their Lips. 173 Some that can bind their Heads with their
Lips, as well as women do with their hair. ibid. Prodigiously prominent and
thick lips. ibid. 174 Nations that have concrete lips, with a hole only in the
middle. 170 Haire-lips their cause and cure. 175
M
Mouth. VVIde mouths where affected by women, they being accounted most
beautiful who have the widest mouths. 167, 168 A conjecture of their using Art
to have them so. ibid. The natural proportion of the mouth. 169 For women to
affect the commendation of beauty in a wide mouth, much derogates from the
honesty of Nature, and her ordinary justice. 169 What they may probably suffer
by a mouth so wide. 170 A little Mouth most commendable in women. 169 Why the
mouth was given to man. 168 Misplaced mouths. 175 Men with monstrous mouths.
170 Nations that have but one hole in their face. ibid. Dwarfes that have no
mouths. ibid.
N
Nails. LOng Nails where extremely affected as a sign of idle Gentility.
289, 290, 291, 292 The hindrance that this affected fashion causes to the
operations of the tops of fingers. 291, 295 Where it is one of the points of
bravery with the principal women to wear long nails. 293 This noted as a
great Solicisme in Nature. 298 Where, to wear long nails on the Thumb is a
prerogative royal. 293 Where they never pare their Nails. 192, 193 Long
unpared nails condemned as against the intention of Nature. 296 The end of the
growth of the nails not to repair their decay by wearing. 298 Nails never
intended as weapons of offensive scratching in man or woman. 298, 299 That the
care of conforming extravagant Nails to the Law of Nature appertains to
reason and the practique intellect. 264, 295, 296, 297 Long Nails thought by
some to be a sin. 297 The use of the Nails. 298 Where the women cut their
nails and jag them round. 289 The dignity and majesty of Nature in the
increase of nails defended. 294 Where it is the fashion and beauty of the
Country to make the nails of their hands red, yellow, and party colored, and
where they gild them. 288, 289 How they do it. ibid. Their offense against
Nature noted, and the natural beauty of the Nail vindicated. 290
Necks.
MEn with Necks of a Cubit long 275 Nations with their Necks so long that they
resemble the neck of a Crane. ibid. 276 Long gang^ell Necks inconvenient. ibid.
Philoxenes, his wish for a long Neck, exploded. ibid. Nations that have no
Neck. 277 That it is not impossible for a man to live without a Neck. 278 An
Infant borne without a neck. 277 Where men and women have gutturall bottles
hanging down at their throat, even to their navels. 278 The cause of that
swelling in their throats. 279
Nose.
Where the women cut and pare their Noses, between their Eyes, that they may
seem more flat and saddle Nosed. 112 This trespass against beauty and the
majesty of Nature exploded. 113 What benefits and real beauties those people
deprive themselves of, by this affected deformity. 114 Where they use to cut
off their Nostrils from their Noses. 115 Nations that have no Nose nor
nostrils. 116 The ornament and natural beauty of the Nose maintained. 116, 117
The utility of the Nose, and the beauty of office, or official elegancy
thereof declared. 118 The reasons why the Nose was placed in the middle of the
Face between the Eyes. 114 Men, whose Noses are slit like broken winded Horses.
119 An Infant born with such Nostrils. ibid. Where they are held for the finest
women, who have little Noses. 120 What art they use to prohibit the increase of
the Noses of their female children. ibid. Where when they would make the
portaicture of a deformed man, they paint him with a long Nose. ibid. That this
fashion abates somewhat of their sagacity. 120 Long Noses where affected. 120,
121 What art the Midwives there use to make the Nose more fair and longer.
ibid. The natural proportion and symetry of the Nose. 121 Their trespass
against Nature noted, who upon pretense of beauty enlarge or prohibit the
natural extendure of the Nose. ibid. Thick and great Noses where in request.
121, 122 Caused by an affectation of art. ibid. The inconveniences and
prejudice to Nature, that may follow hereupon. 122, 123 Where the Inhabitants
have all Camoyse or saddle Noses. 123, 124, 125 That all Children are a little
Camoise Nosed, and why. 133 That nature not always needs the officious hands
of Midwives in this case, as if she were not able to perfect her own work. 134
Where the Midwives are too forward to help Nature in this case. 133 Their
pragmaticall artifice herein taxed. ibid. The inconveniences of saddle Noses.
127 An Ape-like Nose condemned. 182 Flat, plain, and broad Noses, where
esteemed a great Ornament, and the principal part of beauty to consist
therein. 123 By what artifice their Childrens Noses are brought to this form.
ibid. Whether a flat Nose can confer any beauty to the face. 129 A shooing
horne-like-Nose, where not affected. 133 The reasons of the prominency of the
Nose, asserted. 126 What inconveniences would have ensued upon a Nose bread in
the spine or back. 126 That these Nose Levellers may incur some
inconveniences, and prejudice Nature, not only in those actions wherein it is
profitable for the bettering of life, but in those wherein it is necessary to
life it self. ibid. Whether these Nose-Levellers obtain their end of
advancing the beauty of their Faces. 129, 130 That a flat Ape-like Nose, can
never become a man's face. 128 Wherein the beauty of the Nose consists. 130 The
natural perfection of the Nose in men and women. 131 What figure of the Nose
agrees with such a face. ibid. Where a high, aquiline or hawks Nose was and is
in request, as a note of honor and magnanimity. 134, 135 That it was an
honorable office to look to the conforming of the Princes Nose, to make it as
beautiful as might be, and crooked like a hawks bill. ibid. Mercurialis his
conjecture, what artifice and instruments they used to conform the Nose to
their desire. ibid. A Hawkes-Nose, where gentililitious and native. ibid. 136
That when there is an ill conformation of the Nostrils, it belongs to the
corrective part of medicine to reform it. 135 A high prominent Nose where
affected. 1^6 Nations who in a bravery and as an ensign of nobility and
greatness, bore holes in their Noses, wearing Nose-Jewels therein. 137, 13^
That foolish fashion of Nose Jewels exploded. 139, 140 Where they have marks
on their Noses made for a bravery. 138 How they make them. ibid. That their
invention was much put to it, who first bored the Nose to introduce a fashion.
139 That such an invention is to the prejudice of natures Nasall operations.
140 Where they stick pins on their Noses. 138 Wherein the beauty of the Nose
consists. 139
P
Privy-parts. Where they were in their yards betwixt the skin and the flesh,
Bells of Gold, silver or brass as big as nuts. 347, ^48 A description of these
yard bals. 349 How, and when they put them in. 347, 348 Why they were invented.
348 This invention where it might be useful against Sodomy. 350 Absurd
projects of women to gain regard. 351 Where it was a custom to fasten a Ring
or Buckle on the foreskin of their Yard, and for what ends. 352 The art of
infibulation or butning up the Prepuce, with a brass or silver button and
whence it came. 353 Where they wear rings in their Yards. ibid. Where they
trusse up their Genitals within their body. ibid. Their ends of this Custom.
354 Semi-Eunuchs, or men with one stone, one being always taken from them by
their Nurses. 354 Men with three stones. ibid. Whether the testicles be
required to the forming of the voice. 355 Who was the first that caused young
male children to be made Eunuchs. 354 The reasons and ends of introducing
Eunuchisme. ibid. and 356 How many ways there are of this u^natural
dilapidatio^ of the body. 359 The time of m^king Eunuchs. 360 That the name
Eunuch, is but a cloak wherewith they cover the injury done to nature. 357 The
first rise of the reputation of such Semi-virs or half men. ibid. The story of
Gombalus. ibid. Where they sell their children to be made Eunuchs 359
Religious Eunuchs. 358 The reason of their castration ibid. Where Eunuchs who
have religious women in keeping, because they shall not be loved, have also
their noses and lips cut off. 357 Eunuchs, by a total deprivation of their
Genitals, why first made. 359 Where such Eunuchs are in great request. 360
Stories of many that have castrated themselves. 356, 357, 358 359 This kind of
operation, very improper for Physicians, and why. 359 That Castration is high
treason against Nature. ibid. What deformity Castration introduces upon the
body of man. 363 In what cases a dispensation may be granted for Eunuchs. 362
Who was the first that made women Eunuchs. 363 Whether women may be castrated.
364 The manner of operation, and danger thereof. ibid. A History of a maid
spaded in Lincolneshire. 364 365 Another History of one spaded a new way. ibid.
Riolanus his opinion of the ancient way of operation. ibid. What Nations
Circumcise the Prepuce of their Yard. 366 The natural ends they propounded
therein. ibid. Where women have the office of excising men. 372 The reasons
alleged for the Judaicall Circumcision. 368, 379 That they who were
Circumcised, might make themselves uncircumcised. ibid. Who was first thought
to have practiced this. 369 The cure of a prepuce made short by Circumcision.
ibid. The manner of Circumcision with the modern Jews. ibid. Mohammedan
Circumcision. 370 The difference of the Mahometans and Jews Circumcision. 371
The manner of Circumcision at Ginney and Binney. 372 A History of Circumcision
at Ginney. 373 Privileges affected in Circumcision. 374 The inconveniences of
Circumcision. 377 The injury of Circumcision. ib. 378 That one may be born
circumcised by nature. 368, 369 The natural uses of the prepuce, according to
Anatomists. 376 The pretenses of those, who use circumcision for a natural
end, exploded. 377 The danger of judaicall circumcision. 379, 380 That
circumcision is directly against the honesty of Nature. 379 That if there had
not been some figurative meaning in Circumcision, it would have been a most
absurd and unreasonable thing: For if God would have had only the foreskin cut
off, he had from the beginning made man without a prepuce. 379 Circumcised
Christians. 367 In what cases for a natural end, circumcision is only
permitted. 362 A new way of Circumcising men, by way of strangulation. 376
Where women are Circumcised. 380 The original and reason of this invention.
381 Where women excise themselves, not from a notion of religion, but as an
ornament. ibid. The error and sin of this custom. 380 How this Circumcision of
a woman is done. ibid. 381 Men with Members like Asses, and where they have a
great privy member in great esteem. 389, 399 Supposed to be nourished by art.
ibid. The just length and magnitude of the virile member, when it is conformed
according to the law of Nature. 400 Midwives supposed to be the cause either of
the length or shortness of the virile member according as they knit the navell
string. 400, 401 The Anatomicall reason given thereof, with the opinion of
Spigelius 400 That whatsoever augmentation of parts, is gained by Art, besides
the will and ordinary allowance of Nature, it is commonly attended by some
inconveniences. 401 The reason of the inconveniences which follow the
magnitude, and the foul immoderate longitude of the Organ of generation. 402,
403 Where they use to bind up the Foreskin of their Privities with a little
cord, and unty it not, but to make water, or when they use the act of
Generation. 381 An expostulation of this unnatural restraint. 382 Men whose
Members hang down to their shanks. 403 Pygmaei magno veretro. 404 Where they
adorn their Genitals with precious stones. 383 Where they deprive their secret
parts, of that which nature intended to make them more secret. 383 How this is
done, and upon what pretense. 383, 384 Where women never have their flowers.
390 By what means they prevent their monthly Flux. ibid. Their ingratitude to
Nature, taxed, for endeavoring to d^vert the ordinary course of Nature. 391
Nations commended as more respective to nature in this particular. 391 Where
the women have a most straight and narrow neck of their womb, that they very
hardly admit a Man. 392 That this happens to them by art, and not by any
benefit of Nature. ibid. Where this art is familiarly and commonly practiced.
392, 393 The miserable and dangerous effects of this artifice. 393 Where the
virgins use art to distend their Muliebria most capaciously. 393 Where they to
use sew up the private passage of Nature in their Female child, leaving a small
passage for their urine. 394, 39^ Where the Midwives are wont to break that
membrane as unprofitable, which Anatomists call Hymen. 384 How they do it.
ibid. The prodigious conceit of Nero, who must needs have a boy cut, and made
(forsooth) a woman. 407 The natural change of women into men, confuted by
demonstration of Anatomy, and Nature vindicated from being guilty of any such
practical Metamorphosis. 405 That men to be changed into women, is very rare.
407 Nations of Hermophrodites, who have the generative parts of both sexes.
386, 390 Heretics, that thought the first man was an Hermaphrodite. 386 Their
opinion confuted by Scripture. ibid. and 387 The kinds of Hermophrodites.
ibid. That those, who in old time were called by the name of Androgyni, were
reputed for prodigious Monsters. 389 Ancient Records of such Hermaphrodites.
ibid. The causes of Hermophrodites. 390
S
Shoulders. HIgh-huff Shoulders, where in fashion and natural. 280 Where their
shoulders are higher then their Heads. ibid. Some concurrent affectation
suspected in these Nations. ibid. Broad shoulders where in request, and
endeavored or imitated by art. 281 The inconveniences of broad shoulders, and
why Platonic Men are not affected by women. ibid. Narrow and contracted
shoulders, where affected. 282 With what art they of old, affected this
composure of the Shoulders. ibid. This affectation of drawing the
shoulder-points too near, noted and condemned. ibid. Where the Noble Virgins
Right Shoulders, are higher and bigger then the left. 283 The cause thereof
enquired. ibid. Crook-back'd Nations. 284
T
Teeth. Where red Teeth, are accounted a great beauty, 217 By what industry
they attain unto this Dentall bravery. ibid. Where the principal women take a
pride in black Teeth. 217, 218 Black Teeth where a singular beauty. 218, 219
Where so greatly affected, that the blacker they are, the more beautiful they
are esteemed, and worthy of greater honor. ibid. How they make them black.
ibid. Where they polish their black teeth, which makes them show like polished
Ebony. 219 Where they color their Teeth red and black. 217 How they color
them so. ibid. Where the men and women in a foolish pride, black their Teeth,
because Dogs Teeth (forsooth) are white. 219 Where the women guild their Teeth.
221 White Teeth, the true natural beauty. ibid. They condemned that alter the
native candor of the Teeth. ibid. Nations commended that are careful to
preserve the natural beauty of the Teeth. ibid. Their artifice whereby they
make them look like polished Ivory. ibid. Dentifrices commended which preserve
the native whiteness and integrity of the Teeth. 222 Where they file their
Teeth as sharp as needles. ibid. Where they file their Teeth above and below,
as sharp as needles. ibid. This custom condemned as contrary to the law of
Nature. 222, 223 Pretended ends for filing of Teeth. 223 An example thereof.
ibid. Where the women pull out four of their Teeth, two above and two below,
for a bravery: And they that have not these Teeth out, are loathsome to them.
224 Where they pull out five or six Teeth for a fashionable Elegancy. ibid.
Where they have a custom to pull out all their Teeth. 224 Where there are few
to be found that have their native Teeth; but they are pulled out and filed
down, and artificial ones set in their place. 229 Their ingratitude to Nature
noted. ibid. The Teeth intended by nature to serve for an ornament and beauty
to the mouth. 225 The blemish and damage these Nations sustain by this
foolish fashion. ibid. What benefits of Nature they renounce, for the mischief
of so ridiculous a fashion. ibid. That wantonly to pull out the Teeth is a
transgression against the law of Nature. 226 That what these have for a
fashion, some have decreed for a punishment. 228 Where the men and women cover
their Teeth with thin plates of gold. 231 Who first invented the drawing out of
aching Teeth. 229 Where the Parents make a feast when their childrens Teeth
begin to grow. 230 A story of a sound tooth drawn out of another mouth,
inserted in the room of a rotten tooth drawn out, and taking root. ibid. An
example of one, who having a tooth longer then the rest out, to cure the
deformity, fell into convulsion fits, with the reasons of it. ibid.
Tongue.
Where they have cloven Tongues double from the root, thought to be done by
art, as we slit the tongues of those birds we would teach to speak. 232
Hofmans appprobation of the story and linguall advantages they have, who have
really a double tongue. 233 The strange advantages of this peculiar Art. 234
That this art granted, it is an audacious improveme^t of the tongue. 234 An
Infant born with a double Tongue. 233 One with 11 tongues, 11 mouths, and 22
incompleate lips. 234 The tongue of man naturally double, Anatomically approved
by Gallen. 233 The erroneous persuasion of Midwives, that the bridle of the
tongue needs cutting in all Infants, condemned. 235 The ill consequences of
this pernicious custom, as they are noted by many learned Physicians. 235,
236, 237 Camerarius his opinion, how this never enough condemned custom, might
be introduced into the Midwives practice. 236 The exact Symetry of the tongue,
and the providence of Nature in this particular, cleared. 237 What this
ligament of the tongue is, and its use. 236 When is the true time of
dissection, if we suspect some defect. 238 A caveat in that operation. ibid.
FINIS.
Works of the Author already published.
CHIROLOGIA: Or, The Natural Language of the Hand. CHIRONOMIA: Or, The Art of
Manual Rhetoric. PHILOCOPHUS: Or, The Deaf and Dumb man's Friend.
PATHOMYOTOMIA: Or, A Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections of the Mind.
ANTHROPOMETAMORPHOSIS: Man transformed, or the Artificial Changling. [this now
published] Works accomplished by the Author, which he may be induced
hereafter to communicate. CHIRETHNICALOGIA: Or, The National expressions of
the Hand. CEPHALELOGIA: Or, The Natural Language of the Head, being an Extract
of the most noble and Practical Notions of Physiognomy. CEPHALENOMIA: Or, The
Art of Cephalicall Rhetoric. VOX CORPORIS: Or, The Moral Anatomy of the Body.
The Academy of the Deaf and Dumb: Being the manner of Operation to bring
those who are so borne, to hear the sound of Words with their Eyes, and thence
to learn to speak with their Tongues. VULTISPEX CRITICUS: Seu, Phisiognomia
Medici. GLOSSIATRUS: Tractatus de removendis Loquelae impedimentis. OTIATRUS:
Tractatus de removendis Auditionis impedimentis.
Hactenus Sacro Genii impulsui in intellectualem nostram complexionem
operantis, obsecundans, dum in nova ferebat Animus. Opera exegi non
supererrogationis, sed Augmentis scientiarum supplementalia. In quibus de
Republica literaria aliquid meruisse videor: Faciendi librorum nullus multorum
est finii, eorundemque lectio defatigationi est carni; Deinceps de propria and
aliena salute consultanda totus incumbam. Caetera cateri Humanae Naturae Amasii.

FINIS.

