ATHOMYOTOMIA OR A DISSECTION of the significative Muscles of the AFFECTIONS of
the MIND.

Being an Essay to a new Me^hod of observing the most Impor^^nt movings of the
Muscles of the Head, as they are the nearest and Immediate Organs of the
Voluntary or Impetuous motions of the Mind.

With the Proposal of a new Nomenclature of the Muscles.

^y J. B. Surnamed the Chirosopher.

-- Augebitur Scientia. LONDON, ^^^nted by W. W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are
to sold at his Shop at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To his loving Father Mr Thomas Bulwer.
Sir,
IT has been a laudable Custom with Persons of emi^ent degree to descend to
honor their Sons with directing Books unto them; ^he reciprocation of which
af^ectionate Complement is a duty well-becomming a Son; moved (therefore) with
a certain Filial Decency I made choice to dedi^ate this Book unto you in
regard ^he Argument of it is Provincial ^o Physic, wherein your experi^nce
has crowned your Profession, having ever been Fortunatus in Praxi. You shall
find in it that which I use to call the Clock-work of the Head, or the Springs
and inward Contrivance of Instruments of all our outward motions, which give
motion and regulate the Dyall of the Affections, which Nature has placed in
the Face of Man; Being a New light, and the first Irradiation which ever
appeared through the Dissections of a Corporeal Philosophy. Could the Times
have afforded it, it had come to your hands illustrated with the ornamentall
Demonstrations of many Figures prepared for it; but indeed the Stationers
cautionary prudence met with an indisposition in me; for I thought that in such
new and unexpected matters too great a splendour might possibly have dazzled. I
confess I have met with little encouragement in this Design, for all the
Physicians and Anatomists that I have hinted it unto have held it scarce
fecible, Doctor Wright Junior only excepted, with whom having interchangeably
communicated Intellectual Affairs, He showing me the hint of his grand
undertaking, which was Anatomia Comparata, that great Defect in Anatomy noted
by my L. Bacon in his Book De Augmentis Scientiarum, in return whereof I
having first told him of an Achievement of mine in this Art, which I called
Vox Corporis, or the Moral Anatomy of the Body; I acquainted him also with this
Essay, whose apprehension I found so well possessed with the gallantry (as he
was pleased to speak) and the possibility thereof, that he promised me (to
testify his approbation,) he would commend it in his first public Lecture of
Anatomy in the College; a day much expected by those who had took notice of the
most eminent and Divine Impulsions of his Anatomique Genius. But prevented by
his much lamented Death, what entertainment this Essay shall meet with among
the Sect of Corporeal Philosophers; (having bin so infortunately deprived of
the advantage of such a Recommendation,) must be left to the Fate of Books.
However, I hope it shall find acceptance with you, and be received as an
evidence of the proof of that Education you bestowed on me, and of my Duty.

Your obedient Son, John Bulwer.

The Scope and use of the Essay for some praevious satisfaction to the
Intelligent Readers.
More especially Physicians and Masters in Anatomy, whose Candor and
Indulgencie on this Essay is most properly desired.
HAving resolved to trace the Discoursing Actions of the Head to their Spring
and Principle upon which their outward significations depend; when I had passed
the superficial parts, and dug a little more than skin-deepe into the
Mineral of Cephalicall Motion, I came to the Muscles, the instruments of
voluntary motion; or the instruments of those motions that are done by an
earnest affection, that is, from an inward principle. The effects of whose
moving significantly appear in the parts moved, when by an arbitrary motion we
freely reject or embrace things understood (not with our mind only, but with
our mind and body both.) Here I made a stand; and began curiously to enquire
and hunt after all the Anatomists both Ancient and Modern that had writ of the
Muscles, and the motions of the Head, as well to satisfy my self as to crave
in aid of them: and having had a view of as many as I could hear of and
conveniently procure, and observed their several veins and Methodicall
variations no way answering my expectation; An emergent thought suggested to my
imagination a notable Defect, hitherto undiscerned in that Art which of late
has attained unto a great perfection, which cast me into an ecstasy of
admiration at so strange a Preterition, that among the Conscript Fathers of
Anatomy, there has not been any one who, Data opera, had undertaken a general
Survey and Cognomination of the Muscles of the Body, as they are the necessary
Instruments of all those motions of the Mind, which are apparently expressed
and made manifest by the effect of their use and moving in all the parts of the
Body, although more Emphatically, by those operations they have in the Head and
the most remarkable parts thereof. Galen in that excellent Commentary De motu
Musculorum, wherein he went beyond himself, and showed the greatest miracle of
his wit, a Book which all Anatomists kiss with reverence, as containing the
Oracles of Myologie, does not so much as glance at it, but under the general
notion of voluntary and arbitrary motion; and in his Anatomicall
Administrations wherein he abundantly prosecutes these motions, and glories to
have found out many which were hid and unknown to the Physicians that were
before his time, and where he teaches a Method whereby every single motion may
be found out; Nor in his Dissection of Muscles not a word, scarce, pointing to
this Intention, not naming many, but only numerically, not three with an
imaginable reference to any Emphaticall motion of the Mind. And all the
Nomenclators since his time, who have undertaken to play with new names, which
for memory, brevity of Speech, and perspicuity of the thing, they have imposed
upon the Muscles, have omitted the due regard proper to the Spirit and life of
their mental significations: whereas the Denomination had been better from the
Nature and energeticall property of the Muscle, which should by that Rule have
been taken from the more extant and patheticall representations of those parts
they actuate, and by which they exhibit their Organicall significations. More
strange yet, that no Artists should have made this the Subject of their
Orations, but should have all to this Day, either turned their discourse to the
structure only of the Humane Fabrique, the perfections or Symetry of the Body,
or the excellency and antiquity of the Anatomiqu^ Art, or the Encomiums of the
Ancient and modern Anatomists: whereas nothing could have set a greater gloss
upon the Art, or have bin more glorious and honorable, than together with
their Dissections, to have enriched their discourse with a relation of the
Essence, Regiment, and proprieties of the Soul, whose well-strung instrument
the Body was; Dr. Flood being the first that in his peroration (when he was
Praelector of Anatomy in the College of Physicians in London Anno 1620.)
exhibited such a kind of Method, together with an Explanation of his Reason,
and an Example thereof; which Form he did not magisterially propound unto
them, but to declare that the Subject of an Anatomicall praeludium ought to be
the Internal and spiritual man, which is rather to be dissected with living
words, than any knife how sharp soever, and so consequently to be discovered
and explaned by a style of discourse. The field of which subject as it is more
ample and spacious than the rest; So the Studious in Anatomy shall never find
it barren, but most fruitful; So that every one herein may hit of much variety
of invention. If then a Prologue only of this nature is held so convenient by
so great an Artist, how much more advantageous and delightful would a
discourse interwoven throughout the Dissection? Finding (therefore) that
neither the great Parents of Physic, nor their Learned Offspring had
pathologized the Muscles, and thence bestowed significant names upon the most
remarkable of them; I resolved to attempt the Design, so to take away the
blemish which has fallen upon the Art by the slovenly and careless
Denomination of some of them, and the six-footed Barbarismes of those Greek
Conjuring names which are fit only for the bombasticall Anatomy of Paracelsus;
wherein I was encouraged by observing that half a dozen of Muscles named
according to our new intended model, or the Species of their most significant
motion; and seem to have been stumbled upon by the way of sport, or a
Rhetorical Chance-medley of wit; appear so wonderfully pleasing to our
modern and most ingenious Anatomists, that they are still borrowing from on^
another those patheticall Apellations, or (...) Riolanus calls them,
Elegantissima nomina, as if they were much affected with the felicity of that
Pen from whence they first disti^led, quae omne tulit punctum, for Elegancy,
Memory, Brevity, and Perspicuity. It Is true many have exercized their pens in
discourses of the muscles: But an exact Description of the Discoursing motions
of the Muscles none of the Great Professors of Anatomy have so much as thought
on; whereas the facility, utility, and delightsomenesse of such notions might
have invited many; for, what is more easy than to discern the parts manifest
to Sense, and the fidelity of an Ocular assurance? that are so subject to our
touch, that in the semblances of those motions wrought in the parts by the
endeavor of the Muscles, we may not only see, but as it were feel and touch
the very inward motions of the Mind; if you ask what delight will hence acrew
to the understanding? What is so delightful as to know by what kind of movings
those varying motions and expressions of the Head and Face are performed? What
Muscle does accomplish this or that speaking motion? To observe the scheme or
outward figure of each Affection in the Countenance? That is the situation of
each in its motion, as it is drawn by the Muscles, and to read their
significations couched in their names? So that observing these accidents of the
Head and Face, the Types and representations of the Affections which are
accidents of the Mind, according to the nature of Correlatives, we may find out
one by the other. And though it be but Negative ignorance not to be skilled in
such matters, and so may be thought a needless Nicety or overcurious
Inquisition to know every Muscle of our Head and Face: Yet certainly it cannot
but be some disparagement to one that pretends to any ingenuous Education or
Reading, to be as a mere Puppet or Mathematical motion, and not to understand
why, or after what manner, the Muscles of his Head move in obedience to the
Command of his Will; and so to have no better a Headpiece than that, which
counterfeiting the natural motions of Speech, uttered its mind to Thomas
Aquine, and ^he Learned Friar Bacon. And who ^ pray you that is well versed in
^hilosophy, does affect to behold the ^old effects of common Action^ without a
Discourse of their Causes and intrinsicall Agents the Soul and the Muscles?
Since that is fa^iliar to Sense, and so by cons^^uence to Beasts, But this is
subje^ted to the Intellect, to wit, the In^ernall Principle of man, where^ore
we will think it a thing worthy ^o be corrected with the whip of Ig^orance, if
any rashly plunge himself into the Muscular Sea of corpo^al Anatomy, or of the
outward man, without any mention of the Inter^all man, since the Soul only is
the ^pifex of all the movings of the Mus^les, whose invisible Acts are made
^anifest by their operations in those ^arts into which they are inserted. Not
that any perfection or exact knowledge of this nature can be acquired; since
the wisdom of the Creator in the fearful and wonderful structure of the
Head is no^ yet fully found out, although it ha^ be^ne sought after by
illustriou^ men with much piety and Diligence^ and therefore that which is most
probable, and has the countenance of Authority must pass for truth^ To those
also that shall hereafter Physically and Ethically handle the Doctrine of
humane Affections, this may serve as a Mercurius Ethicus, to give intelligence
to all Athenian Pathologists, of the motions of the Muscles which bear the
greatest sway in matter of Affection: whereas heretofore Pathology has been
confined, as it were, to Aristotle^ Muscle, to wit that principle of inbred
Heat, or ever movable substance of Spirit and blood, which seems to frame the
several images of all the affections of the Mind; and has had little or no
intercourse with the Muscles of the Affections; whereby she has been deprived of
a great part of this ornament whereof she is capable. But perchance the
modernes have bin frighted with the difficulty of such a Design, as supposing
such a Muscular Philosophy not fecible or reduceable into an Art: or else if
it ever came into their Heads, they thought it a kind of impudence after Galen
that glorious light of Anatomy, to ende^vour any thing in this kind. Yet Galen
in his Book de motu Musculorum seems to have given any one a fair occasion
of daring, where he writes, Whereas we have partly found out many things, and
partly also intend diligently to make a through search after other things; and
some other may find out what is wanting. With his leave therefore, I shall
endeavor by a light Essay, to take notice of the figure and signatures of
those Muscles that belong unto the Head, and are the Authors of the speaking
motions thereof, and of the Superficial parts comprised in it, by the way,
raising Allegorical inferences from them, and adapting and imposing new names
upon them according to their Physiognomicall significations, which shall be as
the Keys of their important a^tions. Describing the rising and insertion,
together with the fibers which modify the Determinate actions of each Muscle
that I find isntrumental, adjutant, or any way concurring to the expedition of
any remarkable gesture of the Head or Face: So ordering the matter, that
occasionally, most, if not all the mysteries of voluntary motion shall be
brought in, at least in such a manner, as shall be more than sufficient to lay
a firm foundation to our virgin Philosophy of Gesture, and to serve my turn
for the present occasion. And because none that hitherto have treated of the
moving of the Muscles, have driven after this Scope of their significations; I
shall name the Authors by whose light I walk, and upon whose Bowl I clap the
Bias of the Affections, neither my Margin, nor the nature of an Essay admitting
any more critical formalities of quotation. I am not ignorant that such daring
attempts and undertakings are very obnoxious to envy, and apt to fall under the
Censure of Arrogance and ostentation, imputations I have no reason to fear,
since I arrogate not to my self by the conduct of my own light, to have found
any new or great thing to add to the Doctrine of Muscular motion, to which (to
speak the truth) I think there cannot much be added: neither am I so conceited
of these anima^versions, as to hope they should be admitted into the School of
Anatomy, and straightwise be made Canonical; for, to sit a Novelty of this
nature for such an admission, would require a whole College, or rather a
national Synod of Anatomists to consult about it; my single Phantsie being not
therefore par negotio, I have adventurd far with little strength and less
encouragement to recommend the Design to men of stronger Brains and public
Spirits. I think I may with modesty suppose, that I have sprung a new vein,
and say that I was enforced to dig my way through, and out of much Oar and
Dross, to refine what was fit for my purpose, before I could come to ransack
this Secret and undiscovered treasury of the Muscles; or to cast the old me^^^l
of their matter into a new ^ld, to make it more il^^^trious by conjoyning it
with (...) inward motions of the mind, ^^ich set a representative shape (...)
gloss upon the outward ^^tions of those parts which ^e moved by the Muscles.
If ^^ey are contented to allow me (...) have bin the first that by (...)
endeavored to link the ^uscles and the Affections to^^ther in a new
Pathomyogamia; (...) at lest to have published the (...) between Myologus and
^^thology, that any Physio^^gicall Handfaster that can (...) them stronger
together, might ^e it if he pleased: I ask no ^ore: as for the rest, Veniam
(...) laud peto. And if the ^^orbutick wits of this Age, ^ho prefer an idle
Head before ^n active, should be loath to afford me that, I can easily comf^^^
my self with that of Cremutiu^ Tacitus, Suum Cuique posterit rependit, nec
deerunt, si Damn^^tio ingruit, qui mei memin^^rint.

PATHOMYOTOMIA, OR A Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections.
Sect. I. Of the Honor and Dignity of Animal Motion.
MOtion, says the Stagerite, is Perfectio perfectibilis, the perfection of
that which is perfectible. It Is ultima perfectio Creaturae, Says the
^ergamite; The highest perfection of (...) Creature: for, a living creature, is
a ^^ving Creature by moving, and most ^^mmodious to him is motion, as that
which is also out of his substance, because so soon as he is Animal, he is able
to love of himself; and where there is Sense there is also Motion: for, the
Sensitive ^lant that has only the sense of Tact, ^ath likewise some motion,
to wit of Di^tation, and constriction; therefore Aristotle speaking of Mola, or
a false Conception: But because it is not a living Creature, it moves not.
Hence when the Great Parent of Nature had come to Animal motion and its
instruments, He ceased from his work, having nothing more honorable, as having
accomplished the last end in the fabric of the Body; which most Noble and
necessary and no way to be despised motion, especially its chiefest and
nearest instruments, the Muscles, are in us so far and wide renowned, tha^ if
we could conceive in our mind all the organs of motion to be taken out, w^
would leave few parts to remain, an^ you would not acknowledge Man to be a
living Creature; and that not only in regard he is depraved in his structure,
but because he has sustained ^ greater loss in being deprived of his motion:
For were the abilities that proceed from motion and its instruments, se^parated
from the Body, without doub^ man would almost cease to be man, an^ would
degenerate into a Plant or Stock whereupon you could no more observ^ those
motions of the Muscles which ar^ necessary to life, for he could neithe^ follow
that which is wholesome, nor avoid what is noisome. He would be left destitute
of the grace of elocution, and his mind would be enforced to dwell in perpetual
silence, as in a wooden ecstasy or congelation; nay his Soul which is only
known by Action, being otherwise very obscure, would utterly lose the benefit
of explaning it self, by the innumerable almost motions of the Affections and
passions which outwardly appear by the operation of the Muscles. That, as (for
Rhetorique) Demosthenes ascribed all to Action; So Physicians in Nature, give
the pre-eminence to Animal motion, which is performed by the action of the
Muscles. Because all the parts rejoice in Motion, whereas they languish in
Rest; and as we know all by Sense, so we do all by Motion.

Sect. II. That a Muscle is the proper and adequate Agent of the voluntary and
pathetical motions of the mind, outwardly expressed in the Body.
THe nearest and immediate Instrument to the Motive Faculty for the exercise of
motion, as that which can only receive the influence thereof, is a Muscle; from
whence moving proceeds, as from a Motor, whence among Physicians it is
reciprocal and Convertible, to move and to have Muscles: for, no part without
the endeavor of a Muscle, although it be illustrated with the pres^nce of a
Nerve, is stirred up to any voluntary motion: neither shall you find any member
of the Body that is moveable, which has not some Muscle set over it, as
President of its significations: all the outward expressions we have or can
make, are performed by motion, and therefore signify the affections of the
mind, which are motions; the moving of the instruments and parts, answering in
a kind of semblance and representative proportion, to the motions of the mind.
And there is no Muscle to be found in the Body, but it can expedite such
voluntary motion. Since all voluntary actions of the Soul are performed by
motion, and all motion necessarily implies the use of Muscles. Galen sometimes
calls these motions, Animal, to distinguish them from the Natural; for we can
excite these voluntary motions when we please, u^e them often or seldom,
heighten them or abate them, and leave them quite off; which is the Character
Galen gives of a voluntary motion. It Is true, they who are precise in the
definition of a Muscles use, say, it is to be the instrument of free or
spontaneous motion, and not v^luntarie: because Beasts have Muscles, unto whom
Will is denyde, because it presuppos^th Reason. Will being properly an appetite
according unto Reason. Fabricius ab Aqua Pend. takes them for unskilful men,
who think when they read of Voluntary motion, that it is only competent to
men; whereas they by the Will mean not the Appetite contracted, but general
and at large, which we call the property of the very Phancie it self, and
animal. This Aristotle every where calls (...), that is Spontaneus, of ones
own accord, and not done at unawars: whence if any will draw it narrower and
call it voluntary in men, and Spontaneous in other creatures, he will not be
against it, upon this occasion there occurrs another greek word (...) which is
rendered propositum, studium, institutum, voluntas; and this seems almost to
signify the same thing which (...), id est, animi appetitus; but differs, that
one is common to Beasts, but will and election is only proper to men, of which
impe^uous motion a Muscle is the Organ. Picholhomenes likes the general
definition, and allows not of the vulgar restriction of voluntary motion: the
word Spontaneous according to Nancelius, being chosen to show the final cause,
and that the definition of a Muscle may be adequate and competent also to the
Muscles of Beasts, in whom they are not moved according to voluntary election;
indeed, as Archangelus observes, Voluntary motion in man, is both Spontaneus
and voluntary; by Spontaneous we must understand the intrinsique Principle of
the parts to be moved, which is Cognition, and such appetition with Brutes is
the sensitive Cognition and appetite; for these in man there is the intelective
cognition and appetite, which is called the will. Yet as Riolanus well
observes, all voluntary motion is Spontaneous, but they are not termini
convertibiles; for, all Spontaneous motion is not voluntary. Indeed Galen
says it boots not, whether you say such motions are done by advice, or freely,
or voluntarily. And although as to its principle, voluntary motion is
distinguished from animal, as it depends upon the command of Reason: yet we
had no need of that distinction, but that we search not only by what
instruments these motions are performed, but whence, and after what manner they
are made. That therefore Physicians call an animal or voluntary motion which
is made by preceding knowledge, either of the Intellect or imagination, whereby
the motive faculty is excited, that it may move the members after a diverse
manner, according to the diversity of the appetite. By all which and diverse
other places of Galen it appears, that voluntary motion appertains only to
Muscles as their office, and that for good reason Muscles are appointed for the
proper instrument, as being their common and proper action, motion proceeding
from a Muscle, as from both a Principal and adequate Agent; although Averrhoes
(in this point crossing Galen) by diverse instances, which Laurentius has
sufficiently answered, labors in vain to prove that a Muscle is not the Organ
of voluntary motion.

Sect. III. Of the nature and Constitution of a Muscle.
AS he that is ignorant of motion, must necessarily be unacquainted with
Nature, as the ^enius of Nature inferrs: so if you know not the moving of a
Muscle, you shall be altogether ignorant of its nature, which does wholly
consis^ in moving; for, moving is a certain action whereby the first habit of
the Muscle is changed: which moving, the operation of a Muscle, is so proper to
Muscles, that Fabricius hence convinces Aristotle of ignorance in Muscles,
that he is silent of them in his History of living creatures, where he
speaks of their moving; which he would never have been, had he been
skilled in them. A Muscle being not ordained to any use, but for the cause of
certain Action, from whence perchance of the Latins called Musculus a movendo
^he movings of many Muscles in lean and mu^culous bodies do evidently ^ppeare
before the skin is taken off. And this moving disposition of the Muscle ^s much
advanced by its proper tempe^ament, being remarkably hot, for as motion begets
heat, so heat is much required to motion, which is performed with greater
strength and intension of ^he mind, than the acts of sense. But the distinction
of Spigelius is worth the ^oting, That, motion cannot scarce (...) way properly
be said the action of ^ Muscle; but rather a certain effect, and ^^e use of
its action: for, the motion is of ^he part into which the Muscle is inser^ed.
And the Muscles are chiefly named from the motion of members which are
^erformed by them, not that they are ^laced in those parts, but that they are
^he Authors of the motions (and conse^uently of the significations) that
ap^eare in those parts. He must therefore ^e well read and exerciz'd in the
nature ^f Muscles, who would know of what Actions and Significations every one
is ^he Instrument: He should diligently in ^very member, out of the Muscles
raise a consideration of the motion of the members: and again out of the
motion of the Muscles, the differences of Muscles, for they are Relatives.
Motions are the motions of certain Muscles, and Mu^cles are the Muscles of
certain motions. Whence so many voluntary motions a^ there are in the Body
distinct in place and time, there are so many Muscles at least, defined by
their terms and circumscriptions; but although for the most part one Muscle is
assigned to one motion, yet there is sometimes two, where a stronger force is
required, sometimes one only Muscle to more motions* And that we might not
always stand in need of so many Muscles as motions, not few of them perform
oblique motions, and with the opposite Muscle of the same stock, straight
motions. So that a Muscle is destinated to all motions. Hence as the word
motion is generally took for the Genus, so action which is a doing motion, or
a factive motion of the parts, is the Species, and the signification which
action signifies is special, when we say with Aristotle, That action is an
impressio^ in the parts moved, or with Galen, Actione^ ^n fieri constituuntur,
which Factive moti^n is best understood with Avicens re^^riction to animal
actions performed by ^he ability of the Muscles; which motive ^ctions when
they appear in the parts ^oved, for the most part are volu^tary, though they
may be also constrained, as ^ne may by violence make me bow my Head to the
seeming signification of as^ent. And as the moveable parts vary, so ^he actions
vary: Some parts are moved ^y themselves, others by the interve^ing of some
other; and again they either change their place, or are stirred up ^n the same
place. The Muscles which ^ave their principle of moving from the ^oule, and
actuate those parts, are moved ^n the same place, and on their movings ^epend
the motion of the parts, which is ^ot so much distinguished by the diffe^ence
of place, forward, backward, up^ard, downward, to the right hand, to ^he left,
or in orb, but also in the figure of ^he part, which is called Scheme. For,
figure ^s the situation of a part in motion. Now ^ince every instrument should
be so dis^os'd that it may most aptly attain the and unto which it was
appointed, and that a Muscle is the instrument of so many voluntary expressions
of the mind. Let us see what neat and elegant composure it has, to give an
apt satisfaction to so noble and important motions. The similar parts which
concur to the construction of a Muscle, are seven in number, to wit, a Vein,
Artery, Nerve, Flesh, Tendon, Membran, and Fat; among which there is a part,
without which the action cannot be done, being that part from which action does
first arise, the root or mansion of the faculty, all the others subministring
to this, concur and conspire to the end of that one action: Therefore it is
not sufficient to know that a Muscle is the Organ of voluntary motion, but
there is need of the acutest edge of wit, to find out that part which exists
as Prince and chief in it, and which is upon commandment* of the Soul,
effective of motion. This prerogative of moving a Muscle, is most justly given
to the Nerve, as having the greater aptness for motion* for all men very well
know* that the part moves not, but the soul, for the instruments move, because
they are moved by it* besides, the instrument^ that serve any faculty, must
derive their orginall from that part from whence such a faculty proceeds; Now
the Nerves have their beginning from the Brain, and are afterward dispersed
here and there and derived to other parts greater or lesser, according to the
diversity of the Action. But there arises no small doubt, because Galen in
many places calls the Nerves the way of the virtue that depends upon the
Brain: whereupon many assuredly take the Nerves to be only the Posts and
Conveyors and not Motors, and had rather call them Illatores, tha^ Motores,
which is far from truth; for although they do bring the intelligence from the
Brain to the Muscles, yet withal they do move and work; and they are the
Intelligencers and way of conveyance until they come unto the moveable parts:
but when they are once entered into the composition of the Muscle they become
Agent^ and Motors. Which Marinelius by most clear and pregnant instances out
of Galen, maintains and manifestly demonstrates to be true. Now the Brain is
the Universal organ of voluntary motion, the great mystery whereof is thus
ordered. The Brain commands as soon as it has judged whether the thing is
be to be avoided or prosecuted, the Nerves commonly called Illatores or the
Posts, for the Intelligence they give, bring the commandment, and Faculty; the
Muscle illustrated with the Animal Spirits obeyes, and moves the part
according to the command of the ^ill: and as a Rider by the moving of his
Raines, guides his Horse; so the force of the Soul residing in the Brain,
moves the Muscles by the Nerves, as with Raines; for the will is like the
Rider, the Nerves to Raines, and the Muscles to the Horse. So it is no motion
until it come to the Muscle, for that is truly motion, which is done by the
intension and remission of the Muscles.

Sect. IIII. That the Appetite or Will is the first efficient cause, but not
the chief cause of motion, the Spirit and Faculty being the more propinque and
conjunct cause, and that besides the commandment of the Will, the endeavor and
intention of the mind is necessary thereunto.
SInce there are diverse motions and Actions performed by the members, through
mediation of the Muscles who have their virtue, from a faculty, by which
Physicians understand that which has a power of Doing or Working, who sometimes
call them Powers sometimes Virtues; a Faculty by the definition of Galen being
the cause of an Action, for every effecting cause is a Faculty. Now since every
work proceeds from some action, and it is necessary some cause* should also
go before every action, it follows with reason, that as Action is the cause of
every work, so some faculty should be the cause of that Action, for nothing is
done without a cause, which is an Axiom in Physique; therefore it is
altogether necessary to consider the efficient Faculty of Action, and the Cause
of work, for how can any thing be done without an Agent Cause? and that which
has the power of working? Now this is the animal faculty which gives sense and
motion, which suggests cogitation, intellection and memory, and which transmits
sense and motion from the Brain, by the conduct of the Nerves, with the
Greeks usually called (...) that is Rationatrix, presiding over all the actions
and motions that flow from our will, that is from Election and Council, and
that by the aid of the Nerves and operation of the Muscles; of the Animal
faculty the motive is a species. Albertus where he speaks of the Exter^our
motive virtue which follows upon the affective, that is upon that which works
the inward motion of the mind, very appositly to our purpose, distinguishes
the motive faculty into the appetitive, the affective, and the motive, the
first commands the part to be moved, the affective and motive perform the
motion of the members, but the affective makes the inward spiritual motion,
the motive makes the exterior corporal motion of the members which represents
the inward motion. But the actions that are done by the most manifest tone of
the Muscles, are those which are produced by that species of motion which they
call Pathetique; for, that causes more violent, extant, and remarkable actions
in all the parts of the body; the internal motion of this Faculty or
Perturbation Averrhoes calls motum electivum; and there is no creature that at
some time or other is not droven to some impetuous action by this inward
agitation or perturbation of his mind; which actions in respect of their effect
are moral, of their supposed Spring, vital, yet the actions of these vital
Ethiques serve the Animal by diverse motions of perturbations, which spring
from ^he Pathetique Energetique or Ethique fa^ulty, which although of it self
it be ^oyde of reason, yet being apt to obey, ^ence there arises some
conflicts be^weene the Rational and Irrational part ^s the Practique
Intellect has these af^ections in Subjection, called pathe^^call when they are
moved by the arbitri^ent of another, which though they be ^eckon'd among
passions, yet in their ^ffects they are actions, and appear so ^o be in their
types and external repre^entations in the face and countenance, and other
parts of the body. The prin^iple of all motion is the Appe^ite: whence the
sense offering what is desi^ed, the motions are done no otherwise then as you
see in Machins, the ^ullyes loosed, one thrusting foreward ^he other, but in
Machins without the mutation of qualityes, but in us the formal cause of
motive heat and spirits is transmitted withal to the parts, hence in anger we
wax hot, in fear and sadness cold, for, all these perturbations are done with
heat and cold, to wit, the thing seen excites the Appetite and this the
Affection, which prepare the instrument of the Action. So tha^ the Appetive
power or will commands but moves not, but after his nod the Motive faculty
arises, which flowing b^ the Nerves produces Motion. Yet F^r^nelius his
distinction is to be considere^ in this business, who will have the Appetite
or will to be the first Efficient cau^^ of motion, but not the Chief caus^
which belongs rather to the Spirit an^ Faculty than to the Appetite, and must
b^ returned thither, and besides the Appeti^^ or will we must find out some
more propinque and conjuct cause of motion; a^mong others the chief reason is,
tha^ when the Palsy has seized on any part because then the Nerves are
destitute (...) the Spirits and Faculty, the most effica^cious or strongest
Appetite or Will can^not procure a motion, and if you bin^

Nerve hard with a cord you may ^ommand what you will, but there fol^owes no
obedience of the Muscle whose Nerve is so stopped, since all notice or
in^elligence of our will is thereby intercepted from arriveing at the Muscle.
Besides, this commandment of the Will seems of little efficacy at all, unless
a ^ertaine endeavor and intention of the ^ind be added unto it as a Coadjutor
or ^ompanion; for if a man would either wrest his eyes diverse ways, or set all
(...) parts together into speaking moti^ns, shall he forthwith effect it,
although ^he instruments be sound and fit for act^on; of which this in sooth is
the only ^ause, that the mind must hoc agere, and cannot take notice of all
things at one ^nstant, nor be intent to every single motion. Therefore the Will
is not only sufficient, but a certain intention also of the Mind is necessary,
to rowze up ^he Motive faculty, otherwise a sleep and languishing in
particulars. Wherefore this Animal Faculty which by the ^ectorship of the
spirit flows from the Brains into every particle, while it is driven foreward
by the command of the will and the endeavor and intention of the mind, effects
the actions which so significantly appear in the Head an^ other parts of the
Body.

Sect. V. That it is strange, but not so wonderful^ that Animal motion should
be performed on such a sudden.
DIverse things are required that the parts should be moved by an Ani^mall or
voluntary motion. For we mu^^ know, how all that is moved, is compa^^ of a
Mover and a Moveable; Since what soever is moved, is moved of some thing when
therefore we are moved, it is neces^sary there should be a compound of ^ moving
and a moveable; the Soul is the Movens metaphoricum, the moved o^ moveable the
Body, or some part of it; for it is the Soul whereby we live and have motion.
And because the Soul moves no^ by a natural propension, but by know^ledge and
for an end; it would be con^sidered with the sharpness of wit, o^ whom it is
moved, and with what instru^ments and medium's it moves the Hea^ and parts of
it, and which are the in^^ruments moved, and the moving Mediums ^etween the
Soul, and the last thing mo^ed. The Principal of local motion (espe^ially
which must be immovable) is the ^oule, Appetition is the Medium that moves ^he
Moveable, the Instrument is the Spirit. ^o that there are six things
concurring ^o these Actions. Immovable as the Soul, ^^moveable partly, and
partly moveable, as ^he Brain, quatenus a Principle; which love, and are
moved, as the Head, which (...) moved by the Brain, and moves the ^arts of the
Face with it; which are mo^ed alone, as the parts of the Face; the ^edium of
the motion, as the Appetition, and Affection, and the Instrument, which (...)
the Spirit; To this effect Cardan, or (...) you will have it as Fabricius ab
Aqua ^end. has d^awn it out of Galen, and Ari^^^tle: All that appertains and
concurs (...) local motion is thus universally or^ered. As soon as the
imagination is for^ed of the object known by the intellect ^r sense, whether it
be to be prosecuted ^r avoided, straightwaies the Appetite is ^oved, which
forthwith excites and moves withal the passions of the Body, either by heating
or refrigerating, eith^^ to attain or avoid: The passions, that i^ heat, cold,
do aptly prepare the motor^ Instruments, as Aristotle speaks ingeni^ously;
Which are according to Galen, the Brain, the Nerves, the Muscles, an^ Joints.
The Brain besides its propose^ work done by it self, and as it were, ^^^red
up by ploughing, and brought fort^ out of its proper substance, as the
Ima^gination, Appetite, and Passions, (...) moreover transmit the Animal Spirit
begotten in and of it self, by the nerve^ his branches, as it were by channels
(...) the muscles, the peculiar allied and pro^per organ of motion; with which
for^ the Muscles wholly affected and illustra^ted attempt the performance of
appare^^ motion. Now, although the Muscles (...) the instruments of voluntary
motion, (...) many other things being required to the act of their motion;
whence that by (...) mediation (so many causes interceding so suddenly a
commotion should (...) wrought and introduced into the Me^^bers, is a thing
full of miracle! (...) has a pretty Simile to illustrate this b^^siness: As
(says he) in the striking of ^^ring of an Instrument, an eight an^wers unto an
eight: So the Motive Fa^ulty by a wonderful providence of Nature moves the
mobile Spirits, and ^hese moved, fly forth with a stupendi^us obedience to
their destinated Organs. As in a Monochord, a Diapason, a Diapente, and a
Diatesseron sound only ^t certain intervals, and in the other ^tops sound not:
So certain parts, as soon as may be, obey the soul, sending particular
Mandates unto them; for, all ^he parts wait upon the soul, and were framed by
Nature to such an aptitude, that being commanded, they presently obey, and are
moved as long as the moving faculty flowing from a principle, is not by some
impediment debarred from them. But without doubt, says Marinellus, this is not
very perspicuous to reason, how we do move at the Nod of the Will, what part
soever we desire, although the most remotest from the head, the foundation of
the moving faculty, and that without any interposition of time; But all
admiration and astonishment will vanish away, if we suppose that which is most
certain, to wit, that the motive faculty while man is awake, or no^ oppressed
with heavy sleep, does perpetually flow and travel to the Nerve^ which are
derived from the Brain, and dispersed through the Laberinth of the Body; which
virtue since it is, as w^ may so say, in the first act in the Toe o^ the Foot,
the Appetite commanding, i^ breaks out into the last act which is motion. Ca^en
gives us an example: no time says he, it found to pass between, when you would
move your Head, and between the Action it self: As it also happens in the
Sense; for in this we expect no time of wounding to feel, but the Knife at
once cuts, and we feel it. And this calls in question that opinion o^ the
whole School of Barbarians, which affirms the Spirits to be transmitted to al^
the Members, and by them the virtue^ carried and conveyed, they being the
proper instrument of the Soul: But if the virtue is communicated by
transmissi^^ of the Spirits they would no way communicate on a sudden, but in
manifes^ time; for the Spirit is Corporeal: Bu^ we so suddenly as we will move
ou^ Head or the parts of it, expecting nothing at all the virtue to have an
influence upon the motion. For, Nature, as Vallesius well observes, never
orders any thing to have a power, only to move once: but she once gives that
which shall have a power to move many times. And therefore when we attempt any
second motion, we have the benefit of that influence which had first enabled
the motory parts.

Sect. VI. That in all outward Actions the Soul commands either manifestly,
or obscurely, and that we are not stirred up to any such motion by Nature, or
Custom.
IT is very hard and difficult to assign a Cause of so different motions. Galen
who was very curious and inquisitive in searching out the cause of the moving
of Muscles, at last ingeniously confesses, that he knew not how the Muscles
were moved: the cause of his doubt was, that since the offices of Muscles were
unknown to Infants, they seemed not apt to demand their endeavor of them,
because it is a voluntary motion; Will is from Knowledge; the end therefore for
which we are moved, and the peculiar Instrument of the motion is to be known:
therefore since none of these are known to Infants, for good reason we ask why
they rather move their lips than their feet, or how they move them? In all
motions that are voluntarily performed, there is nothing more obscure or
doubtful than this; because I see, says he, in children, much more in others,
that when they would make any outward expression with any Member of their body,
thi^ they do voluntarily, and this they do by a Muscle destinated and
appropriated to that motion, although indeed they know not that Muscle, and not
only are they ignorant of this, but even many Physicians; and the consideration
of this mystery drives him to (...) some extraordinary hand of Providence to be
active in it; for his words are; Because I find the Members of the body to b^
moved by a Muscle on which the Creator, who created and fashioned us, and is
always present with us, has prudently bestowed a power of moving when
therefore we would make use o^ any motion, He moves the Muscle which he has
formed and created for that purpose. Scaliger, who takes this confession of
Galen for a qualme of Philosophical modesty, tells Cardan, verily Galen knew
not many things, which yet he would not have others to know that he knew them
not, and with a subtle facility he attempts to resolve this knotty doubt.
Will, says he, is twofold, one of Election, as in wise men: another from
Instinct, as in an Infant newborn, to suck milk, for when he is grown of age,
he will do the same (if need be) with Election, and the force is the same which
serves the Soul for the commodity of the Body, and has a connative Species of
its conservation: The Soul therefore moves the Muscles, and therefore moves
them. (...) thinks the Economy of our (...) to be as 'twere a City go^ern'd by
good Laws, wherein when ^nce the order is established, there is no ^eed of a
secret Guide which must ^epresent at every thing that is done: ^o all parts of
the Body to what uses ^hey were appointed perform their du^^es without any
Teacher, and as Homer feigned that the Instruments of Vulcan moved of their own
accord, and those golden Shields to be of such cunning workmanship that they
moved of themselves: So the Muscles endued with a convenient structure,
perform their work by a certain ingenit virtue. But Marinellus, a Physician
of an excellent judgment, conceives not Scaligers distinction of the Will to
be consonant to reason; for Will always as it is a Will, supposes some
Election, and Election, Cog^ition, which least of all exists in Infants: And
therefore to feign a Will, to Will something unknown, seems to him a vain
forgery. Nor is he satisfied in the example of Aristotle, which is not well
accommodated to the business of voluntary motion. For, a Monarch imposes Laws
upon his Citizens who are renowned with a knowing soul, and keep their Princes
commandment in memory* But the Muscles the moving and the movable Corporeal
parts are, not endue^ with any Cognoscent powers; for so every animated part
were to have ^ proper Soul, which were most absur^ and repuguant to his own
saying, where he infers, that it behooves not there should be a Soul in every
part, but that it exsist in some Principle or chief part of the Body. Besides,
the parts for the performing of motion stand in need of a Spirit or influent
heat that makes the motion, according to its nature, impetuous, or some moving
Faculty that flows from a principle, but this or that is not moved but by
Imagination, or Appetite, the Imagination or Appetite not without the Soul;
whence it is to be concluded, that the Soul always commands the motion, and
the parts moveable do not perform their work from Nature. The Philosopher
makes it plain, that motion is done by the Imagination and Appetite; for, the
passions aptly obey the instrumentarian parts, the Appetite the Passions, and
the Imagination the Appetite; and if in that place he uses the word Nature for
the So^le, as some Commentators affirm, (for the Soul is a certain Nature)
yet that similitude were incongruous enough and unlike, for, the Soul should
be always present and command the parts, and should not move by some
instrument, which the Philosopher denies. Perchance some may object, that
sometimes we know not nor are awar of some actions we do, and therefore they
can not be voluntary nor have any such emphaticall signification; this indeed
is a thing somewhat doubtful and full of ambiguity in some men's opinions, and
has bin the cause to make some to imagine that there are many kind of motions
that depend not upon our will. But they who have taken this doubt into
consideration, have decreed the will to be double, one is (...) the other is
(...), the first is, vigilantium, proper to them that are awake and heed what
they do; the last is Dormientium, or theirs who do a thing in their sleep, or
with less intention of the mind. So that in every motion the will commands
either manifestly or obscurely. Hence it is that we do not always mind the
motion of every particle in our head or face, yet all the gestures of the parts
which we exercise, even when we know not whether we use them or not, are
motions of the soul, since performed by the work of the Muscles. And I
think, says Marinellus, there is no man when he moves after any manner his
whole head, distorts his Face, Eyebrow, lip, or nose, or winkes with one eye,
which sometimes we do not being aware of them, and so against our knowledge and
will, yet none are so simple to think they are not the actions of the soul,
and done by voluntary motion, and that they proceed not from the soul, because
knowledge and command do not so formally precede as in other actions it is
wont before appetite; for the Fancy may do its work and move when we
perceive it not; and it appears by Aristotle, that motion may be commanded the
members although the outward Senses are notably hindered; and whatsoever motion
is done by the commandment of a Faculty, is voluntary, it being without all
controversy, that all motions the soul exercises by the Muscles are arbitrary
and so to be called, they being voluntary which Reason and the Will command,
called Animal, because common to us with Beasts; For, all motion that the
Rational or Irrational Faculty commands the Muscles, is animal, or
arbitrary; for since all motion is either natural or voluntary, and that which
is done by the Muscles is not natural: it follows then it must be accounted
for animal, arbitrary, or voluntary, names which imply all one thing. But all
motion which is done by the contraction of the Muscles to their heads is
commanded the Muscles by the Soul or Appetite, al such motion therefore is and
ought to be called voluntary or animal, for, that contraction of the Muscles
which without the help of any extraneous thing are driven to their Heads, and
move the members into which they are inserted, is the operation of an animated
body quatenus animated, wherefore such motions of the Muscles cannot be done
by any other thing, the Soul not cooperating with it: For, al actions equally
proceed from the Soul, but receive their Specifique difference from the
instruments; Wherefore these are both animal and voluntary motions if the name
be put for them both, but if you would call that only voluntary, which is done
with our will and assent, and not against our wills, you will be compelled to
exclude many other motions performed by the Muscles from the number of
voluntary motions. Galen endeavors to salve this doubt; why we do these
voluntary actions as 'twere not wittingly or willingly, or as being aware of
them, not presuming to have found the cause, but to speak a little more
probably: Because, says he, we are not intent with our whole mind upon them,
as many have done actions which they forget to have done in fits of anger and
passion, having made but a slight and superficial impression in their minds,
as madmen perform many voluntary actions which yet they remember not when they
come to themselves; whereas to some actions we adhibit a more indulgent heed,
when no way disturbed nor distracted with cares, we are not drawn away to
desist from the motion begun; for, Care, the Contemplation of some thing,
Custom, or some affection of the mind, may prove impediments to the knowledge
of the Command of the will; for if our Cogitation be very intent upon a thing,
so that it slights other things which had intended it, it errs from its proper
end, which often happens to men when they intend a journey to a certain place,
and many times being engaged in other thoughts, do pass it: Notwithstanding
it is a thing hard enough to believe, that any one should command and not know
that he does command, and therefore some have dared to affirm, that the
beginning of a motion depends upon the command of the will; but the progress
of a journey to be done by Custom and Aptitude of parts, since many at that
time are turmoyl'd with diverse cares: but it is better to affirm the Cause of
such error to be by reason of the mind detained by some cogitation. And with
Marinellus we may wonder as much, how such motions are many times done in our
sleep, which we forget to have done in our sleep, the soul then working
obscurely; for when we awake, we cannot tell whether we had moved any part of
our face or no, and so by oblivion are soon induced to say, they were done
without our will or privity, which is the case of your Noctambuli (or as
Senner^us had rather call them, Somnambuli,) who in their sleeps rise out of
their Beds, walk and perform many actions and gestures whereof there is
mention every where among Physicians, which gestures and actions are done
unwittingly, and when they awake in the morning they remember no such matter,
animal motion being stirred up in them by force of a stronger imagination,
which are performed by the benefit of the motions of the Hand feet and the
other organs serving to animal motion, commanded by the Locomotive pricked
forward by the Appetite, stirred up by the Fancy, which taking notice of some
object offered unto it in sleep, tenders it to the Appetite either to be
avoyed or embraced. To which the command of Reason and the will do concur
with the locomotive power, although more obscurely and darkely, the action of
imagination being stronger in sleep, but that of rationation, which should
direct and moderate the ^hansie is more obtenebrated, the actions of those who
sleep, and those who dream seeming not to differ, but that these rise, the
others lying in their beds doing the same things. Another ob^ection may be,
that many of these speaking motions of our Head, Face, and other parts of our
body are many times done by custom and a habit, rather than by a voluntary
motion. Indeed, Zinguer reckons custom among the accidents of the
Isntrumental cause of the motive faculty, and that it is as 'twere the Vicar
of the will and sometimes the Arbiter. But the Master of the subtilties laughs
at Cardan for his definition of the double Cause of motion, one the Soul and
the Muscles, the other custom. You in vain says he, multiply things, you in
vain bring a name for a thing: For, what is custom? if I should ask, you
would spend above two days in deliberation what you were to say, and it would
fall out well if you could then come off with credit. Custom is nothing else
but a habit, but a habit is not the cause of motion, but a quality added to the
motion: because it so adheres to the members, that as Aquilio without C. o^ his
own accord does presently answer, brings forth its actions as they are to be
done without any inquisition. Custom, indeed, and the aptitude of parts do
advance and help forward the doing or perfecting of some motions; and it is
wort^ our admiration, to see in a Chironomer, who has his soul in his Fingers,
the Muscles of his Hand should be directed so swiftly to the Nerves of his
instrument, while it may be he is afflicted in mind, his hand being droven by
the command of his will to such motions, all the ready variations of his
cunning fingers being done by the Nods of the Soul, though unknown unto him;
unknown, by reason of long custom, by which such actions become most easy. The
modesty of Gal^n will conclude this matter very well. Rashly to judge these
motions is ignorance, promptly to pronounce them not voluntary is rashness,
and there is no just cause why we should recede from what is evident, and
there are evident judgments to be made of voluntary motion; the causes we find
not, because we follow not particular actions. He that denies his belief is
void of sense. He is rash that pronounces of uncertainties. He that for the
obscurity that is in these, has those in suspicion which are clear, is a
Sceptique and of them that delight in Doubts. He that not only suspects but
studyes to evert those which are clear, for the obscurity that is in them, is
an arrant fool.

PATHOMYOTOMIA OR A Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections.
Being an Essay to a new way of describing the operative and significative
Muscles of those Affections, which are more Conspicuously emphaticall in the
Demonstrative Actions of the Head and Face.

THE PROEM. The Prerogative of the Head in point of Animal and significant
motion.
MAn who in respect of the variety and excellency of his Actions is a most
perfect Creature, has a Body withal composed of diverse parts, answerable to
the variety of his Actions; and every way fitted to signify and explane the
affections of his Mind; among which, the most eminent and obvious part, the
Head, wherein the whole man seems to dwell, has a prerogative in point of
significant motion, and being the Forum of the Affections, has many advantages
for declarative Action of the subordinate and more private parts of the Body.
And all this by a good right, as being the Root of the Affections, and the
principle of motion. Hence the instruments of voluntary motion, the Muscles,
disposed in the Head and Face, are so honorable and remarkable, that if man
were deprived of them, he would look like a Socraticall Statue; for, his Face
would be alwai^s in one fixed posture, there might be Facies but no Vultus, or
voluntary explanation of his mind: But it would be like a Cabinet lokct up,
whose key was lost. No certain way of entrance into his mind to be found, and
so Momus his Cavil would be just; all the inward motions and affections of his
mind would be obscured in silence, and become altogether invisible, the
countenance, without the moving virtue of the Muscles, ordained in time to
measure out the passions and affections of the mind, remaining like a watch,
whose spring or Principle, and the wheels that served for motion, were taken
out.

Memb. I. Of the Muscles, the instruments of voluntary motion whereby the
general significations of the Head are performed.
ALthough the Brain it self is not moved by a proper Animal motion, and so
needs no Muscle: Yet the rest of the Head requires diverse motions, both ^n
respect of the whole, as in respect of certain parts, or Members, which as
well as their chief are so called, for that ^hey have no proper circumscription
on ^very side, nor are every way conjoined ^o others; more especially, that the
whole ^ead with its comprised parts, by the be^efit of certain Muscles might be
enabled ^o move, and by motion, to express the ^ffections of the mind. Now the
Head ^eing (as all Bodies are) in a place, its ^otions with other corporal
motions must be local; therefore the Head, ^y the Ishmos of the Neck, as it
were ^icking to the continent of the Body, as (...) a Base or Center, is
apparently moved ^y many affections and energeticall mo^^ons of the mind; being
oftentimes moved in a place, from a place, to a place, and by a place; but
observing still the same center, to wit the rest of the Body, which persists
unmoved, as likewise do all the parts of the Head and Face, when their
potentiall abilityes of signification are reduced into act, by any affection or
pathetical motion of the mind. But as members, so some actions are compounded,
and some simple; the compound soon appear; the simple do last occur; for
first we perceive Nods the compound motion of the Head, then the more simple
motions, to wit the contractions and extensions of the Muscles where of those
Nods consist, and which are the singular parts that effect, or assist the
declarative motions of the head: Some of which instruments and their motions,
in lean and musculous men do evidently appear without any dissection even
through the veil of the skin. These Muscles the instruments of voluntary
motion, by which the general discourses o^ the Head are performed, are usually
reckoned seven pair; whereof every one has its Action, some being placed
before, and some Diametrically opposite behind, and of the Muscles of every
pair^ one takes up the right side, another the left. Those Muscles are primary
and serve the proper motions of the Head, which are done, the Head moved, the
Neck unmoved. Archangelus calls these that attend upon the private motions of
the Head, Musculos Cephalicos, capital or moving the head. And, the Cylinder
of the Neck although a medium between the Head and breast yet most properly
referred to the head in respect of the common motions. The Muscles that are set
over the conduct of the Neck accomplish ^he common motions of the Head, which
^re those which follow the motion of the Neck, which motions are secundary and
^y accident, for, the Neck being moved, ^he Head necessarily follows, and
ther^ore with as many proper motions as the Neck is moved with, with so many
se^undary motions is the Head; these Arch^ngelus calls Musculos Cervicales,
from moving the Neck; they are four pair; Which as a kind of Chorus
encircling it ^n a Ring, embrace the Head and Neck, ^eing ready pressed to obey
the Becks and ^odding Commandments of the will. The ^oure first pair also of
the Muscles of the Back are subservient to the motions and significations of
the Head and Neck, and are Musculi adjutorij, reckond by Vesalius and others,
among the Muscles of the Head and Neck, although not seated in those parts. The
chief commodity of the Neck was to sustain the various motions of the head,
wherein there is a new thing and truly admirable, that in the joint of the head
the greatest bone is coupled and put upon the least almost, whose nature is so
obscure, that it is controverted by many, And Galen, the Miracle of nature, and
the most exquisite Interpretor of motion, in weighing the construction of any
part, requires not so learned and witty an^ Auditor as in the motions of the
Head, and with the difficulty of the matter affrighteth his Reader, as
Vesalius, in thi^ point of Articulation (unworthily scoffing) observes of him.
Notwithstanding this is agreed on by both sides, that every motion is performed
upon the first or second vertebra of the Neck, whereof in lean and consumed
men, we may make an experiment, if we put the index of our Hand about the pit
of the hinder part of the head, or nape of the neck; for we shall then
perceive the first and second vertebra to be more moved than any of the rest;
the motions of the other joints are neither so valid nor manifest, and very
difficult to observe, so that they cannot be discerned in the very act, by
every man; So obscure are their motions, that unless you bend your whole mind,
there is no comprehending of them: but the motions of the Head upon the Neck,
which express diverse affections of the mind, are so manifest and evident, that
they are hid from no man. The structure of the joint being very remarkable?
for, sage Nature moderatrix of all opportunities, when she foresaw that many
motions were necessary for the Head, and that it could not undergo them
unless the bones were round and committed to a simple Article loosly bound,
knowing that the security of construction would be repugnant to the variety and
agility of motion, and sollici^ous for the noblest part, though she always in
the first place casts for the dignity of the Action, and in the second for the
security, consulting for both in this ^oynt, chose rather security, than the
variety and agility of motion; for, seeing they were incompatible and could not
stand together if it were tide loosely and free to turn every where; she gave
it a few motions and those safe, rather than many with the peril of the Head:
and because the scope of variety was not to be contemned, therefore provident
Nature what she could not with the magnitude and laxity of one Article perform,
she recompensed with two smaller, and a multitude of Muscles. For which cause
no motion seems to be wanting to the Head. But although the construction or
the articulation and composition of the Neck is provided for local and
voluntary motion, yet there is no Action of Articles but only a Passion; for
so much as the Article or joint acts nothing but only is moved, but to be
moved, is to suffer, when not by its proper motion, but by something placed
without it is moved, not by it self, but by the Muscle; wherefore if the
Action of this joint is a motion, it is not done by acting, but by suffering,
and the motions and significations are to be attributed to the Muscles which
are the isntrumental cause. Lastly, that the Head in violent motions and
agitations might not go beyond its bounds and suffer a Luxation, which is
deadly, there are four strong ligaments to establish and better secure their
motions, which are of great moment to be known exactly by those who would
rightly perceive the motion of the Head, or dispute of their significations:
Provided and furnished with these accommodations, the Head can with what
equipage is requisite, at an instant, attend the motion of the mind, and
at^empt and dispatch all the important negociations and patheticall affairs of
^he will or Appetite.

Dissect. I.
WHen we assent, affirm, yield, grant, vote, confirm, confess, admit,
allow, or approve of a thing, etc. we ^re wont to Nod or bend our head
forward. Galen ascribes this motion to the Head, where he says, Flexio fit
annuendo: which Vesalius expounding says, He means of that motion whereby we
bend or incline our Head forward in assent or approbation. The natural reason
of which motion in these senses is, an approving which is made by the
Imagination seeing o^ hearing somewhat done or said which accords very well,
and this power remains in the Brain or forepart of the Head wherein the Cell
and Seat of the Imagination is, when any of these thing give it contentment,
suddenly it moves the same, and after it all the Muscles o^ the Body,
especially of the Head the chief Sphere of its activity, and so many times we
allow of witty sayings (...) actions, by bowing down, or Nodding of the Head.
The Muscles appointed in a Right motion of the Head to exhibit the yielding
flexibility of the will, an^ the upper portion only of the pain of Muscles,
commonly called mastei^dean or the mamillary pair, because inserted into the
Dug-like process of the Temples, arising with a double original,
distinguished with a certain cavity, whereof one begins at the top of the
Sternon, the other proceeds from the higher part of the Clavicula where it i^
joined to the Sternon; Seated in the forepart of the Neck under the squa^^
Muscle of the Cheeks: For when this part of the aforesaid Muscle enjoyes the
action alone, the Head it self only by the first fibers which are infixed
into the first and second vert^bre, is moved to assent. Which portion, insooth,
has sometimes a peculiar and clear circumscription or delineation which
answers in proportion to those small Muscles which are behind: for since the
significations that are performed by the Head alone, are very short and light,
and the Head being heavy, by reason of its weight is easily depressed or let
down ^o the anterior parts, two such small Muscles were sufficient for this
action. If any man would make trial to find after what manner this significant
motion of ^he Head is done, having got a fresh hu^ane carcass, the other parts
besides ^he ligaments of the vertebres being taken away, driving the Head
foreward and backward with his hands, He shall ^asily perceive it to move first
by it self, and shall thence conjecture the small Muscles inserted straight
into the Head, (...) be the chief autho^s of the motion. Note that whereas this
just flexion of assent is caused by the Heads urging and impelling the second
vertebre by the benefit of the ligament of the Tooth, the Muscles on each side
working together: So if the Right Muscle only be contracted, the Head drawn by
oblique fibers, obliquely assents Leftward: the Left Muscle only working, the
Head assents forward, but to the Right Hand; which you may see represented in
the raines of a Horse. But nothing can better show you how to conceive of the
office and function of these Muscles, than if you should put a garter athwart
about the hinder part of the Head, bringing it from above the ears on each
side-down to the breast; for if you afterward draw both the end^ of the garter
together, the Head will give a just Nod of assent: but if you pull the ends by
turns one after another, you will cause Collateral Nods, such as we us^ when
the parties to whom we make the sign are on one side of us. Now fin^ these
Small Muscles, commonly accounted the upper portion of the mastoidean (...)
Mammillary pair (though their prope^ circumscription seem to give them the
Delineations of a Distinct pair) affor^ the Dug-like process of indulgency,
expressed by assenting Nods, giving them a proper name from the affection and
signification of the mind they help to exhibit, they may be called Parannuens,
the assenting, or yielding pair, or the muscles of Approbation. When the Head
in assenting is more manifestly bent forward, and compelled to Nod, then the
whole Mastoidean paires work together, the lower portion of those Muscles being
most active in the fuller Declaration of the mind which appear under the
Oesophagus, a pair seen before the carcass is excoriated in lean, and old
men, and men living, being those which in antique Coins were observed with so
great diligence by the Ancients; the profoundnesse of this pair yielding a
signature of a deeper assent, and might for Distinction be called par
affirmans, the affirming pair, or the Muscles of Concession.

Dissect. II.
WHen we would bow low, as in assenting with reverence, or to adore, worship,
or profess a submissive respect, the whole Neck with the Head is inclined and
lowly bent forward, in which large expression of the Head and Neck, after the
second vert^bre the third is moved, then the fourth and all the rest, the lower
the vertebre is so much the obscurer motion it obtaines, and the last the
shortest. This motion is performed by the Benders of the Neck, which are two
pair, the first pair commonly called Longus, lying under the Oesophagus, is
long, arising with a sharp and fleshie beginning from the Body of the fifth
vertebre of the Thorax, on the fore part where it is joined to the Rib; this
ascending upwards, is annexed collaterally to all the Bodies of the Vert^bres,
even to the first of the Neck where both the Muscles touch one another, and
with an acute and nervous tendon it ends in the process of the first vertebre,
which is the standart or proportion to the body of the other Vertebres, that
the Neck might be bent. The second pair of Benders commonly called Triangulate
has a fleshy and large original from the first and upper Rib of the Thorax,
afterward maintaining its course toward the Face, it grows narrow, and is
terminated with oblique fibers, in the transverse processes of all the
vertebres of the Neck where they look inward; for, these muscles working
together, bow the Neck right forward, and so consequently the Head. The first
long Muscles which so appear active in these Declarations of the Mind might by
our scope of Denomination be called Par reverentiale, the Reverentiall pair;
The other commonly called Triangulare, for distinction, Par adorans, the Muscle
of Worship or Adoration, or the Muscles of the yoke of submissive obedience;
and that well grounded upon the natural Philosophy of Gesture; The bowing down
of the Neck with the Head, naturally implying a professed submission, even to
the taking up of the yoke of obedience. This motion may be also collateral,
when either of the paires work alone, for then they incline the Neck and Head
forward toward the side of the contracted Muscle.

Dissect. III.
WHen we lightly dislike, refuse, deny, or resent a thing, we use a cast-up
backward Nod of our Head, a motion diametrically opposite to the forward motion
of assent; and this signification of the mind is performed by the extension of
the Head according to Gal^n, Extensio fit abnuendo. Vesalius taking upon him to
expound Galens meaning in these words, says, they are meant of that motion of
Denial wherein we reflect or recline our Head after that manner as the
Thracians and most of your Cretans even at this day seem Abnuere, that is, to
refuse, and deny; for when they refuse or deny, they move their Heads
straight backward, and lift and cast it up, not as we refuse and deny, who
drive the head about in a circumduction. Here Divine Vesalius (as Fallopius his
superstitious Admirer often calls him) the Anatomique Argus, who never took a
nap in Dissection, appears guilty of a drowzie Nod of Cavillation, in making
so blind a Comment upon so clear a Text. But indeed, the luck of his divine
wit hereabouts failed him and proved mortal, which has caused such great
Digladiations among Anatomists, as to divide them into Sects, one part
endeavoring to maintain his Cavil against Galen in point of articulate
motion, according to his provincial garb of refusing and denial: The other
strongly repulsing the Calumny. But as to the signification of the affection of
the mind exhibited by this gesture, none have minded it so far as to undertake
a vindication; which since it is not only a mistake of the mind of the noble
Pergamite, but comes overthwart to endanger the principles of our universal
and natural Language of the Head, I am engaged (saving the reverence due to so
great an Anatomist) to make head against him, and to say, Vesalius non vidit
omnia. To which purpose, an inference from his own words in that place will
serve; For, Vesalius speaking of those anterior Muscles that officiate in the
motion of Assent, says, they are altogether contrary to the first four pair
of Muscles placed in the hinder seat of the Neck; neither can any thing so
exactly show the function of the posterior Muscles, as those Muscles of Assent,
for they have the same motion forward, as the other have backward. Being their
motions, then, are Diametrically opposite, so are their significations: for if
we use, as we do, the flexion of the Head to show our assent, and that properly
according to the universal inten^^on of Nature; the contrary motion to that,
must as naturally imply dislike, or dissent, or resentment. And if we Nod from
us when we bid one go, Nodding to us is a gesture of invitation, and calls and
bids them come unto us; the first significations being made by the cooperation
of the same Muscles of assent, as likewise the Nod of Command, Direction, and
Demonstration are; the second, by them he grants to have an Analogicall
contrariety of situa^ion and motion unto the other; which from thence might be
called Musculi imperantes, Dirigentes, Demonstrantes, and Repellentes, the
inviting or repelling Muscles. And if Galen had said, Flexio fit repellendo,
extensio fit advocando, or invitando, this would have pleased Vesaliu^, who
seems to me in this matter guilty of that fault, which Fallopius grown wiser,
and leaving off Jurare in verba magistri, is bold to accuse him of, that is, He
rather carps at Galens words than his meaning; and here he seems to quarrel
at the signification of the word Abnuendo, as if Galen had improperly used that
word with restriction to a National garb of speaking by the Head; whereas
extensio fit ab^uend^, according to Galens true meaning has an undoubted
reference to the universal and natural way of denial or dislike, which all
Nations of the world agree in, being as common to other Nations, and so to
Vesalius his Countrymen, as to the Thracian and Cretans: And he might have as
well expounded Flexio fit Annuendo, to have been a Thracian or Cretane
property. So that Galens extensio fit Abnuendo (even in the natural
universality of its signification) may be rationally maintained. Now the
instruments of this extension according to Spigelius, whose description (to
avoid the confusion and contradiction I find among other Anatomists) I here
follow, are four pair, commonly called the extenders of the Head, whereof the
first pair, known by the name of Par triangulare, Scalenum, and so called from
their figure, and by some Splenium for the resemblance it has to the Spleen,
affording thence a signature for a Splenetique motion of dislike, arising with
a twofold beginning, one proceeds from the tops of the fifth, fourth, third,
second, and first vertebre of the Breast: The other from the five Snigs of the
lower vertebres of the Neck, and with somewhat oblique fibers are inserted into
the midst of the occipitium which is between the ears. The second pair of
these Extenders, subject to the other, is known by the name of Trigeminum, or
Compositum, because endued with a threefold origination, that it seems to b^
compounded of three Muscles; the first has an acu^e beginning, proceeding from
the tranverse process of the fourth and fifth vertebre of the Breast, and is
inserted into the midst of the hinder part of the Head, therein seeming to have
a signature to accommodate a sharp crossenesse of dislike, which rising from
under the Spleen, and ascending to the Breast, and from thence to the Head,
has therein made an impression of resentment; the other arises from the Snig
of the seventh Vertebre of the Neck, and grows into one with the other before
its insertion; the third coming out from the transverse processes of the first
and second vertebres of the Breast, is strongly fastened into the hinder part
of the Head. The third pair commonly called Recti majores, The right Majors,
does presently occur under these; and proceed from the top of the second
vertebre of the Neck, and are inserted into the hinder part of the Head. The
fourth pair called Recti minores, seated under the greater, arising from the
knob of the first vertebre of the Neck, which holds Analogy with the Snigs of
the other vertebres of the Back, and end in the middle occiput under the ends
of the Recti majores. By the help of all these Muscles (whose Dualities,
multiplicities of principles, and divisions inserted into the Head are not
without some signature of disagreement, and dislike) if one pair of them work
together in Consort, the Head is extended straight backward, to disallow, or
deny; I^ one of them work alone, we refuse and d^ny somewhat obliquely, which
oblique averseness answers in the proportion of contraries, the forward
collateral Nod of assent, and indulgency. And it is observable, that the long
and great Muscles are always first moved in this motion of Refusing, and
Denial, but where the Head is extended after a manner to an acute angle, the
Right relieve the other, for, the long Muscles cannot perform that action, but
it is ever done by the smaller Muscles; which we will therefore call Musculos
Abnuentes, the Refusing, and Denying Muscles. But before I end this Section, I
must crave leave to smile by way of observation at a great Anatomist, whom I
find running away with an error instead of a conceited verity, and one of the
sworn Vassals to his judgment, strongly following the Heu and Cry after him;
Who having absurdly robbed Galens universal Abnu^ of a Muscle, or part of a
Muscle, under pretense of a Thracian, or Cretan Recusant, to enrich his Country
Abnuo, has by his envious robbery committed a contempt against the Sanction of
Nature, who intending the Head to be the Balance of the Soul, wherein the
Cell of Judgment, seated in the midst, as the Tongue of the Beam, to keep the
Head in aequilibrio, until the Judgment moved it to incline, or rise, has to
that end (for Counter-ballance*) planted many Muscles behind to counterpoise
the inclination the Head has, by reason of its weight, to propend or weigh
down in too easy assents; by reason whereof man is equally disposed in respect
of the Organ, according as he sees good, either to approve, or dislike. To
speak plainer, Vesalius taking the fourth part of the Muscles Trigemini, which
Fallopius makes an exact and distinct Muscle, which the Will uses lightly to
dissent or refuse by Nodding backward, Vesalius joines this in commission with
the Muscle commonly called Superior oblique, and makes it serve to Deny by a
circumduction of the Head, from whom Fallopius justly dissents, with Arguments
well grounded upon the Philosophy of voluntary or arbitrary motion, and its
important significations; discovering wi^hall the occasion of this Vesaliar*
D^c^pti^n. Against which abhorred Solecisme of Vesalius, Fallopius argues after
this manner. If, says he, the Head cannot be moved round, unless after the
moving of the first Vertebre, which is obvolved about the Tooth of the second,
it will be necessary that it should be first moved by this Muscle, and upon its
moving, the Head also should be turned: but this cannot be done; Therefore it
does follow, that it is not the Instrument of moving the Head round. For let us
look to its rising and insertion [which indeed is the rule to discover the
course of a Muscles Motion] if the Vertebre is to be turned round, the rising
or original of it will be in the occipitium, and the insertion in the
transverse process of the said Vertebre. Now let this Muscle act, if in the
mean season the Head may be moved, it cannot act, because there is need of the
rest of that very part from whence it arises if it must draw: If therefore it
be granted that the Head may rest, the Muscle working, the Vertebre will be led
about, but upon that motion the Head also is wheeled round; therefore it will
happen that the Head together and at the same time may be moved and rest. But
let us grant the Head to be moved when this Muscle acts [ Denial.] Now the
quaere is, whether it must be moved with a contrary, or the same motion? If it
may be moved with a contrary, a concourse without doubt will ^nsue, and so the
Head will not be moved upon the motion of the Vertebre; because the Vertebre
would be agitated to the Right Hand, and the Head to the Left, by contrary
motion, whereby they would concur and meet together. But let it be the same
motion, that both are carried to the Right Hand; I ask again (says he) which
shall have the precedence in motion, the Head, or the Vertebre? It Is likely it
will be answered, the Vertebre should precede, because that is moved per se,
but the Head by accident upon its moving: But the principle or beginning of
moving comes from the Head, because the Muscle arises from thence, which draws
it, therefore it will follow, that the vertebre is moved by the Head; and not
the Head by the vertebre, which is against his own opinion. Yet some may
answer, that the Head is driven round by this Muscle, beginning at the vertebre
and ending in the Occiput: but if this were granted, it would follow, that this
Muscle should move the Head per se, and not by the motion of the vertebre, and
in its proper Article, which Article according to Vesalius is unfit for
circular motion. Wherefore if we should grant this Muscle to serve for the
circular motion of Denial, [and not the extensive] some of these discommodityes
will necessa^ily follow; which are destructive to that true, nay most true
opinion of the Head in orb by accident.

Dissect. IIII.
WHen we would mock, deride, contemn, disdain, threaten or rebuke, we use an
ironicall motitation or wagging Nod by the flexion and reflection of our Head
in turns in a quick succession, both which motions, peculiar to the Head, are
done in sequence by the Muscles of Assent and Denial making as 'twere a mixed
motion, and that emphatical and proper enough, for an ironie, where the first
action imports approbation, and the second coming in the interim and
immediately upon the nick of it before it is fully done, by a contradictory
motion compounds it into an ironie. Like unto this, is that motion of assent in
old men, from whence the Adage came, Omnia omnibus annuit, touching the
paraliticall indulgency of old men, who are not by the complexion of Age so
free, but they instantly recall their graunts, for in them this Nu^us and
Renutus signify nothing, while that which is by transferring downwards, always
succeedes that which is done upwards, and the downward motion again received
of the upward, the motion is made double and compounded, while the Head
interchangeably changes place, which trembling is a voluntary motion depraved
by ^eason of an equal fight between the moving faculty, and the gravity of the
moveable part, arising from the imbecility of the moving Function, which Galen
approves. Now of voluntary motion which is undergone, not according to Nature,
there is one form which is called Tremor, which he proves again, saying,
motion in those who will not move a member, we call involuntary, but in them
affected with trembling, the motion comes not but from the command of the will;
but is said depraved and not according to Nature, although it depend upon the
empire of the will, for it wants that convenient motion intended by the
institution of the will: for although it be altogether excited ab impetu, yet
the motion perishes, by reason of the imbecility of the faculty. There are
some found who deny the Impetus can possibly be separated from the Tremor,
because they sometimes see the whole Head to tremble and to be shaken, no will
or disposition to move concurring therewith: But they seem not to know, that
to keep any part erect, the commandment of the Will is required; because
muscles in this, scarce otherwise then in other functions, are strained; and
therefore (...) you rest a trembling Head upon a cushion, you shall soon stay
the trembling, and free it from that motitation. And ^ence it is that we know
this motion of ^he Head is voluntary.

Dissect. V.
WWen we reject, refuse, or show an extraordinary dislike, we use to ^urne away
our Head. This is the acti^n Vesalius would have so proper and ^eculiar to his
Countrymen in point of ^efusall and denial; Which indeed is like natural and
common to all Nati^ns, that of Extension, which Galen ^peaks of, and this of
Circumaction being ^oth significant to show averseness of the Mind, unless
you, as Vesalius seems to ^o, will imagine this way of rejection and denial
by the Circumduction or turn^ng away of the Head to be the more ^mphaticall of
the two, by reason of the obliquity of the Gesture. Yet in the other Natural
way of R^fusall or Denial by the Extension of the Head, ^lthough it is done so
straight backwards, the same Muscles when one of ^ pair work alone have a
power to effect some obliquity, which they often put in practice upon this
occasion. The Instruments of this oblique motion of Refusal and Denial are
the two pair of circumagent Muscles, commonly called the Oblique Superior and
Inferior, from their situation, both of them lying under the Right Extenders,
to which they are correspondent in substance and form, exhibiting thereby a
signature of some vicinity and likeness in the substance of their
significations. The upper pair from the middle of the Occipitium arising neer^
the outer side of the Recti majores obliquely descending, is transversly
inserted into the top of the transverse process of the first Vertebre of the
Neck. The inferior pair derived from the Spine of the second Vertebre of the
Neck ascends obliquely, and is inserted with the former into the transverse
process of the first Vertebre. These when they are contracted drive round
circularly toward the Spine backward the first Vertebre upon the second,
whence it comes to pass that the Head consisting thereupon, is together
circularly moved. But because these are somewhat small, the two first extending
^aire, when one of them acts, does ^ssist the motion; and it seems there is
^reat community and reciprocal enter^ourses of relation between the Right
^xtenders and the Oblique Superior, for according to some, when the Oblique
^uperior, that is the whole pair, does ^ork together, their Office is to help
^he Head straight backward to act a ^^ght Refusal or Denial. Well, since the
^bliquity of these Muscles, their ob^^que descension and ass^nsion, trans^^rie
insertion into transverse processes ^o all speak allegorically by their
cor^^spondency of signature a serviceable (...) for the oblique expression of a
^ejecting mind, turning away by a Refu^^ng gesture, they might be called
^usculi Rejectionis, the Muscles of Re^^ction, Improbation, or Disallowance, or
(...) Recusants: But most properly, Mus^^li Renuentes; for whereas Abnuo, and
^enuo, are both words significant to ^^port a Refusing or Denying by Nod^^ng of
the Head; Whereas Galen says, ^ciensio fit abnuendo, I would say Circumactio,
or rather, Semi-circumactio (...) Renuendo, which would not only serve for a
Distinction, but if Critiques would give me leave to express my ^antsie in
this matter, which is a little out of their reach, it would prove as proper to
express this Refusal or Dislike perform^^ by a backward semicircumduction, as
(...) does to signify that Refusal or Dislike i^ exhibited by a straight
backward extensi^^ of the Head. Wherefore to adapt (...) new Nomenclature to
the ancie^^ model; whereas in that, these Muscle are called Obliquus superior,
and Obli^quus inferior; according to our Doctrine and scope of Denomination,
they (...) pass by the name of Re^uens superior, an^ Renuens inferior, the
superior and inferi^or Muscles of Dislike, or the upper an^ the lower
Recusants. That this Actio^ of the Recusant Muscles should not (...) undertaken
without understanding (...) judgment, we have a hint, in that (...) motion is
so proper to the Head, that (...) Neck is destitute thereof; for, this mo^tion,
wherein the Head is driven (...) rolls as a wheel upon an Axeltree, (...) a
circular motion (though the^^ is no exact circular motion in the Head but
semi-circular only, for we cannot ^urne our Head in orb, that is quite round)
may be done the Neck quiescent, if you strive to look by turns to the Right
Hand and to the Left by a circumversion of your Head; for after what manner
soever you order the posture of your Neck, this semi-circumaction of the Head
is commodiously performed. For when men bend their Neck and the Head inclined
therewith, as She^pe-biters in their shameful fear, and rust^ck bashfulnesse
are wont to do; Or if the Neck be extended, as in Refusal and Dislike it
usually is, and in fear, and jealousy, and dread, which makes a man
circumspect, and to wear his Beard (as the Spanish Proverb says) upon one
shoulder; Or if the Neck be Loftily extended, as in proud men, who look aside
upon men, as they say, over one shoulder; Or whether the Neck be bent down
laterally to one shoulder, as in ^anguishing of the Mind; in all these we may
easily maintain the gyre or circumaction of the Head: which ability of motion
was ordered to the Head out of an obsequious regard to the eye, for that which
is behind cannot otherwise be seen by the eye, unless the conversion of the
Head relieved the Defect, and when we need more then this Capital
Semi-circumvolution, the thighs help to turn the Body round. So that the
mind is every way fitted with Muscles for circumspection and wary heed. So
that the same Muscles which before were called the Recusants, might in
reference to these affections of the mind, be called Musculi Timoris, Pudoris
Rusticani, Contemptus. The Muscles of Fear, Rustique Bashfulnesse, and
Contempt, or amici circumspectionis, the Friends of Circum^pection.

Dissect. VI.
LIght Displeasure makes us shake our Head, and casts it into a short Ague of
Distaste; which gesture we also use when we Dissallow, chide, forbid, rebuke,
condemn, doubt, lament, condole, repent, etc. which action is nothing else but
a sloe and definite trembling, and an effect arising from the same cause that
trembling and horror do, namely from the retyring of the Spirits but in a
less degree. The muscles by whose operation this important motion is produced
are the oblique Muscles of Dislike, moving reprocally by short turns, and so
duplifying the single motion of oblique Disallowance, into a redoubled and more
ample circle of Distaste. The quick succession of the same oblique Muscles of
one side working alone, and their fellows on the other side taking it by
turns to maintain the rotation, accomplisheth (also) that motion of the
enraged and frantic fury of the mind which wheels and swings about the Head
in the voluntary and giddy vertigo of Frenzy or Bacchanalian fury. And
because some latter Anatomists have gone about to take away this act of
circumversion from the Head, if you desire to see ^his motion, having gotten a
Humane Carcass, endeavor to remove all the ^arts which are laid over the Head
and Neck (the ligaments only left) then ^ut that part of the skull which is
cove^ed with hair with a saw in orb, and ^raw out the Brain with a portion
of ^he Spinall marrow, afterward bid another to comprehend the skull on both
sides with his Hands, and to hold firm the first and second vertebre, that
while you shake the Head you may try whether it may be moved after this manner
to the sides and in orb; insooth this motion although in it self somewhat
obscure, and is tried in a dead Body, which is not only destitute of natural
heat, but has also by reason of cold the ligaments almost contracted, yet it
is not so small, that it may not answer these small Muscles which cause it, and
which have no other office than to accommodate the significations of this
motion.

Dissect. VII.
IN Supplication, tenderness of love and humility; servile respect, flattery,
reverence, and obsequious regard, etc. ^ moderate bowing the head to one side
is often used, the better to move others to compassion, by that languishing
posture (...) the Head. This oblique motion is of (...) second kind of motions,
and of the (...) differences wherein an oblique motion may be done, this may be
truly call oblique; which motion is peculiar (...) private to the Neck,
according to V^^^salius who challenges this as a peculiar: for, the Head
obtaines no peculiar motion of laterall inclination, but is carried to the side
by the benefit of the Neck only, and by a secondary motion: for, the Neck
unmoved, and rigid, we have no power granted us to bring the Head any way
toward this or that Scapula, ^ntill the Neck be turned thither. The
^ntimations of the mind that are exhi^ited by this laterall motion of the Neck,
have no peculiar Muscles assigned unto their action, there being not par^^cular
and private Muscles allowed to very motion of the mind energetically ^orking
out its signification by the mo^^on of the Head: for, this oblique mo^^on is
performed when one of the Flex^^s and Extensors of the Neck work to^^ther.
Eustachius sees nothing to hinder yet he will not affirm it rashly) that (...)
significations of the mind may be (...) exhibited, when two Muscles of (...)
same side, yet of diyers yoakes or ^^njugations, to wit the forward and (...)
hindermost from the Head inserted ^o the transverse process of the first (...)
work together, for, the Detriment of moving which necessary followed the
security of the Article of the Head, is sufficiently recompensed by Nature with
the multitude, magnitude, and various situation of Muscles. So that (...) the
Flexors and Extensors of one side (...) contracted together, the Head following
the motion of the Neck, is driven to the Right or left Hand, wherein they
obtain their situation, and according (...) these work more or less by
reason (...) their fibers, this straight obliquity (...) more emphaticall. And
although the^^ being no proper Muscles assigned to (...) action, the Muscles
that cause it (...) no peculiar Denomination; yet we man call that Flexor and
Extensor when the appear working together, (especial^^ upon the same Right
side) (...) Supplicationis or Adulationis, the (...) of Supplication or
adulation, or the (...) flatterers: In extraordina^^ languishment of the
Spirits, and in (...) or wantonness of the mind, (...) Head usually is seen to
fall to the Rig^^ Shoulder. But why this Caput (...) or mollitiei, this head of
languishment effeminacy, should always sink to (...) Right shoulder, is a
subtilty worth the Scanning. Baldus thinks that in these maladyes of the mind,
the Neck and Head may incline more to the Right hand than to the Left, because
the Muscles on the Left side are more easily resolved than those of the Right,
as being ^esse nourished; for that it is more cold and weaker than the Right:
which happens because it is less moved and exercized. Now sin^e they who are
drenched ^n these maladyes of the mind, cannot ^ncline their Heads backward nor
for^ard in regard of the vertebras, and those ^rong Muscles implanted in the
process ^f the Iugall-bone and Breast, it remains ^^erefore, since their
Muscles are laxe, ^edounding with overmuch moisture, ^^ey should, as men
drowzie, let their ^ead fall to the Right or Left shoulder; (...) withal,
their Heads abounding ^ith exerementitious humors, cannot (...) sustained,
but are so inclined, and ^^rchance rather to the Right Hand (...) the Left for
the aforesaid reason. and indeed they may well be suppo^^d (...) to have the
Ligaments of the Left (...) more slack and remiss, which notes out much
softness and superfluous moisture predominant in the Left-side, by which, when
the Muscles and Ligaments of that side are loosened, the Head by its weight is
bent to the opposite side, as it happens sometimes the Cheeks to be drawn awry
to one side, when there is a resolution of the Nerves and Ligaments of the
other side.

Dissect. VIII.
PRide, Arrogance, Ambition, Insolency, Insultation, Confidence, Disdain,
Magnificency, Magnamity, and the odious vanity of Bragging and boasting, bear
up the Head aloft, by reason of which garb, such who use it are properly
called Cervicosi, that is, Elate* and arrogant; which action is performed when
all the hinder Muscles of the Neck and Head and that confused Chaos and heap
o^ Muscles in the Back, which are like Labyrinth of many ways, work to^gether;
for then by drawing the (...) straight backward, they extend it an^ keep it
erect as a Mast of a Ship is (...) Cords, which posture is Tonique, an^ has
these significations when it is moderately so held without any vehemence; and
we might call this action of the Muscles, the Combination, or Conspiracy of
Pride and Arrogance: or the Braggadochios plot. But in fierce audacity, when we
would affront, defy, upbraid, and with an execration express cruel anger, we
augment the tension of the Muscles, and confirm our Head to a Chamelion-like
inflexibility, setting withal our face (with the veins retched out) against
others. Anatomists call this, among the five figures of the motion of Muscles,
according to Galen, Extreme figure; where there is an immoderate contention,
wherein the parts are vehemently stretched out, and wherein the Muscles of both
kinds work together, and sometimes beyond their strength; but chiefly when we
compel a Member to persist longer in that tension, for we cannot long endure
the great stresse of the Nervous fibers. But this Tonicall figure may be more
or less intense according to the pleasure of the mover. This rigid form of
fierce audacity, looks like a Crampe or Crick in the Neck, and makes the
Muscles to remain so stretched out, that the Head and Neck seem indeed
immovable, but yet in truth the Muscles are moved in conservation of the
contracted Muscles, such being the nature of successive motions (as Laurentius
speaks) that they are no less done while they are so kept, than when they were
first begun: We may call this general concurrence of the Muscles, when they
are thus perceived to act with perseverance, Tetanum oppositionis, the Rack of
opposition, or the voluntary Crick of stiffenecked Cruelty. But this case of
Tonique motion, being absolutely the greatest mystery that relates to Voluntary
motion, deserves a better inquiry. First, This Action is of the same kind with
Contraction, that is, they agree in the Genus of the Action, but specifically
differ: Yet Galen does not express what Species of motion it is of. So that
this Action is not a change of place, but only an Action with immobility. Galen
calls that Action of the Muscle without local motion, motum Tonicum, which
perchance with him was all one as to retain the part in that place from whence
it would recede, unless it were deteyned by the Action of the Muscle: for, all
immobility (as He proves) is not caused by the privation of Action: for, a part
that is sustained and held firm in one posture that it stirs not, could not be
done, unless they did Act; for else it would be altered, or fall by the weight
of the Body. Whence it does follow, that all immobility does not depend upon
the privation of Action, but upon some Action of the Muscle: But the Action of
a Muscle is motion, for, the Action of a part is defined by Galen an Active
motion, but rest is contrary to motion. Galen takes this for a hard and
difficult question; yet he has many kinds of this motion from experience and
sense; as that of a bird hanging in the Air, and of one swimming against a
stream with equal strength, the moving faculty raising it up equal to the
weight of its body depressing, and the strength of the swimmer equally
contending and striving against the force of the stream. Serpillon imagines
this to be an action mixed of tension, and contraction, which Fontanus his
Antagonist will not endure to hear of. Galen in a most smooth and admirable
modesty of style goes over the Rocks and depths of this mystery: It is possible
(says he) to find some motion, all the Muscles that are ordered for it ceasing
from their Action; and to find a quiescency many Muscles working: For, all
motion is not caused by the operation of Muscles, nor all immobility by their
rest. Now, whether or no shall we say that they do act and are stretched, but
are not moved? And if we fear to say so, we must likewise say that they do not
act; for it is absurd to confess they do work according to their innate and
most proper Action, and to deny them to be moved; But they appear not to be
moved; yet because the Muscles act, therefore we say they are moved: but
because the whole Member whereof they are a part, nor they themselves apart, do
appear to move; therefore for this cause again, we do: not confess they move;
where therefore shall a man find a Solution for this doubt. From the name
Tonique, as some have done? which comes of (...) id est firmo. Fontanus has a
good mind to help Galen out in this difficulty, but endeavors it with little
success: This only he gathers from the Doctrine of Galen, that Action without
motion of the Muscle, is called a Tonique motion; Action with motion,
Contraction; motion without Action born of the Contracted part, Extension; the
Decidency of the Muscle, a motion from the weight of the part and Muscle. But
seeing of the causes of Tonique motion Galen has written little, Fontanus is
at a stand, perchance thinking it would be an impudent Design to attempt any
thing in that kind after so great a light of Physic, yet he puts the Quaere,
whence this Tonique motion should come* and he ventures to conclude, from the
motrice faculty commanded, as all other voluntary actions; for, the nearest
cause of this motion (as he conceives) is the Animal faculty which moves the
Muscles, and it is the part of that to sustain the Members whose part it is to
move them; wherein, after his great flourish, he has made no more progress
than the very words of Galen led him to; whom we find concluding, that this
Species of Action, whether you call it Tonique, or by another name it matters
not much, this is true: That in this Tonique motion, the Muscles are not idle,
but act by the Commandment of the Will. From this Tonique motion Taurellus
took his Lepid Paradox (as he was wont to call it,) In omni motu est quies, and
in ipsa quiet motus. The Muscles most active in this expression of the mind
are the two pair of the Extenders of the Neck, the first whereof commonly
called Transversarium, arises from the transverse processes of the six upper
Vertebres of the Breast, are fastened on the outside into all the transverse
processes of the Vertebres of the Neck. The second pair commonly called
Spinatum, occupies the whole hinder part of the Neck: This takes many
Beginnings out of the roots of the Spines of the seven upper Vertebres of the
Breast, and is strongly implanted into the whole lower part of the Spine of the
second Vertebre. These two, when they work together, first extend the Neck, and
afterward the Head. The first pair might from those workings of the Mind they
help to exhibit be called par arrogans, the Arrogant pair or the Muscles of
Disdainful Confidence. The other pair of Extenders commonly called Spinatum,
for Distinction might assume the name of par insultans, the Insulting or
Bragging pair or the Muscles of Insolent Pride, and fierce Audacity.

Dissect. IX.
THey who like not a thing that has happened for which there is no remedy but
patience, or they who are taken tardy and in the fact, and can no otherwise
defend themselves but by a tacit confession; they who flatter, admire, are
bashful, fear, doubt, deny, or are illeberall, or would frame an excuse, are
wont to shrink the Head and contracted Neck between the Sh^ulders. There are
diverse Muscles that concur to the expediting this shrugging, and Chamelion-like
expression. The most active (for indeed the action outwardly performed seems
to suggest so much) is that Muscle of the shoulder blade, from its office
commonly called Levator, or the Lifter; the Muscles of this Conjugation even
before Dissection being obvious and easy to be perceived in all men,
especially in Wrastlers; arising from the first, third, fourth, and fifth
transverse process of the Vertebre of the Neck, as 'twere in four separated
beginnings, is inserted into the higher angle of the Scapula, moving the
Scapula forward and to the sides of the Neck; and because the shoulder is
joined to the Scapula, by accident it lifts that up also. Lycas among the
Ancients was of opinion, that the Head was drawn down to the shoulder by this
Muscle. But Galen (who thinks it is better to say this Muscle was formed for
the Shoulders sake, rather than the Heads,) says, this alone was designed to
draw back the whole Shoulders to the Head; Wherefore if we should take away
this also from the Shoulders, they would be altogether destitute of such a
motion: But it has such a motion, as is evident to all men; therefore it is the
Muscle that causes this motion; if there be any other (as no other there is)
this is necessary, and this does witness its operation in the Shoulders, that
a Nerve coming unto it from the Brain, if it be Cut, the same motion of the
Shoulders and not of the Head is resolved, of which Nerve Lycas was ignorant as
He objects; and in his Anatomicall Administrations he teaches a way to
discern the motion of this Muscle, which is a general rule, to draw the
Muscle to its Head according to the Nature and positure of its fibres^
Oribasius also will have this Muscle to draw the Shoulders to the Head, and
takes the course to prove it, in placing its original in the Bone of the
occiput, and the insertion in the angle of the Scapula. But after what manner
soever the motion be done, whether by the Heads drawing up the Shoulders, or
the Shoulders drawing down the Head, or both; this Muscle Levator is most
active and evident in the motion, when it appears to move the Shoulders upward
to receive in the shrinking Head, and makes this Dive-dopper, or Dobchick of
the Mind most significantly Emphaticall. This motion and signification of the
Mind may be thought to be a little furthered by the aid of a portion of that
Muscle called by Galen Trapezius, from a Geometrical figure; to wit, that
portion, which contracted, works the Scapula upwards, which is according as it
may chance to be moved; for, this action of the Head may not be so exactly
punctual, as to the Garb, in all men, by reason of the personal proprieties
of men. This Muscle is more commonly known by the name of Cucullaris; which
Laurentius compares to a Maids Coife or Kercher, Columbus likens it to a Clout
the Women of Cremona wear upon their shoulders; and Vesalius thinks that
Franciscans, and the rest of the Orders of Monks borrowed the shape of their
Hoods from this Muscle; which being fashioned round like a Hood, that is a
little Cell for the Head, it seems to have a signature of absconsion, which it
seems to offer the Head, which seems then ashamed to show it self, by
helping the Shoulders to rise, which then are most properly Scapul^ a scandendo
palum, from climbing up the prop of the Neck. The original also of this Muscle
being near under the Cell of the Brain wherein the Memory resides (which is
now afflicted) and going transversly toward the Ears, which do now male
audire; may in an allegorical supposition be thought immediately affected, and
to present it self in part as a Monk and Tacit Confessor of the living
Monastery of Mount Cephalon, and of the Order of Nature. And indeed such
impressions has a melancholy apprehension of such matters made sometimes in
the Head of a Hypocondriacall Nichodemus, that they have caused him to shroud
his Head in a Hood, and turn Monk and a Recluse from the conversation of men.
Another Muscle that assists in this Action, is that which is commonly called
Serratus minor, from the fashion of a Saw which it resembles, for, this with
its upper Fibers alone, when they are contracted, may seem to cooperate to the
significations of this gesture; and the signature of that Muscle seems, either
to insinuate the doubtful conflict of those thoughts which draw a man in this
case by a various vicissitude, now into one frame of excuse, and then into
another, before they can resolve what is best for their turn (so that their
thoughts seem, as Festus says, Serra pugnare, that is, successively to move
forward and to recede; and indeed this outward gesture if it chance to be
repeated, does not very much differ from the posture of those who work in a pit
with a two-handed Saw:) Or else as Placiades observed, this signature of a Saw
may signify Malediction, or as he calls it evil speaking, by reason of the row
of Teeth which seem to intimate some Mordacity, of which the Party laboring
being very sensible by reason of that hated stridor that is so offensive to the
Ears of those who are hit in the teeth with things which it is too late to
remedy; that it may be the Mind thereby now put into a sour horror, such as a
Saw causes in the Body when it falls into knots, bethinks it self what
instrument it has in readiness in the Body (which indeed has the Signatures
of all things,) to fit its purpose in such an intricate nick of irresolution;
and not being able soon enough to resolve the Doubt she is in, the Mind seems
by using this two-handed-saw Muscle at last resolved, that there is no way but
to saw the knot asunder, and to break through with Head and Shoulders. This
Muscle lying wholly under the pectorall Muscle (as it is commonly called from
its situation) draws the other into consort, and it may be thought to assist
when the Fibers of the first of its three Heads work alone; for then they
raise the Shoulders a little upwards. The Muscle also Del^oides so called from
the figure of the Greek letter D and the Humerall Triangle, (in the midst
whereof the Ancients made their Fontanellos which are now better made between
this and the Muscle Biceps) concurres a little to the Significations of this
Gesture. For there is a near relation between the Muscles of the Scapula, the
Shoulder, and the Arm or Cubit; and their motions are Cozen-germans, for as
the Scapula is moved per se, and the arm together by accident, and the Scapula
by accident of the Brachiall Muscles, which while they draw the Arm by a
certain kind of Consequution they lead the Scapula which is annexed unto it
together with it. This Muscle having diverse Beginings of different situations,
one whereof arises from the Anchor formed Process by reason thereof they have
diverse Fibers. Now when all these Heads of the Muscles work together, the
Shoulder is lifted Straight upwards to advance these significations of the
mind, and the co-heaving of this Muscle may seem as if it strove to bring this
active consultation of the Muscles to an issue, as to cast anchor upon this
resolution, That there is no other Defense or Evasion but to bend their power
to subhumerate and bear the burden imposed upon them through the errors of
the Head. At last the broadest Muscle which with the fellow of its Conjugation
cover^ the whole Back, having in a manner remained as a Neuter in this Action,
unle^ the highest of its Fibers had faintly assented to the propositions of the
Attollents, begins to declare by a contrary motion; for, this Muscle, from a
homely use which it sometimes is put to, being called Aniscalp^^r or Anitersor,
an office we could not perform without it, perceiving it was likely to prove
but a soul Business, by the action of it more humble Fibers begins to work
downwards and draw the Shoulders back which were advanced forward to join ^n
suffrage with the Pectorall Adductor. And but that we know there is no part or
Muscle that thinks its worst employment dishonorable, we might (following the
unhappy hint of these Allegories) imagine that this Muscle by some instinct was
moved to join in the appeal to the Heart, so to prevent the worst of that
employment it might possibly be put unto, having perchance when men's hearts
have failed them and sunk lower, bin formerly commanded to make good its
Nickname, given it by some Barbar Dissector, no Surgeon, but a Groom of the
stool to Anatomy. Thus have we now upon the best hints we could meet with
raised, with much liberty of conceit, unexpected Allegories from the
instruments of this Action. But the Name which refers to the significations of
the Mind exhibited by that Action, must be given to the Muscle most predominant
and demonstratively acting therein; which is the Muscle commonly called the
Levator of the Scapula. This Action being one of the first I set upon to
unridle, being thought by some that nothing of certainly or probability could
be said unto it, and objected to me as an Action not possibly to be made
tractable to the scope of my Design; At my first entrance into this Enquiry I
found this Muscle in Dr. Rheades Anatomy of the Muscles styled the Muscle of
patience, which I confess at first sight I took but to intimate the Corporal
virtue of a Porter, and not much better than that Patience which the Spaniards
call Asininum onus; and seeing it exposed naked without any gloss of
interpretation out of his own conceit nor any other authority, it passed with
me for a Dull notion and little to my purpose; when considering the Action
wherein this Muscle sirnam'd the Lifter was usually seen in those that like not
a thing that has happend, for which there is no remedy but Patience, I saw it
might properly stand with the intention of the mind, if it were named Musculus
Patientiae the Muscle of Sufferance, or Patience per force; and having thus
imposed a name upon it answerable to the signification it often helps to
exhibit, Behold I soon saw I was imprudently fallen into the error of the
Anabaptisticall Nomenclators, for, perusing Spigelius, and turning to that
place where he describes the Levator of the Scapula, I plainly saw I was
forestalled, and that Spigelius wa^ before in the Conceit, which prevention by
so ingenious an Anatomist pleased me better than if I had so named it first,
thinking ever after a little the better of my Fancy, because as they say, good
wits jumpe. For thus Spigelius to the purpose: This Muscle I am wont by way of
sport to call Musculum Patientiae, the Muscle of Patience, and he adds his
Reason, which is grounded upon the same signification of the Mind exhibited by
the gesture caused by the operation of the Muscle. Because when we bear a
thing ill, which has happened by chance cross to our Will, we are wont by the
help of this Muscle to raise the Scapula with the Shoudlers, ingeminating the
bitter name of Patience. So that it may be Doctor Rhead might mean as much as
Spigelius, from whom (or some other) he perchance borrowed this name of the
Levator, although his silence in the Reason scarce signified what he meant
thereby. But this Muscle serves to work the Shoulders to many other
significations of the Mind; for, they who would show that they have pity and
compassion of ones misery, or are ignorant of the matter they are asked of,
make use of the same Muscle. Niggards also in the action of their illiberality
and Denial use the same Muscle; the gesture resulting from thence being made
by Aristotle a Character of their cold property; which expression is seen in
its pure naturality in Boys, for when they are loath to part with any thing,
they use to contract their Shoulders, and reduce them to their Neck and Head,
as if they were carried into themselves, as doubting to be dissipated and
offended in their substance, if they should be compelled to give any thing away
which was in their possession; from which most Emphaticall operation of this
Muscle to th^^ signification of the Mind, the Musc^^ might be properly called
Muscul^^ illiberalis, the Illiberall, Negative, or the Niggard Muscle. So much
shall suffice as to the Denominations of this Muscle which is principal in the
Action* which the Mind enters visibly in the Head and Shoulders; as for the
other Muscles which are but Accessories, they are like to retain their old
names, unless some charitable Myotomist be pleased to take pity of their
private Condition, and think good to bestow the other significations of this
Action as nominall favors severally upon them.

Memb. II. Of the Muscles serving to the general expressions, or most
important motions of the Face or Countenance.
MAny are the affections of the Mind that appear in the signifi^ant motions of
the Face, even when ^he Bones are at rest; for whereas some ^arts of our skin
are altogether immo^^able and pertinacious in their circum^uction over the
subjacent parts; other ^arts thereof versatile indeed, but they are not
actuated with any voluntary motion: the skin of the whole Face participates of
motion, which being voluntary, does necessarily imply the use of Muscles, by
whose benefit those motions should be orderly and significantly performed.
Galen was the first who observed that Broad Muscle which he calls (...), The
broad Mouse-Muscle, and was unknown to the ancient Anatomists, arising from the
top of the Sternon and the whole Channel Bone, the upper Spine of the
Shoulder Blade, the Spine of the Vertebres of the Neck, and inserted into all
the parts of the Head which (...) without hair, and the lower jaw, be^yond
which it goes not, according (...) whose variety of originals and the
pro^ductions of diverse fibers it proves (...) Author of so many voluntary
motion as appear in the Face; for it so ends (...) the Face, that it covers it
within as (...) a Visard. Sylvius makes it a Horsema^ Cap or a Riding-Hood, if
you take (...) so much of it as is covered with the (...) Theophilus compares
it to a woman's (...), which the Greeks vulgarly (...) (...), and is nothing
else but a notable fleshie Membrane, a medium between a skin and a Muscle,
which encloseth the Head and Face no less than the Skin, therefore called
fleshie, because besides the nature of other Membranes, in some places it is
thicker and degenerates as it were into a Muscle, as appears in most parts of
the Face, where the skin conveyed along with the Membrane, is the cause why the
skin is there moveable; hence Creatures who have all their skin moveable, for
the greatest part have this Membrane growing to their skin. But although the
Ancients ^hought the whole Face was moved in ^ll its significations by the
operation of ^his broad Muscle, yet latter Anatomists ^ave found out the
Muscles that lie un^er it, whose opportune subjection ^oncurs to the
advancement of the ^eaking motions and voluntary dis^urses of the Countenance;
there (...) for these purposes of the Mind, as (...) reckon, forty six, to
wit, to the ^otion of the Eyes and Eyebrows ^enty four, to the motion of the
(...) twelve, and to the rest of the parts ten. These Muscles by the effect of
their action are beheld in the motion of the Face, while they move the skin
together with them, the parts wherein they are inserted varying according to
the variety of the parts. This difference being, as Galen speaks, between the
skin, and the eyes, and lips, that under the skin there is a Musculous thin
Nature, the Eyes are moved by Muscles, and the Lips by a Nature mixed of a skin
and a Muscle: So that the parts of the Face have their significant motions
either from the administration of their prope^ Muscles, as the Forehead,
Eyelids, and Lips, or by reason of the vicinity o^ the skin, as the Balls of
the Cheek* which being destitute of Muscles (...) moved together with the next
skin; (...) that indeed one motion often times fol^lows upon another, by reason
of (...) common broad Muscle out of which the Muscles that move the parts of
(...) Face are made, there being some (...) are common to two Members, as (...)
of the Nose and upper Lip, and the (...) and Cheeks, whose Muscles are (...) to
each other. Indeed, the Profess of Dissection assign not any action to the
skin in general, because it is a simple and similar part, not organicall and
isntrumental; which must be understood of common and visible actions, for
private it has, as nourishing it self by attraction of aliment, though indeed
in regard of Tact it has a common action. But in the Face, it has a public
and local motion that is most Emphatically significant, wherein the
perturbations of the Mind discover themselves, being moved in the Face by the
straight annexion to Muscles, which are the organs of voluntary motion; for,
Nature would have it so ordered, that by the benefit of certain Muscles
working under the skin, and affecting ^he parts of the Face, (being all of them
furnished in their originals with Nerves from the third Conjugation of Nerves
that come from the Brain) Man with ^is very Countenance alone, should ^xpresse
all his Will, Mind, and Desire, when at any time it happened ^o be inconvenient
or unlawful to open (...) in words at length. The reason why ^he Face does so
naturally follow the motions of the Mind, and is an Index of the Affections,
is, as Baldus thinks, That Affections being Passions in matter, and in the
Body, they are the forms of a certain Body, to wit, of the Mass of Blood; and
insooth, a certain passion requires a certain matter, as Anger Choler, Joy
pure Blood, Sadness Melancholy, Astonishment Phlegm; which humors contained
in their Natural Vessels and mixed together, furnish the Affections with
matter; which while it remains about the Heart and the first sensitory, from
the image perceived and adjudged to have the cause or matter of molestation or
placencie, excited by Heat and Spirits, it is drawn into Act, and is made such
in act; from thence the altered Spirits, or vapors with the Spirits are
elevated, which by the Arteries coming to the Brain, the Principle of the
Nerves, which bring the Commands for motion to the Muscles into which they are
inserted, so making them the Instruments of Voluntary motion, pluck and pull it
after diver^ manners, according to their quality Affecting, Contracting,
Dilating, Heating, Refrigerating, more or less drying or moystening: And any
the least mutation made in a Principle, there follows a change in those things
that depend upon that Principle; Wherefore the Arteries and Nerves that follow
the Heart and Brain are changed, and because the Face is nigher the Brain,
the chief organ of the Sense, made remarkable by the Cognizanze of the
greatest Arteries, and endued with Nerves, and such variety of proper and
common Muscles which entertain them: Hence it comes to pass that all changes
and passions in or with matter, o^ not existing without it, which happen to be
done about the Heart, are participated to the Brain, so that the Soul may
take notice of them and judge them. All these working upon the Muscles of the
Face, after some manner more or less, alter and vary the Face, and move it
from its former state, introducing some of their signs therein. Yet we allow
not the Heart to be the chief original and seat of the Affections, which are
(indeed) originally from the Head; for although in as much as they concern the
Body, their chief seat is in the Heart, because that is chiefly alterd by
them, yet forasmuch as they affect the mind also, it is only in the Brain,
because the mind can immediately suffer from this only. And hence it follows
that the Head and Face do so manifestly by signs (exhibited by the operation
of certain Muscles) express the affections of the mind.

Dissect. X.
IN profuse Laughter the motions that appear in the Face are very remarkable,
there being not any particle of the Face that is moveable, but it is moved by
common or its particular Muscles which lie under the skin of the Face, whose
actions introduce so notable a change and alteration in the Countenance, whence
it is, that man only laughes; because he has a Countenance furnished with
Muscles to declare what is signified thereby. In other Creatures the Face, or
Muzzell rather, is dull and heavy, and seems to sleep in an unmovable habit:
Not but that other Creatures are stirred up after their manner to express some
signs of exultation and Delight, which supply the place of laughter: but
because they do not, as we do, change the Countenance, they are not said to
laugh. Erroneous therefore is their Conceit to whom it seems that Laughter is
a certain common retraction of the parts toward the principle of the Soul,
wherein that conceived joy does flourish: for they will have them to be
contracted and coadunited in that part, wherefore the Muscles of the Face,
Throat and the midriffe is drawn back to the heart. which is absurd, because
the same Species almost of motion is effected in grief, which verily ought not
to be done, for grief rather repells, and withal we see that the impe^us is
rather done ab in^rinseco for as, from the Center to the Circumference: For many
times laughter being begun in those inward parts, it is restrained, and as it
were cut off in the midst, nor is unfolded or revealed in the Face. So that the
motion of laughter begun within in the middle venture, the terminus ad quem is
the extreme part of the Face, where it terminates, because that part is the
emunctuary of the senses, by which our mind does both receive in and utter the
affections, since by that part it does perceive, and in that part the Sensories
are instructed; wherefore to it the whole sense, and more over our whole mind
does conspire. Hence therefore proceeds the Equable Emission and intension of
Sense in the Face, as it were extant and coming forth. Hence the Air is
breathed out thick and short. Hence the Midriffe is contracted and the Muscles
of the face, because the equable Emission with the alacrity of Sense reaching
up to the Sense of the Face, cannot be done without the retraction of those
Muscles. In this Dance of the Muscles performed by excessive Laughter upon the
Theater of mirth, the Countenance, the Mouth seems to lead the Chorus; For,
Laughter is a motion arising chiefly out of the Contraction of the Muscles of
the Lips, in which motion of the Mouth, called Laughter, the parts about the
Mouth seem bounded out with certain lines called Rictus, whence Risus. And
this contraction of the Muscles of the Lips, is occasioned by reason of the
consent they have with the Nerves of the Brain drawn back to their original;
and with the Diphragma, the grand Muscle of this and all other passions which
is altogether almost nervous and musculous. And because the Lips are Muscles of
themselves in respect of their isntrumental relation to speech, their
engagement in this passion renders them unserviceable for the framing of words;
for, the forms and matter of words both are then intercepted; the first by the
streighning of the Gorge and Lips, which will not admit of any articulation
especially labiall: and the latter by the Interjections breaking off the voice
at the Larinx. Hence it is we hear men say they could not speak for laughing;
nor indeed can we eat in the violence of this passion, the impediment
proceeding from this Diduction of the Lips which were given us to eat and
drink withal; yet the Mouth is more shut than open, that is it is Dehiscent,
yet scarce Dehiscent into a Casme, yet the Lips are so distended and contracted
that they discover the Teeth. The Lower-Iaw after a manner inclines inward. And
as about the Nostrills and the Region of the Chin, or forepart of the Jaws, a
Certain concave of a circular line encompasseth the contracted and wrinkled
Cheeks: So the convexity thereof boundeth out the hinder part of both the
Jaws on both sides, where a certain hillock lifts up it self; which figure
of the mouth and cheeks, together with the wrinkles which appear in the Face
of him that laughes, is called Gelasinus. The Nostrils are opener, crooked,
hooked, wrinkled and crisped, especially in Derision. The Eyelids in a
mediocrity shut. The Eye is somewhat recondit between its Orbite, which a
certain corrugation about its outward angle. The Ears indeed are generally
conceived to be immoveble in man alone, which yet are moved in some, and
appear to shake and to be moved; but this motion is not of the Auricles alone
per se, but because they somewhat adhere and are conjoined to the Jaw or lower
Mandible, which is chiefly by its appointed Muscles moved in laughter: yet in
such as have a faculty as some have in their Ears, as having the auricular
muscles bigger than ordinary, this motion may be more evident. The forehead
seems exporrect and unfolded, And all these Muscles on the right side are more
active, whence the motions on that side are most notable and apparent; insomuch
as the Mouth and the Face it self is depraved and distorted, especially in
Derision. But this genuine figure of true laughter is somewhat various,
according to the various Constitution of the substance of particular persons,
in the parts of their face; that as to the individualls, it is almost
unutterable, for you shall see in some, in the Chin and in the Cheeks certain
concavities then caused like those in the Hands and other members; in some a
pleasant p^^ or Dimple which is called the Navell of Venus, and the Muscle
commonly called Buccinator in which it appears, might be thence called
Musculus Gel^sini, or umbilici Veneris, the pleasant Muscle of Loves pretty
Dimple; this in some is a rifi, in others a wrinkle; which are occasioned in
these parts of the face of those that laugh, because in some perchance the
parts of their Face by reason of their unequal contexture or constitution, are
not equally contracted, nor swell, for in laughter the Face swells: for, the
whole Countenance is powered out and spread with the Spirits that then swell the
Muscles, there being a great concourse of Spirits and blood unto the Face,
which bear a reat^gstroke in the Action: So that the Muscles of the Face are
filled with Spirits after the same manner as a certain member directy opposite
unto it which importunately sometimes looks us in the Face, which being filled
with Spirits grows stiff and is extended, yet although the analogy be very
fair, there is no contraction in that part, but only a great extension and
that according to all its Dimensions; which happens by reason of the Spungy and
very loose flesh which is not so much in the Face; and withal that Part is
very free and at liberty: whereas the Muscles of the Face on both sides and
every where adhere most firmly to the bone and skin, that when they cannot be
extended every way according to all their Dimensions, there are contracted. Now
this figure that compriseth the alterations of every part in the face follows
as an effect and consequence of the movings of the Muscles that are proper to
the parts, or which being Common have by their conformation a Sympatheticall
dependency one upon another. But this is not all: for, that which is most
remarkable and worthy observation is, that this moving of the parts of the Face
although very great, is done and undone on a sudden, and almost in a moment;
that is, a man's Face forthwith falls into the posture of laughing, and while in
that posture he laughes, he incontinently leaves off the motion; which as it
suddenly comes, so it goes; when a man cease from laughter although it be at
the highest pitch and scrued up to the very Eela of mirth, it vanishes away,
and needs no time of interposition to abate by degrees, to take out the tracts
of the operations of so many and diverse engaged Muscles, which incontinently
cease from their labor, for as soon as the Conceit and jest is at an end,
the laughter being natural, the mouth and parts of the face return to their
former situation, the motion being now over; of which sudden beginning and
ending of so many concurring motions the Cause may be supposed, the subtlety
of the Spirits in their motion, when they ascend to the face: But what kind of
moving of the Muscles this should be is somewhat difficult to conjecture,
although it is so manifest and evident in appearance. It Is true, we can
conjecture a Muscle to move or to be moved, for we know a Muscle has moved its
appointed moveable, when contracted, it appears shorter and harder; especially
if it have a bon^ under it, as all the Muscles of the Face have. But here all
the parts of the Face, except that perchance of the Forehead, seem to be
contracted together; and the whole face, according to the constitution of its
substance, to grow stiff and hard; wherefore it seems most probable, that all
the Muscles of the face are moved together at once, yet the controversy is
somewhat intricate, and they that are for the Negative allege, that the same
thing cannot be moved by contrary motions at the same time, as for example;
Some Muscles move the Lower-Iaw downwards, and so open the mouth; others by
moving the Iaw upwards close it; others move it outward, others inward; others
draw it to one side and drive it round; wherefore all of them seem not to Move
at once. To which is answered, that things moving in Contraria, in the same
moveable, if they be of equal virtue, they either do nothing, or if they do,
the moveable is distracted: but if they be of unequal power and strength, the
weaker gives way to the motion of the stronger; yet the prevailing Mover in the
conflict or contention obtaines not the same vigor, or as much as if it had
not contended at all and had moved without opposition; for if all Material
Agents (as the learned know) in Doing Suffer also, and after some manner abate
of the Degree of their virtue; ^ow much more will it happen when one has an
adversary, although weaker, yet openly, endeavoring against him? Wherefore it
may be supposed it does not move so perfectly as it would, ^f it were not
hindered by its Adversary. The way to discover the manner of moving in this
Conglobation of Muscles in laughter is, to consider what Muscles of parts of
the Face are effective more or fewer, thicker or smaller; for, many moving
together are not stronger than fewer if they be all equally qualified, and the
great and thick are stronger than the small and slender, as may be made
manifest by special example.

As first, the Muscles that move the lower-Jaw drawing it upwards to close the
Mouth, are more and thick, and therefore stronger than those that lead it
downwards to open the Mouth; as is well known out of the Anatomy of those
Muscles. Now, because in Laughter the Mouth is neither too much closed, nor yet
gapes; the Muscles that serve to shut and open the Mouth are moved together;
the Mouth not being exactly shut, although the Muscles are more intense which
are appointed to shut it; but withal is somewhat opened, by reason of the
repugnancy of the opening Muscles. Hence it is that in over Laughter our Jaws
ache, so that they seem to suffer a luxation, by reason of the contrariety of
moving and violent Conflict; for, the Ligaments, Nerves and Fibers are after a
manner distracted and drawn into factions. And we may observe that the
Masticatory Muscles, (which are better called Laterall from their use) whose
fibers by reason of their Diverse Heads, which respecting one another after a
diverse manner are inserted acrosse in manner of the Letter X, do manifest their
operation in this motion, for by reason of their Fibers, although they move to
the Right hand and to the Left, notwithstanding they can withal not a little
move the lower-Iaw either outward and inward. The Muscle called Adducens
P^erigoideum, which puts the Chin out forward, with the other Mansorie also
which leads the Chin inwards, and when it is produced recalls it back, these by
reason of the contrariety of their movings which are done at the same time in
Laughter, are very remarkable: Of whose Contraction we may make an experiment,
because the Mansorie Muscles being chiefly seated about the Cheeks, do then
appear Contracted and somewhat hard, the Chin being perchance somewhat drawn
in, because the Muscles are more valid which move the Jaws inward; which
perchance may not so exactly appear alike in all men, but may differ according
to the diverse Condition, Composition, or Commension of their parts. The
Contraction of the Temporal Muscle which is but small in Men, is little
observed; nor that of the double-bellied Depriment which works contrary to the
other, for they are small and thin, their employment being easy, because the
Iaw with its own weight tends downward and has no need of any strong
Retractor, but as a heavy thing, it is drawn down with a little ado, to open
the Mouth.

In the motions of the Lips the contrariety is not very much perspicuous, for
they are exercised in two moveable Lips; wherefore their Muscles contracted
together, they are Contracted, to wit, the upper Lip upward, the lower Lip
downwards; whereupon the Teeth are discovered; whence some derive Rideo a
Radio. But that we see the upper Lip more contracted than the lower, it has
that property from the more valid Muscles which it has obtained; ^or although
the Muscles of the lower Lip are broader than those of the upper, yet being
shorter they gain no advantage by their Breadth; for, the Length of a Cord
gives more advantage in Drawing than the Breadth. And that the Lips also in
Laughter are moved neither inward nor outward, (which motions, and those indeed
contrary every one of them has, happening by the advantage of certain fibers
belonging to their Muscles) the cause is, that they being weaker than the
Muscles themselves, moving the upper Lip upwards, and the lower downwards, by
good right give way to their motions, neither are they able according to their
usual operation to move the Lips inward or outward, especially since they are
strongly drawn in on both sides, and extended by the Contraction of the
Cheeks, to which on both Hands they are annexed.

The Muscles which draw out and open the Nostrils, excel so in strength the
constringent pai^e, which are somewhat small; that the adverse moving in the
Nose is not so perceptible to sense; therefore in Laughter they are strongly
Contracted, insomuch as the Nostrills are opened, and especially in Derision
are wrinkled; and these Muscles so raise up and Contract the Nostrils, that the
Nose seems crooked and hooked, and by that means also the Nostrils become
acute.

We may observe concerning the Eyelids which are two over each Eye, an upper,
and a lower Lid, that the upper Lid only, according to Galen, is moved upward
and downward by the office of diverse Muscles having contrary motions; So that
by this Rule and M^thod, that teaches all the Muscles in the Face to be moved
together at once in Laughter, We should not affirm the Eye-^ids to be then
moved, if the aforesaid Muscles of the Eyelids were of equal strength: But
since (as it appreares by the effect) the Muscle that draws it down is
stronger, to which the weight also of the Lid it self does add some
advantage, it comes to pass that the Eyelid is a little then moved downward,
and the Eye a little closed. And although Aristotle who was not advised of
Muscles (much less of the Muscle which late Anatomists have found for that
motion) truly affirms the lower-lid to be also moved in man: yet that motion
is but small and little better then nothing; and that which is as it were
nothing, is to be thought in a manner to be absent. Whatsoever is to be
observed of this matter from late Anatomists, this is enough for this purpose,
that the upper-Eylid has obtained two contrary motions, and therefore can
neither shut nor open the Eye overmuch in laughter, although it shuts it more;
and it is observable that by reason of this contrariety of moving of the
upper-Eyelid, that in laughter there is made, by reason of the Contranixion, a
certain corrugation or wrinkle about the angle of the Eye, especially the
outward angle, which in those that laugh often, are supposed to grow habitual:
which some Ladies fearing, will not laugh, lest they should contract wrinkles
and look old by breaking in that part which is near the Temples, whose Latin
E^imologie they much abhor. Hence of some who have but a kind of pinke eye we
us^ to say, they laughed that they had never an eye to see. And because the Ey^
is more shut than opened in laughter, (...) comes to pass that both the
Eye-brow^ are drawn a little downward, and the^ somewhat, yet lightly incline;
bo^^ the Eyebrows together, especially (...) excessive laughter, being
necessarily moved: whereas otherwise at pleasure (...) can move one of them
alone, as (...) nictation.

The Eyes in profuse laughter seem to be retracted or drawn back, and no^ a
little to be hid within their Orbit^ But to conclude this to be done by the
Muscles, is to speak to more than the causes appearing to Sense. It is though
the Optique Nerves may be retracted (...) well as other Nerves, and why not
Which may be by the seventh Muscl^ placed about it, which with it fibers (...)
has obtein'd, being straight, may, (...) is likely, draw the eye back also.
(...) whether the other Muscles of the eye (...) contracted or no that's a
question. Why not? but there is no confident pronouncing this for a certainty,
because they appear not to Sense; but if they be contracted, it is most
probable that they are all contracted together in this laughter, as the other
Muscles of the Face are; and by reason of that contrariety of movings that they
have, and perchance equality of strength, the eyes seem rather to rest than to
be moved, as any man may make experiment in himself, and may apprehend that
while he laughes, his eyes can difficultly be moved to look round with a
distinct vision, which is done at the perpendicular Ray, unless he endeavor
it by the inordinate motion of his whole Head and Body; which circum^pection
the Head, nor whole Body ^an Scarce then obtain. But the Au^hor of this
experiment will not endure ^o be asked whether the Muscles may ^e then moved,
abhorring to be put to ^o difficult a point of Divination. Sure^y the question
may be resolved according to the received Philosophy of Arbi^rary motion; for
if he will admit the Muscles of the Eye to be all moved at (...) and together,
the motion is Tonique; ^herein although the Muscles seem to be at rest, yet as
Galen says, they do, quiet agere, act in rest; Tonique motion being an
action with immobility.

In this excessive laughter, the Forehead (by which we must understand the
Musculous skin thereof) has a peculiar property of it self, and a privilege
from the universal contraction of the other parts: for, the Front (which is a
thing has bin but little observed) is neither moved upwards nor downwards nor
knit, although it be very propense and proportional to signify many passions
by those motions; but it remains as it were in its natural state, yet
smoothly expanded and stretched out insensibly; which motion of expansion is to
be referred to the Muscles it has received, or to its fibers; which (as we may
believe) are equivalent; whereby when in laughter by the same reason as other
Muscles they are moved together, it comes to pass that the Forehead then does
rather remain immovable, and the motion proves Tonique or streined out;
unless perchance it may be moved a little downward for explication, by reason
of the somewhat more prevalent fibers.

The whole Countenance is poured out and spread with the Spirits that swell the
Muscles; there being a great concourse of Spirits and blood unto the Face,
which bear a great stroke in this action.

Now this broad and high laughter is the measure and rule of the essence of
other, and by its defect, the others may be measured and pondered; for, in low
laughter, although the motions of the Face are even then very remarkable and
great, yet they are more remiss, in moderat laughter they are more intense;
for, these motions of the Muscles have ^ndicible and distinct degrees, or an
^utterable latitude of consideration, here being no Muscle or part in the whole
Body, that is out of action if a ^an laugh but a little: for, although ^aughter
be more especially a motion ^f all the Muscles of the Face at one time and
together; yet it is withal a motion ^ommon to most of the parts of the ^ody.
This Dance of the Muscles be^^g like that which is called the Cushion (...) or
Joane Sanderson, which brings in all that have ability of motion; for, the
whole Head is moved, now cast backward, and by and by inclined to the Right or
Left Shoulder; because the Muscles that move the Head and Neck arise partly out
of the Breast Bone and the Channel Bones, and partly also out of the joints of
the Breast; wherefore it necessarily follows that in violent laughter, and the
agitation of the Diaphragma and pectorall Muscles, the Head should also
together be moved. The whole Neck is contracted and made a little shorter; this
you may either call the motion of the Head drawn down by its contracted
Mu^cles: or the working of the Levator of the Scapula which causes that
shugging of the Shoulders so emphaticall in fat-folkes; but what it is, is not
very apparent or worthy of so great observation, and seems to accompany the
inordinate motions of the whole Head. The Throat seems not a little to
tremble, by reason of the Breast being much, suddenly, and often moved: for,
the Rough Artery being placed in the internal Region thereof, the great and
often respiration shakes the Throat. For since the Midriff is therefore
contracted taking this motion from the dilatation of the Heart, and to bear up
against the moving of the Sense and Spirit, lest it should to the great
endangering of life be emptied and vanish away: or because it behooved these
parts so to endeavor for the strength of the motion to be made which is at
hand. Hence also the Muscl^s of the whole Throat and Face endeavor together
with them, for they so consent with the Muscles of the Larynx, that unless
they be together drawn in, the other can no way be contracted. But what manner
of motions these and the rest which follow down to the feet should be, is
hard to say, or from what denomination to define them: for, we cannot according
to Aristotle, a termino ad quem; for, these motions of the whole Head and Body
seem, Carere termino certo, and cannot be described but after that manner as
men are shook together, are gestient, tremble, or cannot abide in a place, but
leap, start out, ly down, and seem wholly dissolved and impotent. And because
there are so many movings of Muscles, and those indeed contrary, those tensions
and contractions, if they continue and are daily used, are very hurtful: for,
the Muscles of the Face being filled with subtle vapors causing them to
streine for the avoidance (as in Skreaking the Muscles are contracted to avoid
a vapourous excrement,) the Spirits are thereby much evapourated and spent. As
for the rest of the motions let Democritus look to it. Upon this manif^st
sight of the motion of the Breast (wherein the Midriffe is moved, and the
Lungs, even up to the Muscle^ which move the Cheeks, the variou^ movings (from
whence some infer as manifold differences of laughter) and because Respiration,
which is a moving of the breathing parts is as it were the matter of laughter
out of which it is produced, whence comes that succussation of the Lungs and
agitation of the Midriff) no man e're doubted that laughter was a motion, and
to be referred to the motive virtue. But upon what principle this motion should
depend, since it is done before we are well aware of it, and besides our will,
whereas a motion that depends upon Appetite, is Spontaneous, as laughter is
concluded to be, and that Faculty being Animal is no way proper to man; That
has bin somewhat doubted of; upon which occasion some have unnecessarily
multiplied many Entities. But They state the ca^e best who say, that laughter
is an operation proceeding from an effect of the Intellective virtue which in
the first place is the cause of it, and the chief root, for in all laughter
the Intellect is as the first Radix after a manner susteining the perturbation
and dilation of the sense; but the motive power is that by whose commendation
it is last of all perfected. We may not therefore when we see men Laughing to
be affected with a certain moving of (...) Lungs the Midriff and the Muscles
moving the Cheeks, think men laugh, when according to their arbitriment or
any otherwise they accommodate themselves to the motions of these parts: Or
when we see a more remiss laughter out of the moving alone of those Muscles,
and a little retraction of the Midriffe without the manifest act of
Gurgulation, we should therefore believe either that Laughter of it self is
such a motion, or that this, at least for the greatest part, is its Nature,
since all these may be counterfeited, and may be rather an Image of Laughter;
therefore there must somewhat precede in the Soul, and the first Sensitive,
that Laughter may be absolute and accomplished in all its numbers. And indeed,
that manifest motion does presuppose a certain affection of the first
Sensitive and Rational part of the Soul, so that perfect Laughter is not only
that manifest motion, nor that inchoat motion as they speak in the first
Sensitive and its Spirits; for, this is often done, and yet Laughter is
suppressed, that it truly seems to be done by halves, and intercepted as it
were in the midst. But true Laughter has both the effects of the intellectual
part as the Principle upon which the dilation of the Heart and contraction of
the Countenance ensue, it being not only an affection of the Body, but totius
conjuncti, of the whole Man.

So that it is manifest that Laughter is a certain vibration of the Midriffe,
and of the Muscles of the Mouth, and the whole Face, etc. And that when we
laugh the motion of our Face aims at some end, that is, to signify some
motion of the Mind, and follows upon the Connection of those Muscles that draw
the Face in such a sort to some inward parts that are moved by the passion out
of which Laughter proceeds; the Genus whereof occupying the place of the
Form is Motus; the matter or Subject are all the parts of the Face, especially
the Muscles together; the final Cause is to bring forth Laughter, (which by a
kind of magneticall virtue it does even in another.) But Laughter being no
affection, but an outward act proceeding from some inward motion of the Mind;
the question is what affection of the Mind this Jubilee and vibrations of so
many Muscles should signify? Fracostorius judges Laughter to be a sign of two
Passions, Joy, and Admiration. Valeriola and Laurentinus take away Admiration,
supposing that profuse Laughter is the issue only of Joy. Vallesius states the
Controversy. The opinion of Fracostoreus (whatever Bartholinus and others
object to the contrary) seems to me most probable, that it is a compounded
motion, because in Laughter there are certain contranitencies; for, Admiration
makes a kind of suspension in the Head, and Joy a kind of expansion in the
Heart* (Yet both motions are so sudden that they are done together,) whereby
(...) comes to pass that when Laughter (...) produced, it is not done without
some molestation. And that which seem to confirm this opinion is, that the^
are most apt to Laughter who are easily drawn to admire, as Children, Women,
and the Common People: where as Grave men, and Philosophers are lef^ prone to
Laughter. Another thin^ that seems to confirm this opinion is, a new thought
of my own, that (...) suspension of the Eye, and expansio^ of the Forehead
seem to be Symbolic^^ effects of this mixed Passion. But here the grand Quaere,
how Joy that is motion and passion of the Heart, should move the Muscles? for
how so ma^^ Muscles that are the Instruments of the Animal Faculty should be
moved by a passion of the Heart is worth the scanning. For, you would verily
think that the Heart were a Muscle, and the grand Principle that set all the
other Muscles in Motion; whereas it is known well enough that the Heart is
neither a Muscle, nor of it self can move the Muscles, for, that moves only the
Arteries: yet though Joy be a passion of the Heart, Laughter indeed, which
proceeds not only from Joy but Admiration, is a passion of the Rationable part*
(for otherwise Beasts might laugh;) no wonder therefore that the Instruments of
the Animal Faculty are moved to discover and bring forth the Admiration
conjoined with Joy; nor is it a marvel that Joy should be expressed by an
Animal motion, the Heart not moving the Muscles, but the Animal Faculty
consenting with the Vital. So that hereby it is made manifest, that natural
Laughter is a free motion, because it is Animal; yet it can hardly be held in
sometimes, because although it be Animal, yet it is in the number of them that
serve the Natural. And this is the reason why Laughter is originally from the
Head and not from the Heart, that notion, intelligence, or imagination, which
are functions of the Mind, and accounted among those faculties that reside in
the Brain, are brought forth by the Soul; for, who ever (unless a Parasite)
laughed before he knew wherefore he laughed? So that Hippocrates Lib. de morbo
Sacro, with very good reason deduceth Laughter from the Head, as having its
original from thence; for that the first motions begi^ there, and from thence
are communicated to all the subject parts, drawing the whole Body into Consort,
and wit^ its universal moving and agitation declares the Sympathy it has with
the Mind and the Brain: as if the Min^ sitting enthroned in a high Tower,
denounces so to her Subjects to prepar^ themselves for Laughter, for there wa^
something, which they knew not (...) which yet she only saw and knew to (...)
worthy of Laughter: upon this admo^nition presently the inferior principa^
parts Contiguous and Connatives t^ their High Prince bestirring themselves, do
solicit the other lower parts also subject unto them. And first the Brain
commands the Nerves, these stir up the Muscles, and they agitate the parts
annexed unto them; until the whole Body, as it were to gratify the Mind as a
King, signifies its conceived Joy in all the ways and officious demonstration
of triumphant gesture it possibly can; and as every part is nigher to its
Principle, so much the sooner and vehemently it is moved. And although, to
speak according to the modesty of Caesar's Speech in Tully, we are ignorant how
Laughter exists, where it is, and from what place it so suddenly breaks out
into the Countenance: yet the manner and order of the generation of Laughter
may be supposed to be after this manner. When some pleasant queint novel and
conceited object offers it self to the Senses, there is an impression thereof
made in the Brain, the Object thus come into the Brain, the Mind is filled
with Joy, this by the first branch of those Nerves of the sixth Conjugation
which goes into the Heart is carried unto the Heart, with which the Heart
affected, impatient of delay, dilates it self: the Heart impetuously moved, the
Cawle thereof by consequence is carried from one part unto the other and
contracted; and because the Cawle is fastened to the Mediastenum and
Diaphragma, there is a necessity also that the very Diaphragma should be
violently moved, agitated, and heated by the diffusion of Blood and Spirits
that are then increased about that part. The passion or motion by the object
thus raised in the Heart (such is the consent between the Heart and Brain) is
by the other branches of the Nerves of the sixth Conjugation called Nervi
p^renici, which bring the motive Spirits from the Brain into the Diaphragma,
and by virtue whereof it is very sensible, carried back to the Brain: So that
the change of motion in the Heart caused by this Passion, and imprinted,
ecchoed, and expressed in the Diaphragma, and thence conveyed unto the Brain,
is as the Ground; and the motion commanded the Muscles by the Brain, is as the
voluntary Descant upon it. Concerning the chief corporal Principle, and
material Instrument wherewith Laughter is performed, the Learned differ in
their Judgments. Democritus thought that that first part and chief Principle
was the Spleen, and that the other parts were but as Instruments a^^^rwards
subservient to the perfect finishing of the work. Which opinion to others has
justly seemed absurd, because Laughter is performed by the ministerial
assistance of certain motion, but the Spleen is beheld neither to be moved,
nor to be the Principle of any kind of moving, yet we see those parts to be
moved which are in the Breast and middle venture; besides, it is not accounted
the prime seat of any faculty of the Soul, much less of the Cognoscent or
Animal; therefore it cannot be the prime Principle of Laughter. Others have
believed the prime Part by which Laughter is begotten, to be the Diaphragma,
for that is a certain Muscle somewhat broad, placed near the Mind, excelling
in alacrity of Sense, agile to motions, of it self, in the first place
subordinate to Respiration, being of such and of so great importance to the
functions of the Soul, that the Ancients by one common consent named it (...),
quasi mentem vel mentis sedem, and they thought that Phrensies and Delirations
arose from thence: Therefore it is no marvel if Laughter also should be first
wrought by this part, since it is swift and expedite to swift motions, being a
broad Muscle and most plentifully abounding with Sense and Spirit, which is
equally dilated through it: (for, Laughter is accounted to be as a certain
Dilation,) and is withal the prime Instrument of Spiration, which appears to
be in a manner the substance of Laughter, which Aristotle affirms, where he
says, that for this cause the tickling one under the Arms causes this
affection, because the Midriffe is fastened in that part, whereby it easily
opens and moves the Sense of this Muscle besides our Will; which (indeed) is
somewhat apparent to Sense; for, in any the least Laughter the Midriffe is
manifestly removed and retracted, and the beginning of motion being made there,
the other parts, as the Lungs, and Muscles of the Face are forthwith stirred
and moved. But because the Midriffe is in no manner a principal part of the
body, nor the chief seat of the Soul, or of any faculty; therefore neither
does it seem Consentaneous it should be accounted the prime Principle of
Laughing; wherefore for some reasons the Body of the Heart has been by some
adjudged the prime seat and original of Laughter. But Physicians who upon the
best ground make the Brain to be primum Sensitivum, affirm the Brain to be
the Prime Principle of Laughing; but this affection to be made common by
consent to the Diaphragma, and that it therefore is the prime Instrument,
because it begins to be formed, and to appear by this part, the other parts
thereupon administering to the operation, wherein it is necessary to use a
Distinction for the better clearing of the Point, for it is one thing to be the
prime and nearest Principle, and another thing to be the ^rime manifestative
Instrument, and per^ective of the Form; the Brain is acknowledged the prime
and nearest Principle, but the Midriffe is the prime manifestative Instrument,
and perfective (...) the Form. Now the Diapragma (...) operation is so
evidently seen in (...) Face, its motion in this passion being attended with so
many motions of (...) Face and Body, is a Muscle the most (...) nowned and
famous as the spring of (...) the orall motions; whose honourab^^ names
sufficiently prove its Excellency having obtained a figure peculiar an^ common
to no other Muscle; being broad, thin, and orbicular, and having (...)
beginning in its midst, from when^^ thick fibers run out as from the (...) to
the Circumference: for it has a (...) of nervous Circle in the middle, which
is its original, about which anoth^^ wholly fleshie consists, by which the
(...) that go out of it are dispersed (...) spread out to the Piripheria. The
(...) proper and Emphaticall name it (...) obtained with the Greeks is (...),
from the word (...), that in Latin signi^^ sapere, which with us is to savor
or (...) like, for with this part we have a liki^^ of any object, on a motion
of inclin^^tion unto it, to which we are behol^^ing (as Pliny says) for all
our men conceits and fine flashes. This musculous Membrane being as it were the
Timbrell of the Fantsie and the Heart, which beaten upon by them, the Muscles
of the Face and Body are put into motion, and dance unto the Dorian melody
thereof a kind of Morisko expressed in the exultant action of the parts into
which they are inserted, deserves to be called Musculus hilaritatis seu
facetiarum, the Muscle of Joy, Mirth, and Laughter, or of witty conceit, or the
Muscle of the motion of inclination.

Anger, Indignation, and Envy affect the Muscles of the Face, with a kind of
Laughter, improperly enough called Sardonian; which being according to Nature,
is contained in the other Laugh^er, yet there is some difference, neither do
all things* which accompany the other natural Laughter appear exactly is
this, there may be perchance the same motion of the parts, and almost the same
Figure of the Face, but no Sign of Joy or Mirth, but almost always sadness;
for the front is cloudy and contracted, and indeed, the Lips only and Teeth are
affected, in which adulterate Laughter men do Labijs tantum, and (...) enis
malis ridere, or ringere rather (...) ridere,

Fear also, and a Sudden fright (...) Spectrum, especially if it be horrib^^
ridiculous, has the same effect som^^times upon the Muscles of the Fa^^ there
being certain effects that do n^^turally break out into contraries,
i^^sinuating not themselves into the Bod^ corporally, as they say and
subjectiv^ but immaterially and objective inva^^ our senses, for, the Spirits
or Radica^ moisture by which we know on a su^^den, perceiving some sad object
(...) spectre and evil, does perchance fear and flying back betakes it self
in manner wholly to its intimate Tow^ or Fort, therefore it contracts the
me^^bers, and especially the Muscles of t^^ Face, as the part by which the
Spectru^ breaks in most upon our minds an^ Spirits.

Weeping is a motion contrary i^ signification to laughter, representin^ also
some motion of the mind, that (...) by Laughter the heart is Dilated (...) with
it the Breast and the Muscles o^ (...) Face: So by this they are (...). But in
the Face by Laughter the parts ^^out the mouth are more emphatically ^^fected:
but in weeping the parts about ^^e Eye; which compression expresses ^^ares,
else there is little difference in ^^eir lines, as Painters observe, which
^onsequently requires the action of the ^^me Muscles in both, which is not by
^^ny influence of the lively Spirit which (...) Laughter replenisheth the
counte^^nce, causing the eyes to sparkle, and (...) the Muscles of the Cheeks
with a ^^btle vapor: But the contraction of ^he Cheeks in weeping, seems to
(...) from an excrementitious vapor which passes with the humiditie of ^^ares
from the Brain into the Cheeks; and forces Nature to make contracti^n to
dischardge it self of that vapor, ^oyned with the consent, which is be^^ixt
the Muscles of the Jaws and lips ^ith the Midriffe, whose remission and
^ontraction being hastened by the con^raction of the Heart in grief,
con^^acteth also the aforesaid Lips and ^^eekes, which it causes by the fourth
and sixth pair of Nerves derived into both parts from the marrow of the
Chine-bone, in the Neck. These are also the cause of the whole deformity of the
Face in grief, which chiefly contracteth the visage in expiration, in which
the heart has more power over the Midriffe being slackened, than in
inspiration, wherein by dilating of the Chest for use of breath, it is extended.

Memb. III. Of the Muscles appertaining to the ForeHead, or the Brows and
Eyebrows, and employed by the mind in the significant motions thereof.
THE skin of the Forehead is significantly moved according to the pleasure of
our will and that in the opinion of the Ancients from a Musculous and thin
substance united to the skin of the Forehead; for, because it could not be that
any part should be moved voluntarily in any important motion with out a muscle,
our wise Creator foreseeing that, he spread under it a certain thin Musculous
substance; for, the Bulk and proportion of Muscles is ordered according as the
greatness of the part (...) be moved did require. And in this ^lace the skin
only is united to a Mus^ulous substance, which although so ^^ited, yet it is
so free from the sub^^cted bones, that it may be moved, the (...) being the
superficial part of the ^^bject substance which is Musculous (...) adhering
together and grown to, ^^at their motion is both one. This ^^in of the
Forehead, which moved by ^^e Musculous flesh that covers the bone ^hereof, and
by its tension and corru^tion demonstrates diverse affections ^f the mind, is
not only moved by the ^enefit of a fleshy membrane (which ^^ing under the
connate flesh goes into Musculous substance, endowed with ^^raight fibers:) But
with two Muscles, which the course of the fibers, and mov^^g which appears in
this as in other ^uscles, (which are not found in a ^^eshy membrane) do make
manifest. ^^^rentius says they meet in the (...). Columbus says there is no
Muscle in (...) midst of the Forhead; yet he will ^^ve them two, one on each
side, and their motions different, and proves it by the example of a Cardinal
who having the left Muscle cramped with a wound, could not move the one half
of hi^ Forehead; and indeed at the Top of the Nose where they are also more
fleshy, they are so joined, that they may seem one. But that they are two,
Anatomy does not only teach, but reason and experience, for, all the members
are double, that the Body might by kep^ in aequilibrio; and experience shewe^
that if one of them be struck with the Palsy, or cut acrosse, the motion o^
that part is lost, but not of the other; whose motion could not remain entire,
if it were one Muscle. Spigeli^^ calls them (to note their use) the Muscles of
the skin of the Forehead. Bu^ Platerus elegantly, an^ the first I think that
ever let fall a word to this purpose* Musculos affectuum animi significativos,
the significant Muscles of the affections. (...) besides these Frontall
Muscules, ther^ are sometimes two oc^ipitiall, which receive into them the
Muscles of the forehead, and are reckoned to have an influence upon the skin
and Muscles o^ the Forehead and Eyebrows, So that such men who have these
additionall Muscles, have larger expressions of their minds and affections
appearing in their moved Foreheards. Baubinus says these Muscles of the hinder
part of the Head are not found: But Gabriel Fallopius and Platerus show by the
example of Antonius Platus, who could move the whole skin of his Head, that
there is such a speaking motion in the Coape or outer Cover of the Head.
Rhealdus Columbus says he had a thousand times contemplated this motion (not
without pleasure) in the Head of that excellent man Antonius Platus whom they
now call Lonigum; for he moves the whole skin of his Head strongly. Hieronymus
Mercurialis has observed as much in many; Nay Columbus proves this motion by
his own example, the skin of whose whole Head was qualified with such a motion
^y virtue of those Muscles. He therefore ^ecalls these Muscles into play, which
were passed over by the negligence of others, the utility of this motion being
^ot to be despised. St. Augustine affirms that he saw a man in his time, who
could, without stirring his Head, or touching it with his Hands, raise or lift
up all the hairs of his Head, and make them fall flat upon his face; afterward
he could raise them again and return them orderly to their due places. Which
could not be done without the advantage of such extraordinary implements of
voluntary motion. Whatsoever inward Cogitation or affection of the mind is
attributed by Pliny, or observed by Metoposcopers and others to appear in the
Forehead, they are all exhibited by the operation and isntrumental assistance
of these Muscles and since the Muscles, the instrumen^ of voluntary motion, are
found (...) the Head, and so near to receive (...) the races and convoy of the
Nerves ^^bility of motion from the Brain, (...) stands to Reason that the
Forehead d^^clare the will and the disposition and a^^fections of the mind. Yet
to speak (...) truth, these Muscles are rather to (...) ascribed unto the
Brows; and Spigel^ showing his warrant from Galen, att^^^butes them to the
Eyebrows; for (...) Eyebrows have such a command over the Front which
appears so obsequious unto the acts of their authority, that the actions may
justly be counted theirs. Columbus indeed adds two more proper which the
Eyebrows do use, which he affirms that neither Galen, nor Vesalius, nor any
other before him did know. And Aquapendens attributes an orbicular Muscle to
the Eyebrows.

Dissect. XI.
IN Sadness, Grief, and Severity, Dislike, Anger, Threatening, Revenge, and
Earnest study, we use to wrinkle or to bend the Brows from the Sinciput to the
Eyebrows, which are then knit about the Nose; the reason is, for that Sadness
is a certain Contraction of the heat and Spirits toward their Principle, in
regard of the apprehension of some ungrateful object, and this effect follows
although there be no real cause; the Forehead being deprived of the Heat and
Spirits, is wrinkled. The material caus^ being a melancholy humor affected
and kindled with much heat, which sends up a salt vapor to the Face, which
pluckes the Muscles of the Forehead. This motion is performed not only by
assistance of the fleshie Membrane, which under the Connative flesh endued with
many straight fibers goes into a musculous substance: but by the two Muscles on
each side of the Forehead; which motion Laurentius from Columbus brings to
prove, that the Muscles of the Forehead are two, and not one as some will have
it; for, if the Forehead had but one Muscle, this expression of the Mind
exhibited by the touching Brows could not be done, of which opinion also
Riolanus is. These Pyramidall Muscles united together by oblique fibers from
this employment of the Will might be called Musculi severi and minaces, The
Severe and Threatening Muscles.

Dissect. XII.
PRide, Arrogance, Contempt, and Won^derment, advance and lift up the
eyebrows; so does affected gravity when (...) is full of disdain; the like
action of the Eyebrows arch-like bent they use wh^^ are angry, and proudly
threaten Revenge; Grief and Sorrow also cause a man to use the same action of
his Brows. This motion that exhibits so many significations of the Mind, is
performed by the benefit of those Muscles, which arising from the upper parts
where the hair ends, descend into the Inferior parts, lifting up the
Eyebrows; for, those Muscles of the Forehead are rather to be called (as
Spigelius notes) the Muscles of the ^ye-brows, into which they are implanted,
and to whose motion they serve; since they were not designed for the
corrugation of the Forehead, but the elevation of the Eyebrows: for, if they
are reckoned among the Muscles of the Head that are seated in another part,
only because they administer unto the actions of the Head; why should not then
these also for the same reason, although seated in the Forehead, be called the
Muscles of the Eyebrows? This motion of the Eyebrows Riolanus brings together
with Dissection to prove, that the fibers of the Forehead are not oblique
stretched out from the top of the Nose toward the Temples, as Columbus will
have them; nor that the wrinkles of the skin might obtain a transverse
situation; but are carried right downwards as pleases Galen, to whom Vesalius
and Fallopius yield their suffrage. These Muscles if they remain in the middle
figure, as Anatomists speak, (wherein they do perpetually persist unless when
at pleasure and our arbitriment they are removed) they deteine the Eyebrows in
their native posture and situation; whose use of what decency and importance it
is, appears in those who by the unskilfulnesse of Chirurgions, and a
transverse Dissection of the fibers of these Muscles, have been deprived of the
use of these significations of the Mind, and have had their Eyebrows too much
humbled, that they have fallen about their eyes. These Muscles from this action
might be called Musculi Admirationis, the Muscles of Wonder or Admiration. And
because the Occipitiall Muscles (in them that have them) assist* as the pair
of the Forehead, to draw the skin and Eyebrows upward in these significations
of the Mind, they may be called for distinction sake, Musculi, sublimes,
Arrogantiae, (...), Contemptuosae gravitatis* The Lofty Muscles, or the Muscles
of A^rogance, the Threatners, and the Muscles of disdainefull gravity.

Memb. IV. Of the Muscle^ appointed to the Eyelids for the expediting certain
significant motions of the Mind.
THe Eyelids which are light, most (...) and soft, are fitted for a most agile
and prompt motion, and to exhibit many significations of the Mind; yet some
have thought the lower Lid immovable, and so by consequence not capable of
expressing a voluntary motion of the Mind; of which opinion was Galen, who
expostulates with Nature, why the lower Eyelid should not participate with the
upper in points of voluntary motion? Since it was ordained for the same end,
and has a place no less accommodated for the receiving of Muscles. Nature
seems here, as he confesses, unjust; when she might have divided it equally
between them, yet she would gratify the upper with the whole privilege of
motion: and not only unjust in that, but in making the lower Eyelid less than
the upper, which as other parts should have been equal, yet for that, he
applauds the artifice: but his inference from thence, which he says is
perspicuous, that it needed no motion, there he fails; the Reason of his Doubt
he there shows upon an experiment of observation: and it seems to him to need
animadversion, and if he had hit on the right, he promises to declare his mind
in that Book of Doubtful motions he intended to write. Here, says he, it is
sufficient to say that the subtlety of Nature is such, that many Great men
having sought to find it out, yet have not attained unto the full knowledge of
it. Vesalius in this follows Galen. Archangelus says the lower Eyelids stand
immovable, or immovable of themselves, unless they are stirred up by the
motion of the Genae. Weker says they seem to partake of no motion, there
being no Muscle allowed unto them to endue them with any instinct of action.
Laurentius conceives all the motion, and so consequently the signification, to
be performed by the upper Eyelid. Some say that it is after a manner moveable.
Indeed the motion of the lower Lid, it being less, is very small and obscure;
yet not so says Riolanus, but every man may deprehend it in himself: the other
being greater, has a more evident motion. Bauhinus says both the Eyelids
move, as is evident to sense. Paraeus says there is no difference between the
lower and the upper Eyelid, than that the upper brings forth a more open and
manifest motion: the lower a more obscurer, otherwise Nature had in vain
compassed it about with the substance of a Muscle, which late Anatomists have
found out. And indeed the Cause of their motion is very admirable; for, it
altogether imported them to be endued with a voluntary motion, else there were
no use for them. But to all voluntary motions Nature has provided certain
Instruments, which we call Muscles, which move the particles into which they
are inserted; for, since we can move them quicker or slower, oftener or
seldomer, or altogether refrain their motion, and again excite them to
motion, is not he deceived who says their actions are natural and besides our
Will? And in vain were they given us unless we could use them at pleasure,
and to some signification of the Mind. The Muscles that are designed for the
significant motions of the Eyelids are three, one right, and two semi-circular.

Dissect. XIII.
IMpudence, Contempt, and simple Admiration, cause the Eyes to stare, and
require an open Eye; which action proceeding from these intensions of the Mind,
is intense and Tonique, or strained into an extreme figure. Paraeus will allow
no peculiar Muscle for any such signification of the Mind; But the Broad Muscle
performs all, and by its porrection it may serve to open the Eye; who having
by an exact Anatomicall administration of that Muscle, shown how it mingles it
self with the skin, and the Muscles of the Lips; when you come, says He, to
the Eyes, you shall teach how by this one Muscle, the Eye is both opened and
shut; because it is compounded of a threefold kind of fibers. Although by the
opinion of all men that have hitherto written of Anatomy, these actions are
said to be done by the force of two Muscles appointed for that purpose, and
although in their public Demonstrations these two Muscles are wont to be
solemnly shown, yet I think, says He, the very Demonstrators are no more
assured of them than my self. And the ground upon which he took this opinion
up is, because to those that separate the fleshy Pannicle or broad Muscle, no
other Musculous flesh appears in those places, than what is of that Pannicle,
whether you guide your Knife from the front downward, or from the Ball of the
Cheek upward: besides, in incisions in the Eyebrows upon urgent occasion, we
are prohibited to work them transverse, lest this broad Muscle falling upon the
Eye, should make the upper Eyelid or upper cilium immovable: and if any such
incision happen by chance, we are bid presently to sew it up; which thing is a
very strong argument that the motion of the upper Cilium or the Superior
Eyelid is not performed by its own proper Muscles, but wholly depends upon the
broad Muscle for performance. But his next Argument is somewhat Philosophical
to the Doctrine of voluntary motion. Now (says he) if there should be such
proper Muscles in the upper Eyelid as are described, because when one Muscle
acts, his opposite or Antagonist does cease, and ought to give way and be
obsequious: that which is said to open the Eye working, his Opposite
obsequiously yielding, it necessarily follows the Muscle of the upper Eyelid
will be drawn toward it Principle or beginning, as we see to happen in
Convulsions; because the operation of a Muscle is a Collection of that part
which it moves, toward its Head; since therefore such a kind of Collection no
where appears, therefore he thinks it apparent, that all the motion of the
upper Eyelid depends upon this broad Muscle, and that it is the sole Author of
this motion, and consequently of these significations of the Mind exhibited
thereby. Nor is it to be omitted what Galen affirms, that the skin was endued
with a voluntary motion even for this very action, for it was necessary the
Eyelids should be much opened when we endeavor to see many External things at
one time, which is their intention who in this posture simply admire, or
impudently Gaze; for which (a little) the circumfused skin, as well that above
in the Forehead, as that beneath at the Ball of the Cheek, has a voluntary
motion, that by extension thereof it might open wide the Eyes. Vesalius speaks
of a broad and fleshy Glandule, which seems to him to be a certain
vice-Muscle to lift up the Eyelid. But we will conclude with the general
opinion of the best Anatomists, that these motions of the Mind are signified by
the operation of that Muscle of the Eyelid, which is commonly called Rectus,
or the straight Muscle, and from this office Apertor oculi, and Artollens
palpebram, the Eye-opener, or the Gazer, placed in the upper region of the
Orbit of the Eye, near the Musculus Artollens or Lifter of the Eye, being like
also in figure to it, proceeding from the same Principle as the rest which move
the Eye, and inserted into the Cartilage of the upper Eyelid, and by its
fibers contracted inwards, draws the superior Eyelid upwards, the lower of its
own accord subsiding into its place, assisted, according to the intensnes of
the Act, in these significations, by the Muscle of the Forehead. So that this
Muscle commonly called Attollens palbebram, might be named from the declaration
of these affections of the Mind effected by their moving, Musculus Impudicus,
vel simplicis Admirationis, the Muscle of staring Impudence, or simple
Admiration.

Another expression of the Mind is sometime performed by this Muscle, to wit,
Pride, and Loftiness; for Solomon in a Physiognomicall Proverb, observed a
Generation of men, whose Eyelids were lifted up; and therefore whereas the
Attollent Muscle of the Eye is called by Physiognomers Musculus superbus,
because it is a sign of Pride to have lofty Eyes: Casserius the expert
Anatomist, would rather have the declarations of pride and humility to be drawn
from the Eyelids, and especially from the upper Eyelid, for who have this
elate, are proud and fierce; they who have it depressed, and shutting as it
were half of the Eye, so that they seem to respect the ground, are humble and
mild. So that it might be called Musculus Sublimis the Sublime or haughty
Muscle of the Eyelids.

Dissect. XIIII.
Fear and pusillanimitie, cause the affrighted Eyes to twinkle, that is to
open and incontinently to shut more than is convenient. Some have thought this
motion of the Eyelids to be done by the instinct of Nature, and not upon
deliberation or set purpose; for so Aristotle would have them twinkle against
things whose occurrence threatens danger, So that the Muscle were unprofitable.
But in regard of the preservation of the Eye, against which some dangerous
thing is presented it is merely arbitrary: and natural only when it
proceeds from some affection of the Body, unto which it is obsequious, as in
the Cynique Spasme, wherein the upper Eyelid is seen to be naturally moved.
Casper Hofman. very well contends that this motion of the Eyelids is merely
voluntary by the example of those two Gladiators of whom Pliny makes mention
in his Natural History, also by the example of Socra es of whom Aulus Gellius
speaks, but that frequent interpellation happens from things that occur from
without, especially the air light, etc. Indeed usually it ^s done with no
great bent or intention of the mind, as those motions of Election are: but with
a kind of remission or slacking of that contention, as they perform actions,
who do a thing, as 'twere Drowzily and with less heed; and such never
perform a perfect motion, especially Tonique. Now because it is so soon done
(as the Proverb speaks) that for the most part we are not aware of its motion,
therefore it may be Aristtole rather called it natural than voluntary. It Is
true, Galen puts this among doubtful motions and those which are not yet found
out. The Voluntary and Natural motions (says he) are mingled in the Eyelids
motion, which is done in many men without the assent of the will, and you shall
scarce see any one who can so order his Eyelids, as not to move them, and to
remain with open eyes until he would close them; and who shuts them but
seldom. But this motion is merely Animal, as Ma^inellus and others by many
instances affirm, and Galen afterward confessed his former ignorance in this
matter, where he declares the manner how this is done, and reprehends those who
were of his former opinion. Some Sophisters (says he) when they had neither
found the moving Muscles, nor ^he reason of the motion, arrived to that point
of impudence to deny that motion to have any dependence upon ^ur will, but to
be natural, as those ^nvoluntary and necessary motions of ^he Heart, Arteries
and other instruments: thinking it better to lie, than to confess their
ignorance. ^araeus will have no peculiar Muscle ordained for this action, but
to be the work only of the Broad Muscle. But with Spigelius and others we
shall declare that this motion of pusillanimity is performed by two
semicircular Muscles called Claudentes, the Eye-shutters; one superior, seated
in the superior Eyelid, the other inferior; that being greater, this lesser;
yet there are not wanting some who would have these to be one single Muscle,
which yet are two; and observed ever to be double in men that are somewhat
Musculous, and their principles and insertion are distinct, although it be true
that their circular fibers do touch each other; to these add, that both of
them receive distinct Nerves from distinct places* But these Muscles are seated
between the fleshy membrane and that which is brought out of the pericranium,
of which the superior or greater, arises with a^ acute beginning out of the
inner angle (...) the Eye and part of the Eye-brow tha^ is next the Nose, and
so goes transversly toward the outer angle, and at last is inserted into the
outer angle. The lesser being arisen from the top of the Nose near the
foreward angle of the lower Eyelid, with a sharp beginning likewise, when,
being carried transversly, it comes to the middle part of the Eyelid, becomes
more fleshy, circuites the external angle, and ascending to the superior
Eyelid, it is inserted into it with a broad end. These two Muscles when
contracted into themselves, the greater draws down the upper Eyelid, and the
lesser attracts and raises up the lower Eyelid, so that the lower Eyelid is
only lifted up, and that with the second Shutter. Baubinus who would have
these two to be but one Muscle by reason of their fibers which are continued
says, that this Drawn toward its beginning, at one time moves the upper
Eyelid downwards and the lower upward, and so conjoynes and shuts both the
lids together; which the continuity in circuit and angle, and the moving in
the same angle, especially more constrict which is perceived by sight and touch
do prove: for, nothing can be constringed and come to a mutual contact,
unless some parts be led upward and other parts downward; But in respect of
the Eyelids these are two Semicircular Muscles, and separated, each makes a
Semicircle, but both joined together they make a perfect circle; but there is a
Semicircular Muscle found in each Eyelid as well in the lower as the upper,
whose motions are manifest, neither could so quick and frequent a motion be
performed by the upper Eyelid alone, since the motion downward requires a
longer space than is convenient for so great celerity, wherefore they easier
come to a mutual contact, if one be assisted by the other; the lower Eyelid
although it have two Right motions, yet it has not two Right Muscles as other
parts usually have for the same occasion; but this Circular Muscle performs
both actions. Now these two Semicircular Muscles or one circular which thus
shut the Eye in fear and pusi^lanimity might be called from their
manifestation of the mind, Musculi or Musculus Pusillanimitatis, the Muscles or
Sphincter of Pusillanimity. But true Cowards who are of the worse Sect of
winkers are wont to shut their Eyes very hard, not daring to behold at all what
they apprehend so dangerous; to this extreme figure that of Galen is to be
applied, who observes that one reason why the circumjacent skin was endued with
a voluntary motion was, the relief of this action: for, the eyes that were
then to be exactly closed and constring'd by all the circumjacent parts, when
they fear the incursion of any danger upon them, for that end the bordering
skin (both that above in the Forehead, and that which lies below about the
balls of the Cheek) being replicated upon it self by a voluntary motion,
shuts the Eye according to the timorous endeavor of the mind; and upon this
occasion, the Orbicular Muscle of the Eyebrows is not only assistant, but
chief Operator, which may thereupon be called Musculus vecordiae, the Dastard
Muscle, or the Rank cowards Sphincter.

Memb. V. Of the Muscles that serve to the significations of the Mind exhibited
by the motions of the Eye.
THe Eyes of man are the most clear Interpretors of the affections o^ the
mind; wherefore since they were ^or that purpose to be endued with a voluntary
motion, and all motions ar^ performed by Muscles, therefore the great Architect
gave Muscles to the Eyes, whereby they are most swiftly moved according to the
inward motions of the mind, whence the Eye by the Philosopher is said to be the
mos^ moveable part of our Body, by which advantage it has more opportunitie^
to express the motions of our mind* Which Muscles are usually accounte^ six,
because as they say there are bu^ six motions in man's Eye, allowing no Muscle
for the Tonique motion of the Eye, which yet many ocular Anatomists do; which
Muscle may be divide^ into more. If you would observ^ the proper motion of
these Muscles (when they remain in their seat) bind a thread to every one of
them not far from the Tendon, and then draw it, and you shall see how each
Muscle works the Eye to that motion which exhibits the signification of the
Mind which it was ordained to promote.

Dissect. XV.
PRide, Contempt, and Disdain, lift the Eyes upward toward the Eyebrows. The
Muscle, the Organ that causes this lofty motion or exaltation of the Eye is,
the great Muscle, the first in order; for, Pride will have the first place, and
loves precedencie. It is commonly called Attollens or the Lifter, arising from
the upper part of the orbite of the Eye, near where the Optique Nerve comes
forth, and is inserted into the Coat (called Cornea) of the Eye, where it is
clear and near the Iris, by a thin and membranous Tendon, which when it is
drawn to its Head, it helps to declare the Pride of such men who are lifted up
in their own conceit. Therefore more elegantly and apposite to the
signification of the Mind, named Mus^culus superbus, the proud Muscle; becau^^
it lifts up the Eye with a kind of Di^^dain, or the Elate and proud Muscle,
becau^^ in such men it does seem to be round and more prompt to its office,
as Sp^^gelius well observes. And although the^ is a natural reason for the
greatness an^ situation of this exalted Muscle, becau^^ there is greater
strength required to (...) up than to pull down: yet it is very re^markable,
that it has a signature for the signification of Greatness, in that
pro^portion it has to the other Muscles and of loftiness and exaltation of
Mind in being placed above in the superio^ part of the Eye. This Muscle might
(...) more fitly called Musculus Sanctus, (...) Devout or holy Muscle, this
being the Mu^^cle by whose operation in the pious a^^fection of the Soul we
lift up our Ey^ to Heaven in Prayer.

Dissect. XVI.
IN Bashfulnesse, and Shame-faced mod^^sty, and in exhibiting an humble
rev^^rence, with a sweet demisseness we dra^ our dejected Eyes downward toward
the lower Lid. The Muscle that causes this motion is, the Second of the Eye
commonly called Musculus Deprimens, the Depressor or puller-down of the Eye; by
some Anatomists (as I find it fitted to my Design) it is called Musculus
Humilis, the Humble Muscle; for ^ariation we call it the Muscle of Modesty, or
the Bashful Muscle, Not without an Allegorical signature of proportion lesser
than the other, although ^he Eye also which with its own weight ^ends downward
needed no greater (...). And as Humility is opposite to Pride, (...) justly
seated opposite to the First, and (...) the inferior and lower part of the Eye,
by that signature of situation shew^^g, that it is fitted to express the
lowness of Mind, which it most sweetly (...) when it is drawn to its Head. It
^iseth in the inferior part opposite un^^ the former Muscle of Pride, and has
(...) insertion as the former.

Dissect. XVII.
TO turn the apple of the eye toward the Nose, is their peculiar action who
are Sour and Severe; for, such are of a Contuitive, Grave, and Cogi^abund
aspect, such as is seen in those who with some Tragical and Goblin-like look
would affright and scare others. The Muscle which when it is drawn to its Head
performs this motion and signification of the Mind is, the third Muscle seated
in the great Angle, and arises from the Orbite of the Eye, near the
Origination of the Proud Muscle, and is inserted as the former. It is commonly
called Adducens, the To-leader; because it leads the eye inward toward the
Nose; and by the Barbarous Bibitorius, the Tosse-pot; because they make use of
this Muscle who look into the Cup they drink out. Dr Crook calls it the
Gleejng Muscle; for that the Eye is usually turned that way in gleejng; we may
call it the Squinting Muscle; I say the Tragic or Hobgoblin Muscle, but most
opposite and pathetically it may be called Musculus acerbus and severus, the
Sour an^ severe Muscle.

Dissect. XVIII.
Waywardness, Indignation, Contempt, and Disdain, sometimes draw the Eye to
the lesser angle, or to the Temples; which motion and signification of the Mind
is performed by the fourth Muscle opposite to the third, arising and reposed in
the outer side, or external Angle of the Eye, and inserted as the former, and
commonly called Abducens, or the Fro-leader; for, when this Muscle is drawn to
its Head, the Eye becomes the Interpreter of such affections of the Mind. This
Muscle I find more significantly called Musculus indignatorius, the Muscle of
Indignation, or the wayward Muscle. We call it says Dr. Crook the
S^ue-Muscle, or the Muscle of Disdain. And the obliquity of the situation
affords ^ signature for the signification of the motion: for, when the Eye
assisted by ^his Muscle looks askaunce or askew upon any, it most properly
exhibits an overthwart regard, or slighting Dispo^ition of the Mind.

Dissect. XIX.
Wantonness, and Amatorious petulancy make use of a rolling Eye to express
their procacity in. Archangelus conceives that this Circular motion of the Eye,
and expression of the Mind is done, when all the four first Muscles at diverse
times without stay successively work. Which is also the opinion of Columbus.
Which Fallopius reprehends and says, that they err who think the oblique
motions of the Eyes are done by the straight Muscles loosed and stretched by
turns, and acting in sequence, denying that out of two or more refracted right
motions, a Circular should result; since there is no proportion between a
crooked and a straight; we may add with Galen, one motion is not made of many,
as figures are made of lines; yet Platerus is of opinion, that if two right
Muscles of both sides work together, oblique motions may be also accomplished
by their cooperations. But Bau^inus, Vesalius, Spigelius (which is the most
true and authentical opinion) attribute this obscure circumversion and rolling
expression of the Mind to the fifth and sixth Muscle, which as Vesalius well
observes, as they chiefly conduce to Circumversion of the Eye, yet they drive
it after a manner upward and downward: So that the whites obliquely cast up and
down, cause a leering look, which is called the S^eepes Eye. The fifth Muscle
which is the first oblique, and the rolling or circumvolving exterior or
inferior from its situation, and Minor because less than the sixth, this is
seated in the exterior and internal seat of the Orbite, between the Eye, and
the Tendons of the Humble and Severe Muscles, having its original from the
rist which is in the lower part of the Orbite, and joins the first bone of the
Jaw to the fourth, and is implanted near the Iris with an oblique Line,
between the Tendons of the proud and wayward Muscles; whose very situation and
insertion show, that love which they serve to express, is a passion compounded
of all the other* the office of this Muscle is to roll the Eye obliquely
downward to the external Angle with a circular mo^ion, and so to turn the
sight of the Eye toward the Nose. Yet about the rising and insertion of this
Muscle there is great difference of opinion among Anatomists, the most
erroneous Archangelus has well confuted, that is theirs, who would have it to
rise and end in the Eye, which is contrary to the Principle of voluntary
motion: for, if every thing that moves, is moved upon some Q^i^^cent, and in
the moving of the Muscles, the original of the Muscle moving is ever
quiescent, it would follow that the Eye in the very self same article of time
should be moved and rest, which is impossible. The sixth Muscle, and the second
of the Oblique commonly called the interior or superior circumagent, and the
Major because the longest of all the Muscles of the Eye (which although it
exceed them all in length, yet on the contrary in regard o^ its tenuity it is
the smallest of all, this not exactly oblique as the other, but partly straight
and partly oblique, i^ arises out of the same place from whence the Adducens
or To-leade^ does, and having passed by the Pully* and going over the Proud
Muscle, as amorousnesse many times surmounts men's pride, and brings them to a
wanton humility) it is inserted in the upper region of the Eye, between the
Tendons of the Proud and Wayward Muscl^; the use of this Muscle is to roll the
Eye with a kind of circular motion toward the inner Angle, and so to draw the
apple of the Eye from the Nostrills. These Muscles I find according to my
Design, called Musculi amatorij, the Rollers, or Muscles of Love, and
Circulares, the Muscles of the amorous Circuit; the superior Circulator being
also called Musculus Troc^leae, or the Muscle of the Pully, which is a little
Cartilage resembling a Pully, hung by a Ligament in the concave or upper and
lower part of the inner Angle of the Eye, made for the Eyes sake, found out
first by Fallopius, and by Laurentius and Aquapendent called his Pully, serving
this Muscle for a promptness of motion, which from thence obtained its name;
for, it has a Canale through which the Chord of this Muscle passes, and when
the Muscle is drawn inward toward its Principle or Head, his Chords or Strings
with a kind of circular motion obvolve or roll the Eye to the greater Angle.
This is the Muscle most active in this amorous rolling of the Eye, and has a
signature for the facilitating of an easy and amorous insinuation, expediting
and facilitating the motion of the other; both of them being not so fleshy as
the others and small, have a signature for a swift and nimble moving, to which
the round figure of the Eye does much confer; for, a Sphericall figure is most
convenient for a swift motion, which precedes all other movings in a wonderful
velocitie, a circular motion having two advantages of speed beyond any other.
Fallopius says he cannot sometimes refrain from Laughing, when he sees in
man's eyes Muscles the Authors of Circular motion, and yet that they were not
found by the most exercised Anatomists.

Dissect. XX.
IN Cogitation, Admiration, attentive D^liberation, and in voluntary Ecstasies
of the mind the Eyes are fixed, and the Eyelids remain unmoved, and the Head
let down, we contemplat the earth with a set, wist, or museing look; which
motion is Tonique, and is done as B^uhirus, Laurentius, Spigelius and others
suppose, when the four first Muscles of the Eyes, the Lifter the Depressor the
To-leader and the Fro-leader, work together, for then the Eye is drawn inward,
fixed, established and contained; which is then according to Nature, when the
fibers of all the Muscles are equally intended and stretched out; So that the
Muscles seem then to be at rest, though indeed (as we have often said) they
do as Galen speaks, quiet agere, act in rest, for every action of the Muscle
is a moving. The manner how this is done (as they say) is very remarkable, the
four Muscles arise from the Conus of the Orbit of the eye or the root of the
Optique Nerves, thence stretched to the Optique Nerve and to the eye in a
straight line they ^end to the horny Coat, but before they come thither they
end in a broad Tendon whereby they are joined to the Tendons of the other
Muscles and seem to constitute a proper membrane, encompassing the whole eye,
this tendonous membrane is inserted into the hornie Coat in that part where it
is pellucid before the Iris or Rainbow of the Eye, Whence it comes to pass
that all the Muscles working together the Eye is staid and established. But
Columbus who challenges the fifth Muscle as discovered first by his invention,
affirms that Muscle to come into the aid of the other four, which stays the
Eye, as its situation shows, when it is contracted toward its Head, holding
the Eye that it fall not out of its Seat. And Laurentius will have all the six
Muscles of the Eye to concur and to stretch their fibers to this Ballancing
or equal fixing of the Eye. This makes Lavellus, Fontanus and others
contradict Galen, Vesalius, Fuchius and others that follow him, as if there
were no need of a seventh Muscle. But although Spigelius and others will allow
no Muscle to be purposely assigned to this Tonique motion of the Eye: yet
Avicen, Fernelius and some late expert Anatomists are for the seventh Muscle,
affirming that the Muscle which is most active and providently designed to this
action is, that bulbous and orbicular Muscle which they leave to Beasts, who
have need of such a Muscle by reason of their prone aspect, whereas man's os
sublime makes it unnecessary. As for them who cannot see this Muscle (if there
were any doubt of it) the expression of Fontanus which he uses about Folius
his affirming to have sometimes seen the venae lacteae, may be applied. It is
easier to believe one that writes affirming he has seen it, than him who
denies he has seen it: for, because one has not seen a thing, it does not
straightwise follow that that thing is not, but that which one truly sees,
that is, because sense is of things existent. This Muscle therefore that
encompasseth the Optique Nerve and the Basis of the Eye, has a signature of
Situation for this purpose, and therefore being the Chief operator it might be
called the Tonique Muscule. And because Admiration, Cogitation and attentive
Deliberation are a kind of suspension or fixing of the mind, and an intent
application (for, the whole force of the mind is fixed upon the thing and
therefore it is called an intention) And because Ecstasy is a certain excess
of the mind and phantsie in Admiration, from whence the Nerves are stretched
and the Eyes made immovable in resemblance of the posture of the mind, this
Muscle might be called Musculus intentae Cogitationis, voluntariae E^stasis,
intentae Deliberationis, the Muscle of earnest Cogitation and Deliberation, or
the Muscle of the Ecstaticall intention of the mind, or the Musing Muscle.
Amazement, Astonishment, and Stupidity, (passions of the mind working in an
extraordinary manner upon the same Muscles being then passive) cause such an
immovable fixing and staring of the Eye. This is of things formidable and is
an affection above an Ecstasy, which has then no name but is called Horror from
its effect; for, the Spirits that move the Muscles being made immovable, the
Eyes become stiff as horn; for, admiration causes a tension, fear
frigiditie, whence the Nerves become distended and as it were congealed.
Generally this set motion is the other kind of that aspect which they call
Tonique, and is besides nature, when the Eyes remain fixed whether we will or
no: which happens (as they usually say) when the faculty that moves the Muscles
is resolved, weakened or wholly extinguished; or because those Muscles are all
equally gathered and contracted into their Heads.

Memb. VI. Of the Muscles assigned the Ears for certain significations of the
mind.
Dissect. XXI.
CLaramontius and indeed all Semeioticall Philosophers are here lost,
concluding that there is scarce any refluction of the affections into the
Ears, and that of themselves they have no order at all to action. Caelius
says they are immovable, or if they be moved that motion of theirs is duller
and less preceptible. Galen takes not away all motion from our Auricles, whose
substance is (as his words are) but fere immobilis. Athenaeus describing
Hercules greedily eating says he moved his Ears no less than Qu^dr^pedes
do; where Causabon besides which he brings out of Eustathius speaks of one
Muretus who could manifestly move his Ears. And Hosman says he has ^eene
them that could do as much. Justinian the Emperor had such Ears, and
therefore the people among other opprobious indignities offered him in the
Theater, as you shall find in Pro^opius, called him Ass. S. Augustine writes of
certain who could at their pleasure move their Ears either one alone or both
together. Vesalius also says he saw in Padua a Lawyer one Claudius Sym^nius a
Forojuliensian a facetious man, and one Petrus Raviscerius of Geneva a valiant
and stout man, who could at their pleasure move their Ears. All the Family of
the Flacci o^ Rome had this moving of the Ears, and Scipio Du Plesis the
Resolver a great observer of the curiosities of Nature says that he himself
had seen in Gascoig^^ two men who had this moving. And when I was a boy I
remember a School-fellow of mine in whom I was wont to observe that by way of
sport he would often wagg his Ears. So that the Ears although in man for the
most part they are immovable, so that their motion is sensibly perceived in
very few; yet if it happen that we move them at our pleasure as has bin
observed in many, that is performed by Muscles; Caelius imagines that these
Muscles which are perceived to be so wonderfully moved in some men, is not by
reason of the inward motion of the Ear, but by extrusion or excussion of the
Muscle that moves the Jaw, which sometimes is drawn so near the Ear that it
touches it. But indeed the Muscles whose action is motion and the Nerves
which are commonly observed about the Ears do declare it to be true that the
motive virtue does flow into the Ears. And Vesalius the great Anatomist
affirms that they are moved by reason of their Muscles. Indeed as Casserius
well argues, Although the energeticall force of moving be only deprehended by
the senses as apparent now and then in a few certain men, yet the influence of
motion is general into the Ears of al men, which makes them partakers of
voluntary motion; for, unless it were so, we must protest against the
Doctrine of all Anatomists now from many ages confirmed by most certain,
infallible and frequent observations; That motion is not the essential action
of a Muscle, seeing there is no auricle but has its proper Muscles: Neither
does the Sensual immobility of all auricles almost persuade this very thing;
for, it is an Elenchus Consequentiae, The motion of the auricles appears not
to sense, Ergo they have none: For, although we are to yield to reasons, when
the effect appears to the senses; yet where the sense proves defective and
reasons may prevail, the effect is not to be denied; for, if as Galen
witnesses, there concur to an Agent a fit situation, a due space of time, a
valid force of the Agent and a disposition of matter to receive, what should
hinder the effect? these for the most part to be present in the accomplishing
the motion of the Ears, even Sense does teach; wherefore although the motions
of the Ears are not made manifest, yet it is not to be denied, but some motion
at least and less perspicuous to sense is performed by them. The cause why men
do not ordinarily and evidently move the exterior Cartilages of their Ears as
other Animalls do which have them is, as Baubinus and others conjecture,
because those principalls of motion are very small, So that Galen ealls them
certain Delineaments of Muscles, and they have little threads of Nerves, So
that the motive Spirits cannot in sufficient quantity flow into them: and the
Ears are too little and Cartilagineous, whereby the little Branches of the
Muscles and Nerves cannot be expanded; whence their motions are so rare, and so
little perspicuous and obvious to sense, which are greater in such men whose
Ears are perspicuously moved. And where the occipitiall Muscles are found,
these of the Ears are manifestly discovered. Hence it may be Columbus had this
knack of moving his Ears, and he St. Augustine speaks of, both which could
move the whole skin of their Heads by virtue of those Muscles, and having them
(if Fallopius and Riolanus his affirmation hold) had these Muscles of the Ears
manifestly obedient to their wills.

Another reason why the Ears in men are not ordinarily at least not evidently
seen to move is, lest the Sense o^ Discipline should be depraved, especially
since the ears of man are small wherefore they are moved every way to receive
sounds by the most swift motion of the Head, and therefore in Brutes who want
that expeditious mobility of the Head, they are greater, to be more capable of
sounds from all parts, and to drive away flies, which man can do with his
hands. So that to prevent a greater inconveniency and undecency than their
ordinary employment could recompense, they are usually suspended from
preceptible actions in most men, yet, this is not without a Tacit elogie of
the Pleropheria of motion which the face enjoyes by its Muscles, to which the
surplusage of auricular motion might seem unnecessarily redundant; for, the
Face of man is so sufficiently provided of Muscles, the Organs of voluntary
motion, which are ever ready to express any motion his will is pleased to
concur unto, and make a significant declaration by, that he needs no such
additaments as the Muscles of the Ears would make, if they were ordinarily
reduced to manifest action, yet such who have these Muscles large enough for
apparent action, seem to have a Patent for excellent Pantomimicall utterance,
such additionall helps, in all probability, giving advantage of supernumerary
gestures. Now although to men that can express their affections not only in
words, but also by speaking motions, especially in their Faces which are open
and discovered, Nature has seemed to have thought it undecent and
unprofitable, to have any great volubility or flexibility (for so we must
speak for want of better words) in the motion of their Ears as other
Animalls, the flexibility of his Head and Neck serving the Ears to all such
intents and purposes; yet since these Auricular Muscles (the invention whereof
are due to Fallopius) were appositely conspicuous in them by whom they were
manifestly moved while they lived, and are not only described by him, but most
Anatomists, we will first describe them, and then see whether any thing can be
made of their motions. They are usually numbered four, Common, and Proper.
Attollens or the lifter up, Deprimens or the pulle^ down, Adducens ad interiora
the To-leader, Abducens the Fro-leader. The Attollent seated in the anterior
part of the Face placed upon the Temporal Muscle the Attollent of the Jaw;
From the external end of the Frontall Muscle where it is contiguous to the
Temporal is inserted into the upper part of the Auricle. The Detrahent seated
in the hinder part of the Head fetching its original from the Mammillary
process of the Tempils and ends in a Tendon which embraces the whole root o^
the Cartilage of the Ear so, that one portion of it touches the upper part,
the other the middle, the third the lower part. The forward Adducent or
To-leader is a Common Muscle, to wit a particle of that which they usually call
Quadratus or the Detra^ent of the Cheeks, this ascending with its fibers is
implanted into the root of the Auricle. The backward A^ducent is placed in the
Nowle arising from the Covers of the Muscles of the Nowle is implanted into the
hinder part of the Ear.

Since therefore Nature laid not in these Muscles as intending them for any
(...) of Hearing, for we hear against our will; some other use they have,
since nothing appears in the Body that was made in vain, or has not some
office ^^signed. But our Anatomists that ac^nowledge, name, and describe these
Muscles, nay, appoint their very acti^ns, express not what those Actions ^ay
aim at, or are useful unto, no ^ention of any advantage to the Head (...)
their moving; why should these ^uscles pass thus by tradition from ^and to
Hand, and yet remain as non ^^gnificants? they had as good be non Li^ets. I
confess, so novell a thought which for all I can find was never en^^rtained or
scand by any Head) would (...) a curious Fantsie, and such a one (...) is,
whose Motto is, In nova fert ^^imus, tentata relinquere pernox, to ^^tempt a
Comment upon this conceal^ent, and the great silence of preteri^^^n in all
Dissectors; But having had (...) opportunity (since this Design) to observe
any one that had this knack o^ auricular motion, I shall not suffer my Fantsie
to drive far after a seeming Personality, our Scope being to describ^ such
Actions only, which are generally and universally used by all men, as apparent
significations of their Mind (...) and indeed there could be little use o^ such
a Nicetie, since few wise men delight much to show their Ears. But a^ Columbus
would not describe these Muscles because they were but rarely found yet
confesses he had found two of them and at last that he had observed Ear like
unto Brutes in men, which I suppose he meant of their motion; So ^ shall leave
others to guess what proportion these Auricular motions in me^ do hold with
the moveable Ears o^ Beasts, who participate with us in point of Animal
motion. It is well know^ that most of Creatures that have n^ Countenance to
express the variation of their Sensitive Appetites and Imagination, do
express their Senses by certain motions or wagging of their Eare^ for when
they are fearful or affrighted they do auriculis micare, wag their Ears
^uccessively erecting and depressing, or ^anging one Ear, the other erect;
when ^hey are faint and weary their Ears lan^uish; when they are erect or
furious, they (...) up t^eir Ears; when they are sick, their Ears flag and
appear as it were ^esolv'd. Now, as in other Creatures ^he motions of the E^re
have their di^^inct significations; so no question they ^ave in those men in
whom they are ^erceived to move, and in most of us, (...) we had subtlety
enough to note them, and such an open convenience of obser^ation as we have for
Auricular motions (...) Beasts.

Memb. VII. ^f the Muscles that serve to the Significations of the Mind,
exhibited by the motions of the Nose.
THe whole Nose is not, indeed, moved, but only the inferior Cartila^^nous
parts, which Anatomists are wont ^o call the Wings of the Nose; which ^^nce
they are movable, and were to be ^oved by a voluntary motion, there was a
necessity that Muscles should be inserted into them; for although their chief
significations may seem to be performed by the Muscles of the Lips, insomuch
as they also touch the Wings of the Nose, even as the first Muscle of the
Cheeks or Face, is inserted into the root of the Nose: Yet in those that have
great Noses, Anatomists constitute twofold Muscles peculiar to the Nose. These
move the Wings of the Nose with a voluntary motion, the other part of the Nose
remaining immovable; and being throughout connexed with the skin that lies
over them, it administers unto the Motion and Corrugation thereof. So that it
is apparent to the Eye that the Nose is moved with a voluntary motion: So
likewise it follows and is agreed upon that its motions are accomplished by
Muscles, although the Controversy be great among Anatomists concerning their
Essence, Original, Number, Figure and Connection; absurd therefore is their
opinion, which deprives the Nose of all voluntary motion, affirming that it is
only lightly moved by the intervention and tract of inspired Air, since this
exterior motion of the Nose is so manifest, and appears so obedient unto our
Will, that no man but may perceive it, especially since in the Dissection of
the Nose, you shall find Muscles which no skillful Anatomists can deny to be
the true Authors of this Action.

Dissect XXII.
SAgacity, Nose-wisdome, and Sensorious Derision, cause a man to crispe and
^rinkle his Nose upwards, the Nostrils being so raised and contracted, that the
Nose seems crooked and hooked, and by that means becomes acute. These
significations of the Mind are exhibited ^y the Nose, through the operation of
those Muscles of the Nose, which are ^ommonly called Abducentes, or Aperi^ntes,
or Dilatores, the openers, or stretch^ng Muscles, which are two pair.
Cas^^rius (indeed) would have this to be ^ut one Muscle which hitherto has
^een accounted double, dilating the ^ostrills by drawing the Wings of the ^ose
upwards, that upon any exigency of Passion the Air might have a more
plentiful Ingresse and Egresse; for, otherwise this Muscle would be void of
all employment; yet sometimes being not sufficient alone, for some extraordinary
necessity, it calls the Muscles of the Cheeks unto its aid, yet when reason
requires, one part of it can act alone, the other part resting from action. But
they are two pair, the first pair drawing its original from the Jaw Bone
near the first proper pair of the Lips, is inserted partly into the lower
wing of the Nose, and partly into the higher part of the upper Lip called the
Philtre: The other pair covering both the sides of the Nose resembles a
Triangle; For, it arises with an acute Origination from the top of the Nose,
and descending obliquely by the bones of the Nose it ends in a broad Basis, and
is implanted into the wings of the Nose. Fallopius says there are certain
fleshy fiber not few of them arising from the middle of the Eyebrows and the
Spin^ or Ridge of the Nose, which descending obliquely, are added to the fir^^
pair, and implanted into the pinnae o^ sides of the Nose to draw or rivell it
upwards, which you may reckon for a pair of the Dilators of the Nostrills, or
for a part of the first pair it makes no matter which, so we know the use of
of it in this revulsive action, and indeed these second pair are very properly
by Dr. Rhead, called Erectores, or the Raisers upwards. When these two pair
work together and are forcibly contracted to their Heads, the wings of the
Nose are drawn outward and upward* whereby the Nostrills are not a little
dilated, and the skin of the Nose and the adjacent parts most ironically
wrinkled: and because they are continued to the Muscles of the Lips, the upper
Lip is drawn up together with the Nose, which sets a speaking emphasis upon the
Action. Now because Nose-wisemen use this action, Snuffing up the wind withal,
as if they smelt somewhat amiss; and that they arise from between the
Eyebrows which are the natural Censors of the Face, and the thrones of
Judicature, obliquely descending to draw men as with a proboske, before the
tribunal of judgment; And the Nose which from its acuteness in this action
is often put for judgment, and dedicated to dry Derision or Sagacity, These
Muscles might be significantly and most properly (in reference to the
employment they have from the mind) be called Mus^uli Sagacitatis, vel
Censoriae judicationis, The Muscles of Sagacity, or Censorious judgment.

Dissect. XXIII.
CHoler, fuming and precipitate anger or furious madness cause a man to blow
up and down his nostrills with wind, with which sudden and fiery sufflations
the nostrills seem to smoke like a Furnace. Galen seems to be of opinion that
the first part of this action of the Nostrills was caused by no Muscles, but by
inspiration only, and that in vehement inspirations, the wings of the Nose
followed the impetuous attraction of the breath; But Vesalius objects, that in
very strong in^pirations, the Nostrills may be preserved in this posture.
Aristotle (which is no great marveil since he knew not the active force of
Muscles) thought that in the profundity of the Nose there was a certain
valvula, which was opened with inspiration to give egresse to the Air, which
upon ceasing of the inspiration, was shut; which Galen refutes, pronouncing it
to be a thing very uncertain, and that wants Demonstration, and were to no
purpose; and if we should grant it (says Galen) the motion of this Valvula
must either be Animal, natural, or violent. No man will say it is voluntary,
because to Animal motion there is no need of a Valvula, (such imaginary things
as Henericus Regius has gone about by demonstration to persuade us unto) and
an animal motion obeyes our will, ^ut this lid of the Nose is never opened ^ut
when we breath; again, a Muscle is ^he instrument of a voluntary motion, but
^n the inner top of the Nostrils there are ^o Muscles: Nor will this motion be
na^^rall as that of the Valvula of the Heart, because the motion of the Heart
(...) perpetual, and is not performed ac^ording to our will: And we cannot say
it is violent, for Doors are opened by the impetuous rushing in of Air,
without attraction of breath. But although the Nostrills in great inspirations
are a little elevated, and the wings are brought in as following the impetuous
force of the Breath, and in expiration they again reside and are blown out;
yet the Nostrills were moveable and endued with Muscles for this purpose,
because to greater and sudden inspirations and Efflations, they might not a
little confer, their mobility wonderfully relieving the mind in such sudden
Efflations of anger; not a little assisted by the intercostall Muscles, which
according to Galen serve for a plentiful Efflation, and in most vehement
respiration, the Muscles above the Breast come into their aid. But although
Columbus does not acknowledge the constringen^ Muscles, yet we with Spigelius
and others that describe them, must attribut^ this Action chiefly to them,
althoug^ we can not fully agree with Stephanu^ That to the contraction of the
wings o^ the Nose there are no opposite Muscle^ who says, when the
Constringent cease from their action, the Nostrills are forcibly driven out
with a Cholerique wind. These Constringent Muscles are very small as they can
scarce be seen or distinguished, unless in those that have great Noses; and
they are two pair, whereof the first pair is external, arising from about
the root of the wings, and is inserted into the little Globe of the Nose; the
second is internal, and hidden in the cavity of the Nostrills, arising from
the bones of the Nose where they end near the Cartilages, and is inserted into
the wings of the Nose: That contracted, depresseth the wings; this does
introduce or bring them in, and so shuts the Nostrills. And it may be the
orbicular Muscle of the upper Lip, drawing that Lip downward, does withal
constringe and shut the Nostrills, helping a little the attractive action of
the Nose. Now because when incensed Choler gets into the Nose, the Muscles
commonly called the Constringent are most active to bring wind to this
Pepper-Wind-Mill, whereby it is put into a fuming motion, they may be called
Musculi magna Spirantes, or Magni Spiritus, or Fumantes, or Excandescentiae,
the fuming Cholerique, or the Chasing Muscles, or the Muscles of precipate
Anger, or Magnamity.

Memb. VIII. Of the Muscles active in the significations of the Mind exhibited
by the Cheeks.
FOr the advancement of the significant motions of the Cheeks, there are two
Muscles subservient to each of them, and these Muscles are seldom moved, but
in the same motion they draw the Lips into consort of their significations; the
Muscles being common to them and the Lips; for, these Muscles are not
appropriated as peculiar to the Cheek^, but because they seem more to serve
the expressions of the Cheeks, than of the Lips, Spigelius thinks it more
fit, with that warning of their Community, to revoke them to the Service of the
Cheeks, and so consequently to be the instruments of those voluntary motions
which appear in them, which are as Galen observes performed without the motion
of the lower Jaw or opening of the Mouth, the Cheek and the skin to which they
are annexed being only moved, which motion is evident before Dissection; the
Region of their power being that inferior looser part seated without the closed
Jaws and is extended from the Chin almost unto the Eyes, and which by the
breath recalled by the Lungs and retained in the Lips shut, may be blown up.
As for the Balls or Aples of the Cheeks, the seat of Shame, they have no
Muscles, but are drawn in consort by the motion of the Neighboring skin, not
having any proper significations appertainng to voluntary or local motion; but
although they have no Muscles disposed under them, yet is the skin loose having
under it the membrane Periostium, and because its interior part adheres to the
Cheeks, and the Superior part is united with the Musculous substance which is
under the Forehead, it may be moved together with them. Galen allows us, if we
will, to reckon this a fifth Species of skin; but according to its proper
Species, it differs nothing from the skin of the whole Body: yet because it
has this peculiar, to be contained and hemmed in by two skins, and those
movable, united and cohering with them, by that reason comes to be endued with
a voluntary motion; and, therein, now differs from the skin of the whole
Animal. So that being not moved per se, but per accidens, having no sensible
motion, as not fitted for such an use; the signification of their motions does
consequently depend, as Suffragans, upon the motions of the other parts.

Dissect. XXIV.
Scorn and Detraction make a man sometimes to distort his Cheeks, and draw
one side of his mouth down unto the other side, in imitation of the Cynique
Spasme, So that the Cheeks keep not their own situation and figure, but one
follows the other; for, when we withdraw our mouth obliquely to the left side,
the Muscles are so drawn together, there is a necessity the Muscle of the
other Cheek should be drawn to follow the Retraction, which thereupon becomes
more extended and longer than the other; for those that are Musculi congeneres,
that is, which conspire to one and the selfsame actual expression, which are
usually one on the Right side and another on the Left, as often as these
Muscles in the opposite parts are paires in number, magnitude, and strength,
the contraction of one makes a relaxation of the other, that part which is
contracted drawing the other, to wit the whole Cheek aside unto it, so that it
always happens that the relaxed part is carried to the contrary part, for that
is drawn by the Muscle that causes the Action, which contraction of the
perverse Cheek happens by reason of the shortness of its Muscle, for, every
motion that proceeds from the will seems to be done by the attraction of the
Muscles to those parts whence they arise, neither could the attraction of the
other Cheek be done unless the opposite Muscle were drawn back to its
original, whence it appears that the Depraved figure of the Mouth or Symptom
of the function of the voluntary mover hurt, called by Physicians the Cynique
Spasme, which this action seems to counterfeit, by this account differs only
from the Natural, that it is done besides our will, the Convulsion driving the
Nerves and Muscles to the same affect, to which they are led by the Animal
Faculty when they keep their natural habit; the Muscles are contracted into
their proper heads, and with them they rivell that part into which they are
inserted, which indeed is common to the natural and praeter-naturall
Plaise-mouth or Dog-Spasme. This ridiculous, action proceeding from a
Detracting Disposition of the mind is performed by the square Muscle of the
Cheek by Spigelius called Detrahens Quadratus, the first that suffers
convulsion in those that are falling into the Cynique Spasme; the varying
conduct of the fibers of which Muscle some being straight, some oblique, and
some transverse, are to be well considered of by Chirurgions in their incisions
in these parts, which some not knowing, by an over free cutting of the
transverse fibers overthwart, have caused both Cheeks to run as plucked to one
side. This is a thin Muscle although broad and large lying hid next under the
skin of the Neck, and encompassing the whole upper Jaw in the Face, draws its
origin from the regions of the snigs of the Vertebres of the Neck, the
external part of the Neck, the Scapula, clavicula, and the Breast Bone,
ascends by degrees with oblique fibers to the Face, and is implanted into that
part of the Chin where the upper Lip is joined unto the lower. This Muscle,
which covers the Face, and out of which the Muscles of the Nostrills Eyebrows
and Lips are made, being contracted unto it self by aid of those oblique and
transverse fibers it has, the Cheek we command, is drawn awry, the Nose,
Eyebrows and Lips following the obliquity of that motion, thereby making this
Ironie of gesture most complete, for, the Cheek, the Seat of laughter
leading, the Nose with dry mockery or Derison follows, the Lips obsequious by
a silent Detraction, manifest their agreement to the motion of the Nose, and
though they two are in the middle, yet both agree to assist this action on the
side stage of Derision, while the Censorious Eyebrows overlooking, by a
motion of assent and concurrence applaude the Irony. From the signification of
Detraction which this Scheme or figure of motion aptly expresses, this Muscle
may retain the name of Musculus Detrahens, and be called the Detracter,
Detractions by Solomon being aptly called Detrahentia labra, Detracting lips,
alluding for all we know to this action of the Cheeks, the Lips always
moving, when this square Muscle moves, which is common to them and the Cheeks.

Dissect. XXV.
ANger, Swelling indignation, Pride, Disdain, Arrogance, and Ambitious love of
praise, puff up the Cheeks of selfe-conceited men, and make them look big
upon others. Spigelius thinks this motion is not performed by the help of any
Muscle but only happens by the relaxation of the fibers of the Muscle
Buccinator while the breath is retained in the hollow of the Mouth the lips
being shut this Muscle is Distended which makes the greatest part of the
Cheek. But the Muscle Buccinator being so called from the similitude at least
of this affectation of the mind, comprehending all that part which is blown up
when we sound a Trumpet is commonly assigned to this action and consequently to
the signification of this affectation of the mind. A Muscle thin and
membranous, lying under the Square Detracter, interwoven with diverse fibers,
from whence its diverse actions proceed, and is scarce any thing else but a
fleshy implexure of fibers; this from the upper part of the Gums of the
superior Jaw is terminated in the top of the Gums of the lower-Jaw in the
manner of a circle, which since it emulates a circle, and in a circle what ever
part is taken the same is both the beginning middle and the end, it matters not
whether you say it proceeds from the upper Gums into the lower or from the
lower into the upper. This Muscle according to our Design of referring all
names to the Affections of the Mind might be called Musculus Ambitiosus, the
Ambitious or selfe-conceited Muscle; and there is a signature of the conceited
Capacity of the Mind, in the most capacious figure of this Muscle, which is a
Circle, which thus put in motion, by way of ostentation seems to infer to
others, how far they can enlarge and extend the Sphere of their ability, even
to comprehend all within the compass of their perfection, and personal worth;
which least any man should not sufficiently understand, they are so puffed in
mind, that they will strain themselves so far, as to sound the Trumpet of
their own Praise, by making an unhandsome use of the Muscle Buccinator. Nor is
it altogether unsignificant that this selfe-conceited and praise-seeking Muscle
lies underneath the Detracter; for they that ambitiously arrogate to themselves
the merits of applause are very apt to Detract from others; and indeed,
Ambition and selfe-conceited Pride is but Detraction under a Visard. But if the
puff of Anger swell this Orbicular Muscle, he that puffes and chafes after
this manner, seems to be his own Trumpeter, and to sound defiance to those
against whom he presents himself with Cheeks so inflate.

Dissect. XXVI.
Despair makes the Cheeks to fall or sink; they who think the former
affectation of the Mind to be performed by the help of no Muscle apposite to
that action, conceive this adduction or contraction of the Cheeks is performed
by the Muscle Buccinator, which with them is Contrahens alter, as being
designed by Nature unto it; and ^t may well be by its Contraction, or the
Contraction of its fibers, a motion quite opposite to that of Confidence and
^elfe-conceit, being a contrary affection ^r motion of the Mind. But this
action ^s not very remarkable unless in proud and confident self-conceited men
when ^hey are humbled by a counter-buffe of ^nquisition, and the bladder of
their ^ride is thereby pricked, that makes them look like the baffled Sons of
Despair.

Dissect. XXVII.
Cheerfulness a pleasant and smiling Alacrity cause in many a Dimple in some
part of the Cheek, which Anatomists call the Navell of Venus. This is caused
by the moving of the same Muscle Buccinator, which after the manner of a
Sphyncter encompasseth the Cheeks, which when it is contracted and drawn in,
in some part of it makes that Pit or Dimple which so gracefully appears in the
Cheeks of some men.

Memb. IX. Of the Muscles that serve the Mind in the motions of the Lips and
Mouth.
FOr the Declaring the Motions and Affections of the Mind, the Lip^ the cover
of the Mouth, were to be moved with a voluntary motion; wherefore they have
obtained Muscles, without which no voluntary motion can (...) performed; for
the expediting therefore the significant motions of the Lips (besides the
Muscles common t^ them, and the Cheeks) there ar^ four pair of Muscles
assigned unto them; which is the most received opinion, although Fallopius
would add ^ new pair; and Riolanus says we may number eleven proper Muscles,
besides those two common to the Lips and Cheeks. But their Muscles are but
four, because there are but four principal motions: by which four, eight
motions are performed. Columbus sai^s, that by mediation of those four Labiall
Muscles, we perform twelve motions at the least, (for to every motion there
are not peculiar Muscles dedicated, but the same Muscles that lift them up draw
them also awry, to wit, when one of the Attollents work alone, whereas when
they both act they cause a Right motion.) But they all upon occasion receive
action and employment from the command of the Will. These Muscles of the Lips
are so mingled with the skin, that the fibers do intersect themselves acrosse,
from whence the motions of the Lips are very diverse, for, because the fibers
are diversely mingled and enfolded together, being of two kinds, the External,
and Internal, they do not only bring forth Diverse, but Contrary motions. But
the Commistion of the Lips with the skin is most admirable; for here you cannot
say they are laid under, and that they do adhere and cleave to above, as in the
Front and other parts of both the Jaws, seeing that in these, we can
distinguish and determinate in perspicuous limits, where the Muscle truly ends,
and when the skin arises. But in the Lips the permistion is so throughout,
that both are abolished and confused in one another, as you cannot say this is
a Muscle, and this skin, which is common and conflate of both, neither in the
whole, or if you should divide them in parts, but you may rightly call them
either cutaceous Muscles, or a Musculous skin. Galen where he reckons the
several kinds of skins in the Body, counts this the fourth kind, in which the
Muscles are lost, (and as we may so say) confounded together with it; for, the
four beginnings of those Muscles which come to the Lips are perspicuous
indeed, and manifest before they are mingled with the skin; but afterward are
to be found no more, and cannot be separated from its substance; insomuch as he
holds it worth our serious consideration, whether Anatomists speak truly or
properly in saying, both the Lips are moved by Muscles obliquely inserted into
them: or whether we might rather say that the Muscles of both are ex toto
cuticular, but assisted by the fibrous Muscles; which Fungous and very moveable
substance, and unusual composition, deservedly accrewd unto the Lips, by
reason of their peculiar action, for unless the substance had been ordered
after this manner, those Actions, the Signs of the Affections of the Mind,
could not possibly have been done as now they are; or so significant^y
expressed: neither could the Lips have had such variety of important mo^ions.
But hereby so singular and renowned is the choice substance of the Lips, and
the various movings for which ^hey were ordained, that they are soon ^eady to
any kind of use and action, that the Will can call for or require.

Dissect. XXVIII.
THey who Contend and Dispute with some beat of Anger when ^hey hear their
Adversary, and go about ^o answer them, are observed to open ^he Mouth, and
lift up their upper Lip. This motion is performed by the first pair of proper
Muscles of the Lips, commonly called Attollens Labrum superius, The Attollent
of the upper Lip, which arises out of the first bone of the upper Jaw where
the Ball of the Cheek is, and is inserted into the sides of the upper Lip
near the Wings of the Nostrills; when this whole Pair works together, it
lifts the Lip straight upwards, from whence this Muscle might be called
Musculus logisticus, the Logistique or Contentious Muscle, o^ the wrangling
Disputant. But although this Muscle be chief operator in thi^ motion, yet we
must note with Galen, that the whole substance of the Lip* does much advance
the Action. Not^ also that when this motion is done straight upward with the
whole Lip^ then the whole Pair work together* But when one side of the Lip is
obliquely lifted up, then one of them is only employed.

Dissect. XXIX.
ANger and Discontent of mind* cause one to pout or put out the Lower-Lip, who
are then said to han^ the Gib, an action most commonly ^eene in children when
they are angered. Which motion is performed by the Muscle of the Lower-Lip,
commonly called Deprimens, proceeding from that low and interior Seat of the
Lower-Jaw where there is a certain asperity, protuberating as it were to the
sides of the Chin, and by and by obliquely ascending, is inserted into the
midst of ^he Lip; which Muscle from this action might be properly called
Musculus ^ristitiae the sad or discontented Muscle.

Dissect. XXX.
THey who would Mock, Deride and Contemn others, use to shoot out and bow
back the Lower-Lip; this Action as I take it, is performed by the Discontented
Muscle when the external fibers of the lower-Lip are strained and stretched
out, not a little assisted by the fungous substance of the Lips which ^s easily
filled, and being replenished protuberates: and because this outward Deflection
of the lower-Lip, which Galen reckons among the straight mo^ions of the Lip, is
performed chiefly by the operation of the external fibers of the Lip, they
Deserve to be called Fibers Sarcasmi, the mocking or cont^^melious fibers.

Dissect. XXXI.
THey who Scorn and Deride others are many times seen to Distort or wrest
their Mouth by drawing it to one side, Like unto the Mouth of a Plaise, or in
resemblance of the Cynique Spasm. This ironicall and voluntary Torture of the
mouth is caused by the operation of the Second pair of the Muscles of the Lips
commonly called Abducens, or ad latera trabens, which arising from the Cavity
under the balls of the Cheeks is inserted into that place where the Lips meet
together and are conjoined. This motion being assisted by the Common Muscle of
the Cheeks and Lips commonly called the Square or Detrahent Muscle of the
Cheeks, by us called the Muscle of Detraction, whose oblique fibers do not a
little Contribute to the signification of the mind exhibited by this oblique
motion of the Lips. From which operation the Muscles Abducent have in this
signification of the mind they might be properly called Sanniones the Scoffers
or the Muscles of Scorn and Derision. Note that this signification of the mind
may be exhibited by the mouth drawn to both sides or either side according as
the whole pair or one alone does act.

Dissect. XXXII.
EFfeminate and Amatorious affections in the mind make Harlots perpetually to
play with their Lips, and sweetly to bite them and suck them in; ^ motion
observed to be customarily used by such Creatures, performed by the tension of
the internal fibers of the Muscles of the Lips, whereby the Lips are drawn to
give way inward and to fold themselves in this Right motion as they call i^) of
the Lips being much furthered by their fungous Substance which is ^asily
Emptied and afterward contracted. You may call these internal the ama^ous
fibers of the Muscles of the Lips.

Dissect. XXXIII.
WE shall see in unhappy Boys that when they would mock and ^eride one
another, they thrust out their Lips after the manner of a Hens rumpe, which we
usually call to make a Mow, which ridiculous gesture is performed by the
constringent Muscles, which are compounded of all the ten Muscles of the Lips,
and are that Musculous extremities of the mouth, and that fungous and vermilion
Substance which we see, and with orbicular fibers encompasseth the outer
mouth, and shuts it in like a Sphincter; which Muscle is very conspicuous in
them that have great lips. This mock Spincter when by its hayry strings it
works this motion, making the mouth a^ port Esquiline of Derision, straightens
and thrusts out the mouth forward, and is (as Galen and Aviten compare it) like
the shutting of a Purse with strings; for in this attraction or corrugation,
the Lips are so much increased in thickness, as ther^ is of their length taken
from them by that action: as if you should, putting two fingers upon them, on
each sid^ one, and lightly compressing, contrac^ them, you shall advance them
into such an altitude and thicknes, as you tak^ away Latitude by constringing
them on each side. By this means the tension of the Muscles while they are
diversely distracted at one time, deduceth the extremes to a medium, the
fungous substance of the Lips not a little helping them, for such a substance
is easily emptyed and replenished; emptyed is submitted, and replenished,
raised into a tumor. The Professors of Dissection before Galens time, made no
mention at all of the priorums or anterior motion of the Lips, neither was he
satisfied how this was done, but referres it to his Tract of obscure and
doubtful motions whose manner of moving is not fully found out; which
ingenious Tract, by the injury of time, (to the great Damage of Anatomy,) is
lost, for that which we have under that Title ^s Spurius, as Hofma^ thinks,
whose judgment herein admitted would ^omewhat weaken the Authority of ^he
Quotations of that Tractat. There ^s also as I conceive a concurrence of ^he
round membranous Muscle Bucci^^^or which is inseparably truss^d about* ^ith the
Coat of the mouth, so that ^he signature and cooperation of that Muscle seem
to exhibit a desire to proclaim as with a trumpet the Contempt and Scorn that
is then exhibited.

Dissect. XXXIIII.
IN Salutation, Valediction, Reconciliation or renewing of Love,
Congratulation, Approbation, Adulation, Subjection, Confederation, but more
especially and naturally in ^oken of Love, we use to kiss, which is done by
drawing together the Lips into themselves, and a little putting forth the parts
that lie loosely scattered about the Mouth, this being the usual Prologue to a
Kiss, which cannot be decently done unless we a little contract our Mouth;
which significations of our Will are thus exhibited by the moving of the Muscle
commonly called the Constringent Pair of the Lips, or Corrugans from puckering
the mouth; which is done after this manner, the upper Lip is no^ only drawn
together, but withal pulled downward, and the lower Lip lifted up, whereby the
Lips are Collected and reduced into themselves; this Muscle I find from this
employment to be called Osculatorium, because it contract^ the Lips when we
fasten a Kiss upon another: which name implies only the manner of the outward
Action and not any inward Affection of the Mind exhibited thereby, the Latins
having no word to signify both, which the Greeks have, which whom (...) is
both to Love and to Kiss. This Muscle from its office might be called the
loveing pair, Par Dilectionis, or the Sphincter of Salutation. Note that this
Muscle is assisted in this signification by the Muscle Buccinator, which is
common to the Lips with the Cheek, which Muscle we have named the Muscle of
the Navell of Venus.

Dissect. XXXV.
THey who mock, wonder and admire are wont to Gape upon one with their mouth.
Stupidity, Folly, Idle expectation, and Gree^y attention cause the same Action
of the Mouth. The significations of the Mind exhibited by this Gesture are
performed by the Action of the pair of Muscles of the lower Jaw, commonly
called, Graphoides and Deprimens Biventre; which arising from the Appendix
Styloides, when it comes to the Anterior part which is under the Chin, there it
is inserted into its Internal seat, which therefore is a little exasperated;
this pair when they both work together by pulling down the Jaw, open the
mouth into a moderate figure, wherein the Temporal and maxilliary Muscles are
at rest. The smallness of this pair of Muscles, as it shows that the motion
is easily done, the Jaw with its own weight tending downwards, needing no
strong retracter, but as a weighty thing is led downwards with very little ado:
so by signature of the Instrument insinuates how prone by Nature the Mind of
man is to these kind of significations, implying withal, (that whereas the
Mouth is the Gate of the Stomach, and now opened as the Gin of reproach by a
double-bellied Muscle, arising from such an Appendix as resembles a Needle or
Pin of a Table Book, and inserted into a part which has therefore a signature
of Exasperation,) an extraordinary Appetite, even canine, with a silent style
to engrave a Scoff in the Face of those against whom exasperated we exhibit
this Hieroglyphique of open Contempt, wherein there needs no words, the abused
naturally too well knowing men's meaning by their Gaping. Nor is the Caution and
Proviso of Nature in the ordering of this Muscle to be passed over in silence;
for in the midst between the Bellies of this Muscle there is a Tendon which a
certain Membrane growing to the adjacent parts does involve, resembling a
Pully, contrived to prevent an exception against the General Rule of Muscular
motion: for, since these Muscles (as they should have done according to the
Species of their intended Action) derive not their original from the lower
parts of the Neck, but arise rather from the upper parts, they are reflected
about the lower parts of the Jaw, as it were, at a Pully, not without an
allegorical signature of the usual effect of Mockery and scornful Strife, of
which a Pully is the Hieroglyphique, for as that turns as it were returning
upon it self, so such kind of Strife begets Strife, that it seems to be
rolled upon it self. Neither is this Retraction or Depression of the Jaw
performed without the assistance of the Square Muscle of Det^action, which h^th
great coherence with the Chin, Contempt and Mockery being never without some
kind of Detraction. There is also a natural Reason for this Action of these
Muscles in greedy attention, because the Mind is furthered in that matter by
this Action, for out of the very fifth pair the Auditory Nerve there are
remarkable branches sent to the Pall^te, the Bone Hyodes, and the Larynx in the
mouth, wherefore from thence, that is by the mouth: sounds may be conveyed to
the Ears, even to the Tympanum; for distinction (therefore) we call them
Musculos avidae attentionis, the Greedy Gapers, or Muscles of the attentive
bent of the Mind. You might call them as well Musculos otiosae expectationis,
the Muscles of idle expectation.

Dissect. XXXVI.
IN some tedious beavinesse of Mind, in the Dislike and weariness of our
absent mind, in the wanderings, and (...) loose and manifest security thereof we
of^ are drawn to Yawne, an extreme figure, as they call it, of the lower Jaw,
wherein the Lips are most distant from one another, one protended upwards
toward the Nose, the other drawn down toward the Chin, and with Galen, is one
of the two Right motions of the Lips which are altogether straight. These
significations of the Mind are performed by the same Muscles as the former
motion is, which might likewise hence receive the name of musculi oscitantes,
or oscedinis, the yawning Double-bellied Muscles, but more properly, in
reference unto the affection of the Mind, we might call them Musculos
Hallucinantes, vel fluxae Securitatis, the Nauseous Muscles, or the Muscles of
wandering Security. This Oscitation (how ever some speak) is from the Animal
Faculty, and therefore is performed by Muscles, and is done by the Muscles of
the Face, as it were, dilated by deliberation, that the crude vapor may go
out, as Pandiculation is a Deliberate Action of the other Muscles of the Body:
Neither need it to trouble any one, seeing a thing that is done out of
Deliberation, and which seems to proceed from Prudence, to be done by Infants,
and of us without considering of it; for, Nature (as Hippocrates says) is
Learned without a Teacher. These are done by a certain Instinct, but not such
as most men take to be Natural, for we understand this Action to be
voluntarily done, because when we please we can begin it and restrain it; And
when we make others yawn, it is not done so much by Sympathy as by consent of
parts, and conspiration to Action; for, our voluntary motion is done sometimes
by Deliberation, and sometimes by Imagination; Imagination always prevents and
goes before Deliberation, when therefore the Muscles of the Temples and Cheeks
contain any vapor (by Imagination) when one yawnes others are moved with that
moving, and so they move the Faculty, not so much to expel, as to be a
deponent, and to lay down the windy burden with which the Muscles were charged.

Dissect. XXXVII.
THey who by silence would express the reverence and regard they have of those
who are in presence, use to close their mouth and hold their Lips together;
which is performed by the moving of the Temporal attollent Muscle, which
filling the whole cavity of the Bone of the Temples, has its beginning from the
bone of the Forehead Synciput Temples and Cuniformis is at last inserted with a
strong Tendon into the process of the lower Jaw. When this Temporal pair
work together, they bring the lower Jaw to the upper, and so close the mouth
which is held so still in the posture of silence by the Tonique action of the
same Muscles which for the most part is Tonique, unless when we speak or
sleep open mouthed, for when we sleep with our mouth closed, the Tonique
action of these Muscles is preserved.

Dissect. XXXVIII.
ANger, Indignation, Grief, Despair, Jealousy, Wonder, Admiration, and evil
Cogitations, Cause men many times to bite their Lips, an Action which they also
use who meditate and threaten revenge: which affections of the mind are
expressed in the Lips and Teeth by the operation of the internal fibers of the
Lips, and the strong Compression of the Teeth occasioned by the forceable
working of the temporal Muscles.

Dissect. XXXIX.
ANger, Cruel virulency in those that Threaten Revenge, Envy and Virulent
Mockery and Insultation make men sometimes gnash and grind with their teeth,
and to set them so firmly together that the Cheeks are drawn in o^ adverse
parts. This action^ and virulent expression of the Mind also is performed by
the violent Compression of the Teeth by the strong force of the Temporal
Muscle.

Memb. X.
Dissect. XL.
IN Derision, Scoffing insultation and contumelious Despite men are seen
sometimes to lill out their tongue (...) those they Scoff and deride.
Concerning this significant motion of the Tongue Auerr^^es is of opinion that
it is not done by the aid of the Muscles, but by a proper motion, and would
prove thereby that the Nerve and not the Muscle is the first and necessary
principle of motion. But Columbus and most Anatomists are of the contrary
opinion. Galen indeed is very Scepticall about this motion and has placed it
among doubtful and obscure motions which he was not well satisfied (...)* for
says he, the Tongue does not seem when it is extended out in length to go
uniformely out of the mouth, for it covers the lower Lip and descends somewhat
to the Chin, and that is by reason of the Bridle which is beneath it before, we
find not the cause by reason whereof the Tongue is prolix or prolonged until
it be visibly put out of the mouth. No motion obeyes the will but the motion of
a Muscle and no Muscle continued to the tongue distends it until it bring it
forth of the mouth, hence for good reason we fall to staggering when we would
know after what manner this action of the Tongue is done, and if any motion
could be found in the Body which is done by the will without any Muscle there
had no ambiguity fallen into this question. Indeed there is a rarity and
porofity in the Tongue as in the virile member, but that there should be such
virtue in it as we observe the appetite to instill into that Petulant part so
that it moves with competent motion and thrusts it self out of the mouth, how
this should be done that is to be considered. And yet the action in kissing,
which some beastly Leachers use when their veins are inflate with lust would
enduce one to think that there were some analogy between the extension of these
two unruly members. The difference between the erection of both parts is that
the virile member is not only increased in length but in thickness and
compass: but the Tongue only in length being not increased in all the
dimensions of its body when it goes out of the mouth. And because they who use
this Action of the Tongue do it before they can think or understand with what
Muscle or motion they should produce it, it is agreeable and meet that the
Muscle whose lust was imposed upon it, for this reason should neurr a
Satyriasis when it avoucheth lust, and imagines by the aptitude of the thing
unto it. So that the cause propinque of the Egresse of the Tongue out of the
mouth and of P^^iapisme is a thing of very subtle Speculation. It is no
marveile that the Tongue voluntarily is moved only by the Muscle. But there is
a virtue in it by which it does indeed weigh what the Intellect does desire. So
that it may move it self with motion for a competent Egresse out of the mouth,
which doubt in effect insinuates the Tongue it self to be a Muscle, although
he speaks not plainly out. But according to the most received opinion this
significant action of the Tongue is attributed to the operation of the pair of
Muscles called Geneoglossum or Extrahens Linguam, which arising from the
asperitity which is in the middle of the lower Mandible, but is in the internal
Face, is inserted near the root of the Tongue; this pair contracted, puts
forth the Tongue beyond the Teeth and Lips, which pair in respect of this
ironicall action performed by it, according to our manner shall be called
Cynoglossum, the Liller, Dog-muscle, or the Blaring Cynique; or the Muscle of
Contumelious Despite. And there is something remarkable in the principle of
this motion deserving to be remembered, which Fernelius and Bauhinus have
observed, according to whom, it is the only Muscle of the Body that is the
opifex of two contrary motions, and has no fellow; for, every one has but his
simple action whereby it is reduced to its Head, and the Original of the
Nerve: But the greatest part of the fibers of these Muscles is carried to the
root of the Tongue, but the smallest part of them toward the Tip, so that the
parts of the same Muscle produce contrary actions, for, with the greatest part
of the fibers drawing to their original, the Tongue is put forth without the
Teeth and Lips: but the lesser part of them working, they recall it in, to
which revocation some assign the next pair Hypsioglossj which was appointed
by nature to withdraw the Tongue straight back; otherwise as Arantius well
observes it would follow, that the same Muscle would be both endued with a
double action; and together at the same time both act and suffer, which is both
contrary to Reason, and the placits of Galen. And it falls not within the
compass of my understanding how this out-drawer of the Tongue should perform
that assigned office, for it seems to me by its Original to be only
qualified with a power to draw the Tongue to the Chin, and therefore I am
gravel'd with Galen about the manner of this motion, yet am withal inclinable
to the judgment of Fernelius, a ferious and an honest man, who says, that
because no Nerve is inserted outwardly in the Tip of the Tongue, which should
draw or thrust it out, it is more probable to attribut [this ironicall eduction
of the Tongue] to that Muscle, then with some to confess, that there are
certain voluntary motions in us, whereof no Muscle or Nerve is the author.

Dissect. XLI.
Of the Muscles serving to express all the vocal intentions and affections of
the Mind exhibited by the motions of the Tongue and Lips, and whether for those
purposes the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles.

BY Speech framed by the motion of the Tongue and Lips we have another way to
express all the motions of the mind; speech being a free and voluntary motion,
which it appears to be in that it may be made or restrained at pleasure, it
must therefore be performed by Muscles, and they that carry the greatest stroke
in framing the vocal affections of the mind, being the Muscles of the Tongue,
and even the Lips whose Muscles serve to order speech have need of its help.
And therefore the Tongue in respect of this Office it performs to the
Affections stood in need of many Muscles, whose proper Muscles according to
some are six, according to some nine, some ten, or five con^ugations, some
count them eleven. But not conten^ with these, some reckon the substance o^ the
Tongue among the Muscles, among whom is Stephanus, yet Riolanus saye^ that
although the Tongue may seem^ to be a Muscle because of its wrested,
obvolutions and implications like an (...) or Lampery, yet it is not, and
Bartholinus is of the same mind, because it has no fibers neither does move
any other part but is moved by its Muscles; others add this reason; for
otherwise the motion would be made toward the end, and the Tail of the
Muscle would be moveable and the Head immovable, but that reason is false as
Bartholinus proves, for the principle or beginning of the Tongue is near the
Larynx, and as it were arising out of ^he bone Hyodes, it seems not to be
Consonant to reason, that the Body of the Tongue should be a Muscle and that as
some would have it a double one, for although it have such an Eele-like
^olubility, yet it were strange to the ^ondition of all other Muscles, for,
first no Muscle is framed for it self, but ^or another part which is
immovable ^f it self, that so it might be moved by (...) Muscle. Hence to
things that are moveable of themselves there was never any Muscle inserted, and
therefore neither in the Brain, nor in the Heart, ^or in the Arteries you
shall find any Muscle, because these by an imbred virtue are moved by
themselves; i^ therefore the Tongue were a Muscle i^ would follow that it was
made for it sel^ since it is inserted i^to no immovable Body. Secondly, no
Muscle moves i^ self, unless by accident, to wit when moving another to
whose motion it is appointed it is moved it self, but the tongu^ moves it self
not for another, wherefore i^ is no Muscle. Thirdly, every Muscle act^ by
fibers, but nature has denied fibre^ to the Tongue. Fourthly, all Muscle^ are
invested with a simple dense an^ thin Membrane, whereas the tongue i^ covered
with a thick hard porous and rough skin. Fifthly, it is absurd to say a Muscle
moves a Muscle, and that on^ Muscle is inserted into another, whenc^ if you
call the Tongue a Muscle, i^ would follow that a Muscle moves a Muscle, for
many Muscles are attribute^ unto the Tongue. Sixthly, if the Tongu^ is a Muscle
and can perform so many motions by it self, it would show a^ error in Nature
to have given it other Muscles, for, Frustra fit per plura quo^ fieri potest
per pauciora, Since therefore Nature has not in vain granted Muscles unto the
Tongue, it will follow al^o that the Tongue can be no Muscle. There are not
wanting some who suppose they have excluded the Tongue from the order of
Muscles by these fol^owing reasons; every Muscle draws us end toward its
beginning, which happens cont^ary in the tongue, for that draws its B^ginning
toward its end But ^his Reason is false as Bartholinus proves, ^or the
Principle or Beginning of the Tongue is near the Larynx, and as ^t were
arising out of the Bone Hyode^: Again, the B^gining of a Muscle is ^mmoveable,
but they have a moveable and, but it is contrary in the Tongue, whose end is
rather immovable than ^s beginning. Therefore it is manifest that the Tongue
cannot be numbered among Muscles. But this Reason as the ^ther is rejected as
contrary to the ^cular faith of Anatomy grounded upon sight of the thing done;
Therefore ^^ere is either somewhat that is moved ^^luntarily besides a Muscle,
or all the ^otions of the Tongue are to be attri^uted to its Muscles. Casserius
freely de^^vers his opinion in this matter. It cannot be but the Tongue should
b^ endued with a proper motion, and tha^ likewise voluntary; for, it is moved
after so many manner of ways, and agitated unto so many parts, that i^ were
ridiculous to affirm all its motions to be performed by Muscles, yet
notwithstanding he will not therefore call the Tongue a Muscle, but Musculous,
as partaking somewhat of the Nature of a Muscle, existing as a mean between a
Glandulous and Musculous Flesh. But Fabricius ab Aquapendente a most
industrious and acurate Anatomist, and the Corypheus of all the Tribes of
Dissectors, who has subtlely Anatomized all the Organs of Speech, seems to me
to show very good Reasons why the Tongue and Lips both should be Muscles, that
is for the Dexterity o^ Speech, and the more ready expressing the Affections of
the Mind; for, (...) Speech be made by motion, and signify the Affections of
the Mind, which are motions without all question, the moving of the Instruments
must be answerable to the movings of the Mind but, since nothing is swifter
than the Mind, deservedly therefore the movings of the Tongue and Lips are very
swift, (...) those which are to follow the moti^ns of the Mind: It is fit
therefore (as nature would have it) that such mo^ions should not be performed
by the Muscles of the Tongue and Lip, but on^^ from their Body as they are
Muscles ^f themselves. The Tongue and Lips ^^ve Muscles, as they have Muscles
they ^re moved of another, and therefore ^ower: but as they are Muscles they
love of themselves, and that most ^wiftly roled and driven, and for this ^ause
the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles; the Tongue and the Lips i^ ^locution are
moved of themselves, in ^ther Actions not only of themselves ^ut by another,
that is, by the Muscles, and that for celerity and expedition; (...), since
Nature, with that which in ^oving requires no great strength, re^^ires also the
quickness of motion, (...) makes the parts to be moved of ^^emselves by
mingling the Motory ^ower with the Part to be moved as in ^e Tongue and Lips,
which since ^^ey were not to agitate a Bone, but most light Air, and to
perform (...) quick motions in speaking, for (...) cause we judge Speech to be
done with^out the Ministry of the Muscles, only (...) the Body of the Lips and
Tongu^ which if it should not be so done, the Affections of the Mind would be
(...) slower in their Delivery. So that the Tongue is not the chief Instrument
(...) Speech in regard of its Similar sub^stance, such as is not in the Body,
(...) in motive Actions we must not loo^ for a similar part to be the next
(...) of motion, because in that it is a co^^pounded Action it requires a
compou^^ded part which is the cause of an Actio^* But only as it is movable,
and it is (...) in as much as it has received the Facu^^ty of moving, and is a
Muscle. Deserved therefore according to our Model (...) Denomination may the
Tongue an^ Lips be called Musculi Rationationis (...) orationis the Muscles of
Discourse (...) Orall Reason.

Creatori, Capiti nostro, in Quo movemu^
Cephaledoulia, in Excelsis.
FINIS.
Ad eminentissimi acuminis, scientificum utriusque Physiognomiae Protomysten.
GRata Manus, Facies nunc est gratissima nobis:
Quae docta vultus mobilitate placet.
^ondita Myotomus nobis mysteria pandis:
Organa and aspectus mira patere facis.
^elineas Mures talparum more moventes:
Musculus o^ tenerum flectit ad omne Pathos
(...) vultus Rector moderaris habenas:
Affectus, Fons est Frons, and Origo Caput.
Ocul^s, sic ipse Manus, sic Ora movebas:
At nunc in Caus^s ingeniosus eris.
^cta vides* Pulcra est Concordia cordis and Oris
Dextram Myologi, Pathologia petit.
^iqua and temnas quasi sesquipedalia verba:
Nomina quae signant, dum propior^ dabis.
^tomia nova haec, veterum quam nemo priori
Tentare ausus, and hoc tempore nemo Novus.
Admirari prope ^es fuit una, at Amice
^e non mirari est, res odiosa nimis.
To the daring Advancer of all Somaticall Science his Selected Friend, on his
PATHOMYOTOMIA.
THou Grand Adventurer, wits Magellan
To whom our Microsme or Isle of man
By thy all searching Pen's so thoroughly (...)
There Is now no part in us an unknown land;
How thriving is thy Fleet in new Designs,
To bring home not the Mineral but the Mines?
This Pathologicall Anatomy
Dear Friend has wound our admiration hig^
A strange Essay indeed, that dares to trace
All the rare Springs and Wards that move a (...)
To make Anatomy by Muscles wind
The swiftest motions of the minged Mind
Natures high piece of Clockworke this You (...)
Reason the Spring winds up, the Musc^es all
Like wheels move this or that way, swift or sloe,
As the Affections Weight does make them go.
All the Souls motion's seen, the Head and Face,
Discovering all, as through a Cristall Case;
Here the Affections keep an open Mart,
By Patent sealed by thy Cephalic Art.
This Itchnographie of thy Art does smile,
A promise on us, of some stately pile.
And puts us in good hope abroad to see
That Masterpiece of Physiognomie,
Thy Magisteriall Quintessence of Books,
Or extract Scientificall of looks.
Then that whereby as a Face-Prophet shown,
Thou know the Affections' are the Bodies own,
Whence subtilely thou 'rt wont to ken and trace
The Critciall Disease-discovering Face,
That though the humors bedded are within,
Yet thou can track their footsteps in the skin.
Strange secrecy of Art and mystical,
To cast our Faces as an Vrinall;
Nay, by a strangers Face well copyed out,
For to pronounce by Art He has the Gout.
Such are thy common Aguries; we may
Sure trust thy skill, that does such beams display.
The last Year styled you Deaf and Dumb man's friend,
Now Thy Design more deeper does descend.
I see Thy knowledge and invention flows
As far in man as Sense and Motion goes.
Then take the Chair, where may Thou Doctorall sit,
Command our health's, as Thou have done our wits.
Lure down thy soaring Truths, salve every doubt,
And by convincing practice make them out
To Faith-bound Sceptiques, who count nothing good
Till flat experience make it understood.
Now to the Art-forsaken Deaf dispense
Thy skill as Aurist to restore their sense,
Were thou once known, Surdasters would come on
To court Thee for Thy Autocousticon.
Next as a Linguist teach the Dumb to break,
Or pick the Padlock lets his Lips to speak.
Ransom each captivd tongue, weak speech improve,
And the impediments thereof remove.
Then as a Motist by this healing light,
Set all our Heads depraved motions right.
And may success attend, while swelling Fame
Fills up thy Sails with an All-hea^ing name.
Tho: Diconson. Med. Templ.

Judicium (...) cujusdam de hoc opusculo; in quo Sanctioris Anatomiae, and
planenovae, Specimen Lectoribus exhibetur.
QUI Manuum Loquelam, reconditioris Philosophiae Mystes, oculis suis primus
hausit; qui^ Chirologiam (spissum and operosum opus) primus (...), quatuor
abhinc annis, publici ^uris fecit; is ipsus Author, ultra cutem and corticem,
oculo^um scalpellum, usque adeo Latenti Capitalium Musculorum Texturae pariter,
and Indoli demersit, ut hodie pererudi^um aliud cogitationum suarum and audacis
juxta and felicis industriae por^entum ((...) proditurae rudimentum)
prodi^erit, Vulgaribus Ana^micis nostris, and Sciolorum Vappae, ^ec visum
usquam, nec auditum. Ac proinde nullius hic noster Manuductionem secutus,
nullius exempli premens vestigia, motuum (...) dilucide nobis expedivit. Quin
and ipsis Musculis, Affectuum organis and eorundem Pantomimis, nomina concinne
aptavit; and indigitavit insuper, Mentem quasi Corporis Navarcham ad clavum
sedentem, moderari Artuum funes, and eosdem huc and illuc pro arbitrio
remittere and contrahere. Qui ijdem Musculi dum Animi pathematis sese
attemperant, and inserviunt, ejusdem lineamenta depingunt, and quasi aspectui
obvertunt; and exteriore modificatione sua, palam illa faciunt, quae interiore
impulsu machinamur. Ut hic libellus omnibus reconditioris Anatomiae studiosis,
and usui futurus sit, and voluptati.

Scripsit I. H. C. W. M.

A Table showing the chief Heads of the Sections of the Introduction to this
Anatomicall Administration of the significative Muscles of the Affections of
the Mind.
Sect. I. OF the Honor and Dignity of Animal Motion. Sect. II. That a Muscle
is the proper and adequate Agent of the voluntary and patheticall motions of
the Mind, outwardly expressed in the Body. Sect. III. Of the Nature and
Constitution of a Muscle. Sect. IV. That the Appetite or will is the first
Efficient cause, but not the Chief cause of mo^ion; the Spirit and Faculty
being the more propinque and conjunct cause, and that besides the Commandment
of the will, the endeavor and intention of the mind is necessary thereunto.
Sect. V. That it is ^strange but not so wonderful, that Animal motion should
be performed on such a sudden Sect. VI. That in all outward Actions the Soul
commands either manifestly or obscurely, and that we are not stirred up to
any such motion by nature or custom.
A Table showing the Heads of the Dissections of the Anatomicall Essay,
describing the Muscles of those Affections which are more conspicuously
emphaticall in the ^emonstrative Actions of the Head and Face.
The Proem The Prerogative of the Head in point of Arbitrary and Significant
Motion. Membr. I. OF the Muscles the instruments of voluntary motion, whereby
the general* significations of the Head are performed. Dissect.
I.II.III.IV.V.VI.VII.VIII.IX. The Anatomicall Administration of the Muscles of
the Affections, whose operations conduce to the general actions of the Head.
Membr. II. Of the Muscles serving to the general expressions, and most
important motions of the Face or Countenance. Dissect. X. The Anatomicall
Administration of those Muscles.
Membr. III. Of the Muscles appertaining to the Forehead and the Brows or
Eyebrows, and employed by the Mind in the significant motions thereof.
Dissect. XI. and XII. The Anatomicall Administration of those muscles
Membr. IV. Of the Muscles appointed to the Eyelids (...) the expediting
certain significant moti^^ of the Mind. Dissect. XIII.XIIII. The Anatomicall
Administration of those ^^scles.
Membr. V. Of the Muscles which serve to express the significations of the
Mind exhibited by the motions of the Eye. Dissect. XV.XVI.XVII.XVIII.XIX.XX.
The Anatomicall Administration of those Muscles.
Membr. VI. Of the Muscles assigned the Ears (as i^ is likely) for certain
significations of the Mind. Dissect. XXI. The Anatomicall Administration of
thos^ Muscles.
Membr. VII. Of the Muscles that serve to the signifi^cations of the Mind
exhibited by the motion of the Nose. Dissect. XXII.XXIII. The Anatomicall
Administration of the Muscles.
Membr. VIII. Of the Muscles active in the significa^^^ons of the Mind
exhibited by the Cheeks* Dissect. XXIV.XXV.XXVI.XXVII* The Anatomicall
Administration of the Muscles.
Membr. IX. Of the Muscles that serve the Mind in the motions of the Lips and
Mouth. Dissect.
XXVIII.XXIX.XXX.XXXI.XXXII.XXXIII.XXXIIII.XXXV.XXXVI.XXXVII.XXXVIII.XXXIX. The
Anatomicall Administration of those Muscles.
Membr. X. Dissect. XL. Of the Muscles serving the Tongue, for some silent
expressions of the Mind, with the Anatomical administration of those Muscles.
Dissect. XLI. Of the Muscles serving to express all the vocal intentions and
affections of the Mind exhibited by the motion of the Tongue and Lips, and that
for those purposes, the Lips and Tongue were made Muscles.

Errata.
FOl. 47. line 9. read motions. fol 107. l. 16^ Larynx. fol. 120. l. 26. They.
fol. 119. l. 18. (...) That. fol. 204. l. 14. read revell.

An Introduction to the Dissection of the Muscles of the Affections of the
Mind, in apparent significations exhibited by the Head,

In six Sections comprizing the Philosophy and general notions of voluntary
motion.


