AN ANSWER TO TWO TREATISES Of Mr. JOHN CAN, THE Leader of the English
Brownists in Amsterdam.

The former called, A Necessity of Separation from the Church of ENGLAND,
proved by the Nonconformists Principles.

The other, A Stay against Straying: Wherein in opposition to M. John Robinson,
he undertakes to prove the unlawfulness of hearing the Ministers of the Church
of England. Very seasonable for the present times.

By the late learned, laborious and faithful servant of Jesus Christ, JOHN
BALL.

He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and
searches him, Prove. 18.17. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1
These. 5.21. LONDON, Printed by R. B. and are to be sold by John Burroughes, at
his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon near the Inner Temple gate, in
Fleetstreet. 1642.

TO The Christian READER, Sound Knowledge and love of the Truth, together with
inward peace and Spiritual joy, through Communion with Christ, in the
Ordinances of the Gospel.
Christian READER,
THis ensuing discourse was prepared for the Press by the Reverend Author, and
committed to one of us, that it might be made public: of which we will say
nothing, but shall freely venture it to stand or fall by the award of an
impartial judgment. Neither shall we present thee with the Authors deserved
praises, seeing his rare piety and great learning were sufficiently known to
very many of various ranks, who were well acquainted with him, and his works
already Printed have given a competent proof hereof unto all others who have
(...) them without prejudice and partiality.

Only by occasion of publishing this piece, we ^^we leave to clear him from
such aspersions, as by (...) have causlesly been cast upon him, and by others
too much and too easily believed against him, (a thing incident to men most
eminent, and innocent, as instances in all Ages will evince) not only to the
blemishing of his just estimation, but also (as we conceive) to the prejudice
of the truth it self, and in favor of many spreading errors and exorbitances.

Those aspersions which we shall endeavor to take off are two, which though
they openly contradict each other, yet they unhappily agree to defame our
worthy friend, whose credit we judge our selves many ways bound to vindicate
and preserve.

The one, intimating some degree of declining from his former inconformitie, in
deserting the Nonconformists cause and grounds, being too much inclined to
favor the times in our Ceremonies and Service book.

The other, expressing his advancing beyond the wonted limets of a
Nonconformist toward the cause and course of separation.

Two things are pretended to confirm the former. 1. A passage in the Preface
of his Book called, A friendly trial of the grounds tending to separation,
etc. page 3. his words are these. Many are the objections which are made
against set forms of Prayer, and particularly against our book of Common
Prayer; All which I have endeavored to answer severally, not because they are
of so great weight; but because I desired fully to satisfy every doubt, etc.
Secondly, that in the whole frame of the same book he speaks more covertly
and coldly against the corruptions of our Church than became a man who
continued steadfast in the ways of Nonconformity.

For Answer whereunto, we affirm in the General, That upon our knowledge he
lived and dyed a strict forbearer and firm opposer of all such corruptions as
the Nonconformists (heretofore so usually called) had commonly by their public
writings disallowed. Nor have we known any man in that kind more precise,
uniforme, and constant to his opinion in discourse, prayers, and practices, yet
always carried on with Christian moderation and meekness; which graces are
of singular use in controversies of this nature: yea some of us can witness
his purpose, (if God had lent him longer life) by a set Treatise to have showed
himself a plaintiff for the Nonconformists against the corruptions in our
Church, as in this he appears their defendant against the Calumnies of Master
Can. These testimonies may satisfy the sober minded, that he continued cordial
to their cause; whereunto more might be added, but we desire not to revive the
remembrance of these differences among dear brethren: Because we pray and
hope that through Gods mercy; by means of our Gracious Sovereigne, and of the
present Parliament, they will in such sort be buried, that they shall arise no
more to our disturbance and discomfort.

More particularly to the passage objected out of the forecited Preface, we
Answer, That the words themselves do not necessarily imply any such sense; but
they may admit, yea they will carry a better construction, if the Reader will
be candid and well advised. For he says not, that he has answered the
objections, as suggesting little or nothing blameworthy in our Liturgy, but
because they are not of so great weight as to enforce the unlawfulness of
those set forms, or warrant a separation from our Churches, and public
worship in regard thereof. All which both the title of the Book, and the
tenor of the whole discourse therein, together with this Treatise exhibited
will sufficiently clear unto the indifferent and attentive Reader. And that
this was his meaning, some of us can testify from his own mouth, which also
he would have manifested to the world (if God had lengthened his life) either
in an Epistle annexed to this work, now brought into the open light, or some
other way, as might have been judged most convenient.

But you will say.

Two things we conceive may fully take off the strength of this objection.

2 The state of those times wherein this piece was penned would not brook more
plainness in that and such like points; this we could (if it were expedient)
abundantly evidence, by declaring with what difficulty it passed the Press,
what exceptions were taken at some harmless expressions, and what amendments
were exacted in some phrases, which seemed somewhat openly to hint the Authors
heart-workings toward that Reformation which in these times is much desired
and endeavored.

The second imputation remains to be removed (viz.) that though our Reverend
Author had both reasoned and written against the opinions and practice of
separation in the time of his health, yet on his death bed he did retract, and
with grief repent what in that kind he had done.

This is commonly reported, confidently believed, and gladly embraced, not only
here at home, but also in foreign parts, even in America, as by diverse
letters and other ways some of us have been informed.

It is high time therefore to give open check unto these groundles rumors,
lest the cause here maintained should thereby suffer prejudice, either in the
minds of them who are friends, or of those who be adversaries thereunto. And
for this end we entreat the Reader first to consider that this imputation being
directly contrary to the former, either they must confute each other, or else
argue the man strangely light in wheeling from one extreme unto another, or
guilty of a fowler fault, in writing one thing and thinking another: from both
which charges we assure our selves his great soliditie in judgment, and piety
in practice will fully absolve him in the consciences of all such who were
acquainted with him.

And as for others, we hope they may be abundantly satisfied by the ensuing
evidence.

First, in that four or five days before his death he expressed to some of us
his willingness to have this Treatise presented to public view, which he had
composed since the former.

Secondly, so soon as he had finished this book, he undertook a large
Treatise of the Church, wherein he intended to discover the nature of Schism,
and to deal in the main controversies touching the essence and government of
the visible Church.

Concerning these matters, we have almost fifty sheets of Paper written with
his own hand, wherein many passages expresle his continued dislike of the
separations, both then and now in practice. And these writings, together with
his other papers, he on his death bed committed to the care of some of us, to
be disposed of for private or public use, as we should judge expedient.

Had there been any grief upon his Spirit, or alteration in his judgment, in
reference to what he had spoken or printed against the separation, we know none
so likely to have been acquainted therewith as our selves. For one of us
dwelling near unto him, was for many years his bosom companion, and in his
last sickness seldom from him. Another (being requested during, his
weakness, to supply his place) so journing in the same town, was daily with
him.

The other three of us (being his familiar friends) did all visit him, within
one, two or three days before his end. We are all of us, as we hope (though
most unworthy) the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who desire to be faithful. And we
do each for our selves seriously protest in the presence of Almighty God, that
we never heard any syllable from him sounding that way.

Yea, there is one thing more to be added, which may for ever silence all
gainesayers (viz.) That one of us through Gods good providence, suspecting what
has since fallen out, and being desirous to prevent such false rumors, within
less than two days before his death, and not many hours before he was
speechless, asked him to this effect, Whether he had any remorse or disquiet
in his mind for any thing he had written in opposition to the way of
Separation, whereto he thus answered, I thank God I have not any, but I rather
take comfort in what I have done, and could have desired (if it had been the
will of God) to have lived a while longer to have given further assistance in
that work. And this question was propounded to him, and the Answer returned by
him, not only in the audience of some other of us, but also of sundry other
godly friends, who can attest the truth of this relation.

Lastly, We boldly challenge any person to come forth, and to make proof
either by word, or writing, that this our Reverend Brother either repented his
pains, or changed his judgment against the way of separation; which if he
shall accordingly do, then will we be content to undergo the severest
censures, that are due unto unjust suppressors of the truth. But if any failing
herein, shall hereafter persist to promote either by scattering or crediting
the forenamed reports, we leave them to the judgment of all indifferent men,
whether they deserve not to be accounted defamers of the dead, and liars
against the truth, if not subtle promoters of their own cause and course, by
pretending falsely the Patronage of their Adversary, when they could not stand
before his Arguments.

But in probability some will thus reply to our Apology, That if your friend
did not retract, the more was his sin, and the less his honor. Unto whom we
return this answer, That this censure strongly presumes his former discourse
in the maine matter to be erroneous and unjustifiable, whereas that is the
thing still in question, and (as we verily believe) cannot be solidly proved.
And though our Reverend Brother be dead, (whom God had extraordinarily fitted
for disputes of this nature) yet we doubt not but the living Lord will raise up
for himself some other instruments to maintain the truth which he had
undertaken.

There is one thing more (Christian Reader) which we desire thee to take notice
of, viz. That whereas it is often reported, that this Authors former book was
fully answered, before it passed the Press, and that therefore further answer
there^o cannot be expected, we shall relate the truth for thy satisfaction in
that particular.

Our worthy Brother, having by Conference (as some of us, and others know) with
unshaken strength defended the lawfulnes of set forms of Prayer, he was
afterward by a Le^ter, sent from a worthy Gentleman, M. Richard Knightly,
requested to state that question, then much in agitation, and to give in some
arguments for his personal settling. Hereupon in the space of one day (the
Messenger staying for an answer to the letter) he did set down his judgment,
with some grounds thereof, and sent them unto his much honored friend: from
whom a copy being procured and conveyed into New England, it seems an Answer
was undertaken by a reverend brother there. In the mean time, the number of
them increasing who withdrew themselves from our Church Assemblies, because of
the Liturgy there used, he was importuned both by Ministers and others from
diverse parts of this Kingdom, to take some further pains in that
Controversy. This occasioned the perusal of his former papers, and the
examining of those Arguments which he met withal, either in Printed books,
Manuscrip s, or the Rela ion on of friends, against the use of set forms of
prayer in general, and of our Common prayer book particularly. And thus the
Embrio biggened, and being ready to be brought forth into the light, an answer
unto the first conceptions came to the Authors hand, wherein was nothing
material (as he conceived) but what was answered in the book^, then about to
be licenced: yet by reason of some exceptions in another frame suggested, he
judged it sufcient to annex a few marginall notes unto his book, as thou
may observe, page 13.15.24.33. etc. being unwilling in a more open way to
reply upon the private answer of him, whom he highly prized, and intending (if
God had spared life) to have returned more large and particular animadversions
to himself in private.

The Almighty speedily cast out of his Church all causes of offense, clear up
doubtful truths unto the hearts of his people, Compound all differences
amongst Brethren, make us all of one mind, heart, and way in his worship, that
our divisions may no longer dishonor the Gospel, distract the weak
conscience, disinable us to do that good we desire, or put weapons into the
hands of then, who oppose that reformation, the perfecting whereof our souls
long for, through JESUS CHRIST.

THOMAS LANGLEY. WILLIAM RATHBAND. SIMEON ASH. FRANCIS WOODCOCK. GEORGE CROSS.


An Advertisement to the READER.
THis Book was divided and sent unto several Presses, that it might the
sooner come abroad, yet by reason of the multitude of Pamphlets which it met
with daily, it has been thrusting through the throng for the space of half a
year at least, before it could see the light. In which regard also, it pleades
excuse, if in the printing it be not found every way so punctual, as might be
desired.

Farewell.
THE ANSWERS TO THE EPISTLES.
BLessed be the Lord, 2 These. 2.8.
We see now in good measure; that accomplished which the Apostle foretold,
touching the revelation of the man of sin, and heartily beg the full
consuming of him by the brightness of Christ's coming. But the discovery of
that mystery of iniquity, and consuming of that monster of abominations,
stands not in separation from Christian societies, entirely professing the
true faith, worshipping the Lord with that pure worship, which he has
appointed, and holding communion in those ordinances, which God has blessed to
the comfort of thousands and ten thousands; even their souls, who with most
bitterness oppose those congregations, if ever they felt sound comfort indeed.
Separation from the true Churches of Christ; his Ministry and worship (of
which sort I shall prove that to be by the Word of God, for which I plead)
tends not to the overthrow of Antichrist, but to the renting of the Church,
the disgrace of Religion, the advancement of pride, schism, contention, the
offense of the weak, the grief of the godly, who be better settled, the
hardening of the wicked and the recoverie or rising again of Antichristianisme.

They that condemn our Assemblies, Ministry, and Worship, and voluntarily
separate from the preaching of the Word, Prayers, and Sacraments as
Antichristian, if in words they do not maintain Antichrist, really they do
him more credit than his chief upholders. For of necessity they must
confess, that in Antichristian Churches the entire faith may be purely
professed, the doctrine of salvation plentifully preached, Ambr. in Luc. l. 6.
c. 9. tom. 5. Petra tua Christus est, fundamentum Ecclesia fides est. Si in
Petra fueris, in Ecclestaeris. P^ra est Ch istus. Hieron. in Psa. 133. Ecclesia
ibi est, ^bi fides vera est. Ecclesia autem vera illic erat vbi fides vera
eral, cum haeretici omnes bas ecclesias possidebant, Aug in ep^st. Ich. tract.
3. Estautem matter ecclesia, and uberaejus ^uo Testamenta divinarum S^r. hinc
sugatur lac omnium Sacrameatorum pro aeterna salute nostra gestorum. E^^n
Psalm. 21. Vbicunque timetur Deus and laudatur ibi est ecclesia. Parker. Ep.
published in the profane Schism of the Brownists. CAN A stay against
straying, answ... 1. p. 44. Mediam tenn^^e beati. The true and pure worship of
God is called gross idolatry. CAN stay.. 4. p. 32. Filthy superstition. Id.
sect. 1. p. 49. Our assemblies the harlots house. Id. sect. 4. p. 61. The best
Preachers are the worst. Id. sect;. 5. p. 76. In Scriptures are said to be
Robbers and Thievs, yea spiritual sorcerie is charged upon them. Id. se. 8. p.
87.
the seals of the covenant for substance rightly administered, and by the
blessing of God upon his own means Christian souls ordinarily converted and
nourished unto life eternal, which is much more than all the factors for
Antichrist shall ever be able to make good; and if true, nothing could be
(...) to the praise of Antichristianisme. In effect, (...) they less, than
even persecute the Lord Jesus in his had, which they revile in his
ordinances, which they dishonor, and in his servants whose footsteps they
slander, whose (...) they desolse, whose office they trample upon with (...)
Which if the forward abettors and promoters of this separation did advisedly
consider, and take the Lord before them, they would not furiously brand and
abandone that worship and ministry, which has the approbation, and carries
the seal of God. As it is unlawful to approve that thing which ought to be
condemned, so to condemn, what is to be justified, much more to cast off and
reject those godly assemblies, which Christ has and does grace with the
presence of his grace, as false; and that worship which is tendered to God
alone, in the mediation of Jesus Christ according to his will, as idolatry; and
that Ministry which God has, and daily does bless, to the gaining and
edifying of souls, unto life everlasting, as Antichristian.

Humble minds are afraid of novelties: CAN stay. sect;. 1. p. 48.
But this is the greatest noveltie that ever was heard of in the Churches of
the Saints. All that we speak we should affirm out of the holy Scriptures,
soundly interpreted, and rightly applied. But this judgment is not of God, is
not taught in Scripture, CAN stay. sect. 11 p. 112. In cord animaque
credentium ponitur idolum, quando novu^ dogma constituitur. Hier. in Jer. 32.
Omne dogma contrarium veritati adorat epera manuum suaru^, and constituit idola
in terra sua. Hier. in Isa. 2. Ne sit^s mul^e Magistri dissenti^ntes a doctrina
uni^^ Magistri Christi. August. l. 1. Retract. A Stay sect;. 1. page 47.
Quicquid pariter omnes uno eodemque consensu, etc. Vincent. Lyrinen. cont.
proph haeret c 4. Field of the Chapter l. 3 (...) 43. p. 175.
is not consonant to the doctrine of Christ, our only Master, as in the
examination of particulars shall be showed? If it be a great sin to be rash
and adventurous, upon opinions in matters of Religion, where men are not first
well informed in judgment by true grounds of knowledge: What is it to condemn
the Churches, Ministry, Worship and Servants of the Lord Jesus, against the
express Sentence of our heavenly Master and Teacher? If an Idol be set up in
the Church, when a new Opinion is broached ( as some cite it out of Hierom)
they of the Separation upon trial will be found the strangest Idol makers in
the world, because they have broached the strangest noveltie that ever was
maintained in the Church.

Such as lay down rules (says the author of the Stay) to find out the truth
by, write thus; What the Fathers all with one consent have held and written, is
a necessary token to know the truth by. And whatsoever has been holden at all
times and in all places by all Christians, that have not been noted for
noveltie, singularity and division, is to be received as the undoubted truth
of God. If these assertions be true, then is this condemnatorie sentence most
unjust and untrue. For not only all old writers generally, but the most learned
of later times; yea and all sects and sorts of people professing Christianity
(themselves excepted) are against it.

Therefore did they consider the terror of the Lord, CAN stay, sect. 1 p. 8.
and that great day in which the Lord Jesus shall appear in the brightness of
his Father, to avenge the quarrel of his least Commandment, and to judge the
wrongs, Gregory to John the Bishop of Constantinople says thus Tu q^^^
Christo universali, ecclesic capiti, in extr^mi judicii d^cturus es examine;
qui cuactacjus membra tibimet conarts universalis appellatione supponere. CAN
stay against straying, sect 1. p. 8 Parker of the cross part 2. c. 9. sect; 2.
I may well compare some of unbridled spirits to the Flaccians, whose
intemperate fury, made Ernestus to deal the more hardly with the Protestants,
out of a fear they were all of the same spirit, and would in the end procure
like mischief. Am. Polan. in Dan. c. 9.
injuries and reproaches, which are cast upon his Church and Saints, ordinances
and worship, they would not speak evil of what they know not, revile his
heritage, despise his worship, condemn the righteous, vilify the ordinances of
grace, abuse Scriptures, misalledge Authors, cause divisions and schisms, in
the Churches of God, distract the minaes of some, obstinate others, and expose
religion it self to contempt. Let me speak to them as the great est zealot
in that cause at this day, speaks to his opposite in a cause of less
importance. When God arises up what will they answer him? what will they say,
when he shall not only charge them, that they have made a rent in the Church,
brought an evil report upon his ordinances, spoken contemptuously of that
which he approved, yea commanded, and perverted his word for that end and
purpose: But also that they have labored with might and maine to draw others
into the same transgression, by means whereof his name is blasphemed, the
weak scandalized, the godly made sad, and that which was halting quite turned
aside?

If it be sure, that a more grievous punishment is reserved for them that cause
others to offend, than for them which do such things themselves, let the
adviser weigh seriously, whether it does not concern himself, as much as any
other, to tremble and stand in awe.

It is a vain boast, that at this day there are few, CAN say. Epis^ to the
Reader. The judgment and practice of some men of special account in the Church
of God, have to this day held this impression in me, that I esteem the
Captains and Ancient-bearers of this schism, unworthy the honor of any set
conflict and public confutation. S. B. the raising of the foundation of
Brown. Ep. to the Christian Reader. CAN Neces. of separa. Epist. to the
Reader. Galschill to Martial Epist. Omnia invalida nihilo sunt aequi^^ paranda.
if any, except Formalists and Familists, and men of corrupt minds, who
suppose that gain is Godliness, that will appear in defense of our parish
Churches Ministry and Worship. For the professors (as he is pleased to style
them) are of the same judgment, touching those things that formerly they have
been of, and stand ready by the Scriptures to prove their godly congregations,
to be the true Churches of Jesus Christ, and their worship to be of his holy
institution. If of later times they have been silent in these matters, it is
not because they are better informed; or that they see and acknowledge their
worship and Ministry to be falls and idolatrous: but they would not spend good
hours in vain, seeing what soever was written in this kind had been
learnedly and sufficiently answered, not with reproaches, taunts, and boastings
as is suggested, but with solid proof out of the book of God. Christian
Religion teaches men to occupy themselves otherwise, than to mispend their
time in answering that, which in the ears of all indifferent men carries a
sufficient confutation with it, or is sufficiently confuted already: specially
when experience had lessoned them, that they must deal with such as will
overcome by peremptory censuring, when weight of reason is wanting to them.

Nevertheless, If not, reply if they please and when they will. CAN stay.
Epist. When the undertakers have finished their answer, and ^ast. Dav.
published his many things that he has to say against it. Id, sect. 4. p. 36.
least overmuch silence should be interpreted consent, or beget too great
confidence in men, of the goodness of their cause, and others should stumble
at their vaunts, as if none durst, because they do not undertake their answer,
I am purposed by the grace of God to examine the grounds and arguments, whereby
they would persuade the Necessity of Separation from our Assemblies, and from
the worship of God performed amongst us.

Sundry things M. Can requesteth of him that shall undertake to read and
answer his books, CAN stay. epistle to the Reader.
1 That when he sets himself to read he should set himself as in Gods
presence, and look on with a single and unpartiall eye. 2 That he live by his
own faith, and build not upon another man's fancy. 3. That he deny himself
and be contented to be guided by God alone. 4. That for a particular fail he
do not condemn the whole. 5. That he change not the state of the Question.
6. That he may find plain dealing, Id. Stay. sect. 1. p. 2.4.5. Sanctis
Scripturis non loquentibus quis loquitur, Amb. de vocat. Gent. tom. 2. l. 2. c.
3. Omne quod loquimur debemus ^ffi mare de Scripturis sanctis, Hier. in Psalm
98. tom. 8. Nihil ultra quamsacris literis proditum est definiendum, Erasm. in
Hilar. Solum Dei verbum certum, caetera falsa si d^ssentiant. Fer. ad Romans c.
3. p. 303. CAN stay. sect. 4. p. 32. and sect. 1. p. 44.
and what is brought against him, be read out of the Prophets or Psalms, the
Law or Gospel.

Whether these conditions be observed by the Author himself in his writings,
let the indifferent judge, as namely, whether passages of Scripture be truly
alleged, Authors rightly quoted, arguments plainly propounded, conclusions
soundly drawn, his adversaries ingenuously dealt withal? Whether in writing
he set himself in the presence of God, and weigh in the Balance of the
Sanctuary what he commends unto his Reader? Whether he censure not before he
make proof by Scripture, and rather insult over his adversaries with insolent
and reproachful terms, than confute their grounds with substantial reasons?
and whiles he commends plain dealing, simplicity and integrity, he do not
play the jugler, who pretends plainness, that he might beguile and deceive the
sooner.

For when he makes semblance of zeal for the purity of religion, CAN stay.
Epist: to the Reader. CAN Neces. of separation. Epist. to the Reader.
wishes tenderness of conscience to his Reader, ever and anon objecteth to
his ^pposites what abominations and vile corruptions they labor to justify,
which formerly they condemned, bears in hand that the Scriptures speak
expressly for him, and the learned of all sorts ancient and modern, who would
not expect fair carriage and honest dealing? whereas, let the whole frame of
his writings be looked into, with a single heart and unpartiall eye, and it
will be found weary corrupt, loose, deceitful for the matter, and stuffed with
scorn, reproach, slander, insolency, and falsifications for the manner. Herein
whether I speak the words of truth and soberness, let the Reader search, and
then give sentence.

But for mine own part I desire to answer in the fear of God, and not to
strive with him in the like measure of sinning. A good cause needs no such
tricks of wit, but as it is of God, so it is able to maintain and defend it
self, and the more sincerely it is propounded, the more it will prevail. In
controversies, if men will keep a good conscience, their zeal must be
tempered with wisdom, truth, and meekness of spirit, they must speak as in
Gods presence, give the right sense of Scripture, and make fit application of
it, seek the truth in love, and that victory alone which truth will carry.
According to the measure of grace received from God, I shall desire to walk
within these bounds and with this resolution I come to compare cause with
cause, and reason with reason. Let the Scriptures be the only judge between
us, upon which all Aug. Epist. 48. Audi quid dicit Dominus, non quid dicit
Donatus, etc. Et de Pastor. ca. 4. Ego vocem Pastoris requir^, lege de Psalmo
etc. Hieron. in Mat. 23. Quod ex Scriptura non habet authoritatem, etc. Basil.
de vera fide, Nos omnem a Dominica doctrina alienam and vocem, and sententiam
fugiamus. Chr. in 2 Cor. hom. 13. Obsecro and oro omnes vos, ut relinquatis
quid huic vel illi videatur, and de his scripturis haec omnia inquirite. Ambr.
tom. 3. lib. 5. epist. 31. Caeli mysterium doceat me Deus ipse, non homo qui
seipsum ignoravit. Petrus de Aliaco praec. Gerson. Nullum principis edictum,
aut ecclesiae decretum est justum, nisi sit Divinae legi consonum. Novum
Testamentum est malleus, qui universas haereses interimit, est velut lucerna
lumen exhibens, recurrendum est ad folas Scripturas ut aete^nam salutem
adipiscamur.
conclusions in Divinity, if sound, are grounded, whereby all distinctions, if
true, are warranted. After the voice of God in Scripture, the determinations
and practices of our Guides, who are no Mat. 11.8. Luc. 7.14. 1 Reg. 14.15. sc.
calamus arundincus, non aromaticus s^^ mensorius. CAN stay. answ. sect. 1. p.
47. Howsoever we must live by our own faith, notwithstanding, we are not
lightly to esteem of the determinations and practices of our Guides, specially
when we know they are no reeds, but men stable and unchangeable in the truth.
Bilson Christian subject part 2. page 351. Many Bishops have taught lies, and
and seduced Princes in the Church of God: and therefore not their dignity but
their doctrine is it that princes must regard: for neither prince nor people
stand bound to the persons of men, but unto the truth of God, and unto their
teachers, so long as they swerve not from the truth. Id. Absolute judge of
truth, neither prince nor priest may challenge to be, for God is truth; and of
God I trust no man may be judge. The son of God says of himself, I am
truth, etc. Angust. de nuptiis, ad Valentin. l. 2. cap. 33. Optat. lib. 5. ad
Parmenian. And, page 351. Only God is to limit and appoint by his word, what
shall stand for truth and what for error etc. And as Bishops ought to discern
which is the truth before they teach, so must the people discern who teaches
right, before they believe. Idem page. 355. As the pastors have authority from
Christ to preach the truth, and woe be to them that resist the preachers of
truth, so have all hearers both liberty to discern, and a charge to beware of
seducers, given them by the same Lord, and woe be to them that do it not.
reeds, but men stable in the truth shall be produced, for they are not lightly
to be esteemed, though their consent cannot be the ground of Divine faith and
assurance.

The Lord in mercy give us to know the things which concern our peace,
comfort and salvation, and make us wise to walk in all pleasing before him.

CHAP. I.
THe Question betwixt us is, Whether by the Scriptures, and principles of the
Nonconformists, The state of the Question.
Separation from the Church of England be necessary or lawful? Those that hold
it lawful to be present at the preaching of the Word, but not to partake in
the prayers of the Congregations, nor to be present at the Sacraments there
administered, I leave to their own defense: The necessity or lawfullnesse of
Separation is that which I deny.

Neither is it here questioned, CAN. Necessit. of Separ. Epist. to the Reader.
Whether the principles of the Nonconformists be true and justifiable, but
whether the necessity or lawfulness of separation can truly, and justly, be
inferred and concluded from them. This Position therefore I lay down, as
directly contrary to the other; That separation from the prayers, Sacraments,
and preaching of the Word of God in the congregations and assemblies of the
Church of England, is unlawful by the Scriptures, and that whatsoever
complaints (whether just or unjust) the Nonconformists, judicious, learned and
holy, have made of the corruptions in our Church government, Ministry,
Worship, Prayers, Administration of the Sacrament, and people, received, or
permitted as external members, they do not infer, either in their
judgments, or in truth, a necessity or lawfulness of Separation from our
Churches, as no true Churches of Christ, our Ministry as false and
Antichristian, our Worship as Idolatry. And therefore, I shall shall hope, such
as have separated unadvisedly, if men of tender hearts, they will repent of
their rashness, seeing the grounds where upon they build are rotten, the
building ruinous, and the practice directly tending to the scandal of
Religion, and discomfort of their souls. And now I proceed in the fear of
God, by the beams of Truth, to try and examine what is objected, to show the
necessity of Separation from the Nonconformists principles.

SEC. I.
TO Communicate in a false Ministry, CAN. Neces. of Separat ca. 1. S. 3 page
26, 27. The Church acts of Antichristian Ministers, are Idolatious. Id. Stay.
sect. 1. page 5. and s. 4. p. 28. Id. Stay. Answ s. 5 page 66. Mat. 24.5.24.
Hos. 4 17. See Jun. on the the place. See Stay against straying s. 13. p. 124.
125. Iere. 23.6. Prove. 5.3. Mat. 7.15. Ioh 104, 5. Phil. 3 2. See Stay against,
Sect. 12. page 116, 117, 118, 119. and s ^^. p. 112, 113 Ioh 4.23. Romans 12.12.
Numb. 16. Isal. 50.18. 1 Timothy 5.22. (...) against Stray. sect 6 page 81.82. and
sect. 13. page 89. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Luke 10.16. (...) The^^ 2.2, 3, 4. Revel.
13 and 14 9 12. and 18.4.
is certainly a breach of the Second Commandment; For what do they, but
indeed set up an Idol, yea and bow down unto it, who serve God in, and by a
devised and usurped Ministry. In Song 1.7, 8. The faithful entreat Christ to
be showed where he by his Ministry, with his Spirit, Word, Seals, Censures,
etc. feeds his Flock, that there they might place themselves for Instruction
and Government, and not turn aside to the flocks of his companions, that is,
the congregations of false Christ's, and false Prophets, which came in his Name,
saying, I am Christ, and deceive many. Again, Ephraim is joined to Idols;
What were they? among others, they were Priests which Jeroboam ordained for the
high Places: What follows? let him alone, that is, have no communion with him,
either in his false Ministry, or other Idolatry. Often do the Prophets,
Christ, and his Apostles, forbid men to hear those, which thrust themselves
into ministerial offices, not being sent of God, and from the Church. To
communicate in a false ministry, is to do a vain worship; and therefore
unacceptable altogether unto the Lord. In this men do abet the party in his
sin, and so make it their own by imputation, and inwrap themselves in the same
guilt with the offender. God has promised no blessing to his Word, but in his
own Ordinance, though I confess he may, yea, and does grant often times that,
through his infinite Godnesse, which no man can challenge by an ordinary
promise. To do otherwise, is to rebel grievously against the Lord, and to
uphold, what in us lies, that which the Lord will consume: therefore, as no
good Subject should assist or communicate with any person in the administration
of civil justice to the Kings Subjects (no although he administer the same
never so legally, justly, impartially) except the same person had a commission
from the King so to do: so neither ought the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, A
dumb M^^ster^e being unlawful and false is to be separated from, their
Ministers for the greatest part, are dumb Ministers C^^ Necess. of Separ. page
42.
to partake with any person whatsoever in the dispensation of any Spiritual
ordinance (though in it self never so holy) without sufficient warrant and
commission from the most absolute and Sovereign King of his Church, Christ
Jesus. Such as have spiritual communion in a false Ministry, do embrace the
bosom of a stranger, and so commit spiritual whoredom against the Lord.
Christ sets it down as a property of his sheep to be observed, that they
follow not strangers, but fly from them, for that they know not their voice.

ANSWER.
THis Reason is grounded upon the complaint which Nonconformists make of some
great abuses in the Ministry: but in them it is not to be understood of all
Ministers, Where are the words, or what be they, that condemn all the
Ministers for some? that say all Ministers are unlawfully admitted, for some?
or that there is none good, because some are bad? If there be no words, that
carry with them any such sense, then you do wrong to your brethren. The Lord
bless and increase an hundred fold the godly, wise, learned, grave Ministers
of this Church. T. C. repl. 1. page 25. And so others in their complaints, are
to be understood. Nolo autem (...) quis existimet per ea, quae ecclesiasticorum
permissa sunt, me omnes prorsus ecclesiasticos, nullo excepto, compreh^ndere
velle. Nic. Clem. Specul. Eccles.
nor to infer a nullitie of the Ministry. It is nor to be understood of all
Ministers, for amongst them there be many learned, wise, godly and painful, as
the truth is, and they acknowledge, duly called and approved, whose Ministry
God has sealed, and blessed. It does not infer, a nullitie of the Ministry
of others: for even the idle, unlearned, scandalous, being in the room of
Ministers, are Ministers to others, though not to themselves, and their
Ministry, so long as they Minister the things of God, is effectual to the
people of God. If then your meaning be, that the whole Ministry of the Church
of England is false, impure, unlawful, according to the principles, and
complaints of the Nonconformists, it is notorious: If that the Ministry of
the Church of England in general is a nullitie, by reason of some maims and
defects found therein, which they desire might be redressed, in that also you
do them apparent wrong.

In the Proposition, as it is set down, that we may understand the sense
thereof, two things are to be considered. 1. What is meant by a false
Ministry. 2. What it is to communicate in a false Ministry.

In plain and distinct dealing, a false Ministry is not to be confounded with
a maimed, defective, or impure Ministry, for as the Gospel may be preached
truly when it is taught impurely, so may the Ministry be true for substance,
when it is impure in some respects. But seeing in your language, every
unlearned, scandalous, negligent Minister, is a false Minister, and the
Ministry which he executes, is a false Ministry; therefore to omit further
contestation about the word, It must be noted, That a false Ministry is
twofold. 1. Absolute, viz. such as is no ways appointed of God, in respect of
the substance of the office, whereunto he is set apart, as if a Minister be
called to preach pernicious and damnable doctrine, or to offer Sacrifice
propitiatory for quick and dead, and this Ministry is a mere nullitie. 2
Comparative, or in some respect, as that which is maimed in the qualities, or
care of the party chosen; or designed, as if a man unlearned, scandalous, idle
be chosen; if he feed not the flock, or teach without power and authority. And
this Ministry is defective, but of force and efficacy to the people of God:
for substance, it is of God, for the good of his flock, and what is done in the
administration is done by the authority of God, but the persons themselves, if
in no measure qualified, are not allowed and approved of God.

The second phrase, To communicate in the false Ministry, may import two
things. First, to communicate in the sins of the Ministry, Iniqua lex est
quae se exammari non patuur. Tert. in A^ol. Non tam vi cogere homines ad
obsequium, quam ratione persuadere debenteae leges, quae scribuntur a pio
nomotheta. Dan polit. Christ. lib. 5. cap. 3. Course of confor. page 149.
Gratian. Decr. 1. did. 12. cap. 1. Bilson Christ. Subject. par. 2. p. 353.
354. Quomodo vero discedimus ab impi^s hominibus? Morum dissimilitudine. Si ab
ipsis corpore divelli possumus, and nos ad meliores confer, onmino debemus:
sed saep^ fit, ut velis nolis, in medio imp^orum^e ve^sari oporteat: caveas
igilur ab eorum stud^is and operibus, ut Deus tecum loquatur. Lavat. in Eack.
cap. 3. Hom. 11.
and this is altogether unlawful. For Gods people, when the matter comes to
their practice, must have the judgment of discretion (and further they crave
not) the judgment, I say, of discretion to try the Spirits, whether they be of
God or not. And in case the Church, whether of ignorance or contention, or a
man-pleasing humor, determine in doctrine against the Word, or in ceremony
against the general Rules, their duty is to obey God, rather than man. But the
sins of the Minister, or other part of the Congregation, shall not be imputed
to him, who does only communicate in the ordinances of worship. 2 To
communicate in a false Ministry, may import, to communicate in the ordinances
of worship with them, whose calling is not in every respect approved of God:
and this is lawful.

If then the sense of this reason be, That our Ministry is absolutely false,
or a mere nullitie, it cannot be made good by Scripture grounds, or
Non-conformists principles, but the contrary is most evident. And he that shall
undertake to prove such a desperate Proposition, must grant that there was
neither Church or Sacrament, nor Ministry in the world for many hundred years
past, if he find not just cause to question his own Christendom. But if the
meaning be, that it is not lawful to communicate in the worship of God, with
Ministers not fitly qualified, disorderly called, or carelessly executing their
office and function, then it is directly cross to the Word of truth, sound
reason, and consent of all the learned.

If you demand, as you do of your Pistoler, Where I pray you, do you read in
the Scriptures of two kinds of Antichristian churches? speak out man: show us
the place, the chapte^ and the verse: ingenuous dealing requires it. Stay,
sect. 3. page 20. Isa. 56 10 11.12. Jer. 8 8.9, 10.11 M^c 3.11. Mal. 2.8. Ezekiel
44.7, 8, 9, 10. See Iun. annot in loc. L water ibid. M.c. 3.11. Jerem. 5.31. 1 Samuel 2.12, 15, 16, 17, 25. 1 Samuel 1.1, 2, 3 I^h. 2 16. See Constant. Emperor
Com^in Misn
where we read in Scripture of these two kinds of false Ministers, and
communicating with either in the ordinances of worship, we will show you the
place, the chapter and the verse.

When the Priests were dumb dogs, that could not bark, and greedy dogs, that
could never have enough, was their Ministry true or false, were they
qualified, as becomes the Ministers of the Lord of hoasts or no? The strangers
and uncircumcised, which were set to take the charge of the Lords Sanctuary;
were they true Ministers, or false? When the Priests taught for hire, and the
Prophets prophesied for money; when the ^rophets prophesied lies, and the
Priests bare rule by their means; Was their Ministry true or false? Were the
Sons of Eli true or false Ministers? qualifyed as becomes the servants of
God, they were not, but the function which they executed, was of God. When the
Priests bought and sold Doves in the Temple, or took upon them to provide
Doves, or such like things for them that were to offer, was their Ministry,
true or false? Did they that whereunto they were appointed of God or not? Matthew
5.20.21 22. etc. Matthew. 15.3, 4, 5. Matthew. 23.13.15.
When the Scribes and Pharisees corrupted the Law by false glosses, taught for
doctrines men's precepts, made the Commandment of God of none effect by their
traditions, shut up the Kingdom of heaven before men, neither going in
themselves, nor suffering them that would, making those of their profession
twofold more the children of hell than themselves: When they taught
Justification by works, and perfect obedience to the whole law, and denied in
Christ, both the Person and office of the Messiah, blaspheming him in his
doctrine, as a deceiver of the people; Matthew. 12.24. Luk 7 30. Joh. 7.32.
Matthew. 21.45, 36.
in his life, as a glutton and wine-drinker; in his glorious miracles, as one
that wrought them by the Devil; and when they hated to be reformed, was their
Ministry true or false? were they called of God, or did they thrust in
themselves before they were sent? If their Ministry was true, then an
ignorant, Idol, profane, idle Ministry, which despises knowledge, opposes
Godliness, prophaneth the holy things of God, corrupts the Law, polluteth
the worship, strengthens the hands of the wicked, and leads the blind out
of the way, may be a true and lawful Ministry of God.

It is besides the mark here to answer, that the Scribes and Pharisees did
neither minister to any but the Lords people, nor in an unlawful place, nor by
an unlawful entrance: For the Question now is of their Ministry, and the
qualification of their persons to the office, which they took upon them,
Whether such a Ministry as theirs was to be approved of God, and such Persons
to be chosen, or continued in their standing. For be their outward calling what
it will, and the people to whom they administer, as they may; if the Ministry
be not of God, if the persons be not qualified as God requires, if they
execute not their office for God, according to his will revealed, and the good
of his people, but against God; according to their own corrupt immaginations,
and to the grief of the godly, their standing in that place and room, without
question, is not of Gods approbation, nor their calling lawful. It might be
added, Number 8 9, 10. L^^. 8.3.
that though the tribe of Levi only was used to the Ministry, yet all that
tribe was not applied that ways, nor those at all adventure, but by choice,
according to their abilities. And therefore, if the Pharisees were not fitted
in some measure for their office, the choice was not by approbation from God,
nor their entrance lawful.

If then their Ministry was false, either it was unlawful to communicate
with them in the ordinances of worship, Matthew. 8.4. Luke 17.14. Io. 18.20. Luke
22.53.
which is directly cross to Scripture, the examples of the Prophets, our
Savior, his Apostles, and all the faithful; or to communicate with, or in a
false Ministry, is not a breach of the second Commandment.

They that preached Christ of envy, Phil. 1.15. St Paul. to the Philip. is
glad that the Gospel is preached although it be not purely, but he would never
have been glad, if it should have been preached falsely, or not truly, etc. the
want of a good calling, may give occasion to say, that the Word of God is not
sincerely taught, because there is not a lawful and ordinary calling: l. C.
repl. 1 page 28.
to add affliction to Paul's bands, were they true Ministers or false? What
soever you will say, to hear them preach Christ, was no breach of the second
Commandment. If in some respects they were true and false both, then the
Ministry is not absolutely false, which in some considerations is not pure,
as it ought, and is to be desired; then the Ministry may be true in one
respect, and false in another; then also it is no sin to communicate with, or
in a false Ministry, so far, to wit, as it has truth, and does carry the
stamp of God, so far as the faithful are allowed to desire, and they have
authority (though not approbation) from God, to dispense his ordinances.

An ignorant Minister is an Idol, having eyes when he sees not, and so is a
scandalous idle Minister, yea an Hypocrite, and hollow-hearted Minister, having
only the outside of a Minister, but wanting the life and soul, the approbation
and allowance of God. But the faithful do neither bow down unto an Jdoll,
nor set up an Idol to themselves, who seek and desire the ordinances of grace
from their hands, unto whom God in his Providence has committed the
dispensation of holy things, for the good of his people, though not for the
profit of themselves. Who is blind, but my servant? to wit, Jsrael, which
should have most light, because of my law: or deaf as my Messenger that I
sent? The Priests and Levites whom I sent to teach the people. The Idol
Shepherd, the Lord calls his Shepherd, Isa 42.19, 20. Sept. (...). See J^n^
annot. in loc: P^sc. schol. ibid. Zach. 11.17. Tarnov: in loc. Rutgers: (...):
Metaph. ca^de B^n^t: page 175.
not because he does the will of the Lord, but he is sent of God to the people,
who by just means does revenge the impiety of men. He enters sinfully, that
is never so well able to teach, if either he live profanely, or teach
corruptly, or be altogether remiss in his office; when yet to hear him once
being in office, and well gifted, was never deemed an humane invention.
Sometimes it does so fall out, that to avoid some great hurt or danger, or for
some other end, some things may lawfully and ordinarily be intended, which
without such peculiar circumstances, whereby evil is separated from them,
would be unlawful. And though it be unlawful to choose such a Minister, or to
have private familiar society with such a scandalous person, yet it is lawful
to join in the ordinances of grace, because God has called us thereunto, and
so ordained.

An ignorant or scandalous Minister is given in judgment, So Tyrants reign by
Gods Providence, but not by his approbation. Hos. 8.4. Tert. apol cap. 30. and
ad Scapul. cap: 5. Orig. in lab. Ind. hom. 4 Cyp. epist 55. and 68. Hos 13.11.
See Deodat. annot. Itali ia loc. Origin Hom 4, in Iud. Aug. contr. epist. Parm.
lib. 2. cap. 4. Chrysostom. Hom. post. in Hebr. Steut ergo ^lum pia crant
sacrifica secund. legem, quimvis ab impus sacerdoribus celeb ata, Ier. 3.14.

Si pia res est imperium, quamvis ab impio teneatur. Grot. de jure belli and
pacit. l. 1. ca. 2. Gratia^ decret. par. 3 de consec. d^st. 4. cap. 25.26, 27.
39. Hos. 4.5, 6 T. Crepi. 3. page 13. Admonit. page 47. CAN. ne essit. of
Sepa^a^. page 41. Z^^ch in Hos 4.6. Rivet. in Hos. 4.6. Etsi ab hommib es non
repellantur, ne sacerdotis extrinse us in Ecclesia sungantur.


but so, as God remembers mercy for his, which he will reach forth by them. If
God set Tyrants over a people in wrath, may not the Righteous seek protection
under them, or receive right by their government. God takes no pleasure in an
ungodly Minister, but he is pleased to place them here and there, that the
children of blessing might receive by their Ministry, what the Lord has
promised, and knows to be expedient for them. The Church-acts of ungodly
Ministers, are to themselves unprofitable, and in them sinful, abominable, but
to the Congregation, they may be profitable, effectual, acceptable, as they
are done for them, not without some calling, by Providence of God, and
authority from God.

The Pastors according to Gods own heart, whom he gives, of his matrimonial
love, and special favor, are furnished with the gifts of knowledge and
holiness: but others are called of God, not without his overruling stroke in
that which is done by men. The Lord threatens to reject them, who despise
knowledge, that they shall be no Priests unto him: But this threatening is not a
present degradation, or turning them out of office, disinabling them in that
they could do, and making all their acts void, but a menace of future evil in
Gods time, for that they ought to have done, but did not. And even from this
co^mination it will follow, That if Ministers who despise knowledge and
understanding, be permitted, by such as have power to cast them out, but do
not; they retain their power and authority still, for the good of the
faithful, until God be pleased to cast them off, and turn them out of
office, though their function be not pleasing unto God.

Ephraim (says the Prophet) is joined to Idols; that is, Hos. 4.17. Sept.
(...). ^un. Conjunctus^^, id est, tra^^fuget a Deo vero ad falsos: River. (...)
adhaerens, affixus est Idolis, conjunctus aut alligatus est. Sept. (...). lun.
sine illum, ^. c. ti^o Ichuda (...) cum illo (...) ne cito, Riv. 1. nihi t^ke
cum illo comu^ ne^^ta. Tarnov. Nihil quiequam tibi cum (...) sit commer. j. Ab^
Ne argu^^ eu^^ quispiam. Hos. 4.15. Sept. (...). Al. (...). Aqui. (...), Sym.
(...). Hoca. Aq. and Sym. Interpretati sunt (...). i. e. domum inutilem, ut
Hier. abserva. Com. in Hos. ca. 4. ac ipse it is assentiens, adjungit Bethel
appellatam esse Bethaven, i. e. domum inutilem, ut quae nihil prosi^, sive
domum Idol, ob vitulos in ea positos. Rainold. de Idolat. lib. 2. ca. 4.. 5.
Ier. 13.1.

Song. 1.7.8. The word may be read, as one that covers her self as an harlot.
Genesis 38.14, 15. M^^er. or in Cant. 1.7. Or as one that covers her self in
mournin^ ^^v. 13.4, 5. Mic. 3.7. Bright in Lo^. Sept. (...) Sym. (...).


has left the true God, and follows false Gods, or Idols; he is glued, and
sticks fast unto them, that he will not be pulled away: Let him alone, that
is, Have no fellowship or communion with him in his Idolatry. But that which
is truly alleged against communion with Idolaters in their Idolatry, or false
worship, is unjustly wrested against communion with a true Christian Church, in
the holy things of God. The faithful must not enter into Gilgal, nor go up to
Bethaven, though the Priests that there sacrificed, were of the Tribe of Levi,
because Idolatry was there committed, the Office or Service there performed,
was directly contrary to Gods Commandment. But they were bound to go up to
Jerusalem, though the Priests there Ministering had entered unlawfully, and
executed their Offices corruptly: because God had appointed they should appear
before him in that place, and the Service there tendered was of the Lord, and by
his appointment, though the Priests were ignorant, proud, profane, covetous, or
the like.

The Faithful entreat Christ, To show them where he feeds his flock; that
they might not turn aside (if the words will bear that interpretation) to the
flocks of his companions, that is, the Congregations of false Christ's, and
false Prophets. That which you add, by his Ministry with his Spirit, Word,
Seals, and Censures: And that there they might place themselves for
instruction and government, is not found in the Text, and may be received or
refused, as it is understood. If your meaning be, that Christ by these means
does feed or rule his Flock, it will easily be granted. If it be this, That no
Christian may lawfully sit down in any congregation, where any one of these is
wanting, or not executed in all points as it ought; you speak of your self,
and not by the warrant of Gods Word. For where Christ does feed his flock,
there may the Saints of God communicate, in the ordinances of Grace and
Religion, though some be wanting, or not so purely performed in all points as
they ought; though the Minister in some particular enter not as he ought, or be
not qualified as the Word requires.

It is one thing to sacrifice at Bethel, Deuteronomy. 12.5. Ho. 4.15. ^^o. 4.4. and
5.5. 2 Cron 15.3. and 11 12, 14, 15, 16. and 13.9, 10.11, 12.
which God has straightly forbidden, where is neither God, Priest nor Law;
another to worship God according to his own appointment, though the Minister
be not such as he ought. I wonder, if men do not tremble thus to abuse and
misalledge the holy Scripture.

Often do the Prophets, Jere. 23.9. Matthew 7.15.
Christ, and his Apostles (you say) forbid men to hear those which thrust
themselves into ministerial offices, not being sent of God, and from the
Church. This last clause, And from the Church, is your gloss, but not found in
the Texts of Scripture quoted by you. Perhaps you would cunningly insinuate,
That all Ministers not called by the Church or particular Congregation, where
they are to administer, be false Prophets. But this is to beg what you shall
never be able to prove, not to make proof of that which is questioned. Bilson.
Christ. Subject. part ^ p. 367. The Lord when he says, Beware of false
Prophets, notes there shall be Prophets by their calling, which shall be found
false by their reaching, as S Peter also witnesses. Pet. 2.1, 2. distinguished
from Godly Teachers, not by office, but by doctrine. Ier. 21.14. v 26 Iere.
11.14, 15. v. 21. Iere 6 14 and 8.11. Ier. 23.25 v. 26. v. 32. Ezekiel. 13.2, 3.6,
7. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
Most certain it is, the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles do all warn us to
beware of false Prophets? But who are false Prophets? They who are not chosen,
called and ordained by the community of the faithful, where they are to
Administer? No; or they whose outward calling in the Church, is somewhat
defective and disordered, nay corrupt and sinful? Not so neither. But they are
false Prophets, who walk with falsehood, and strengthen the hands of the
wicked, that they might not return from their wickedness, who speak the
vision of their own hearts, not from the mouth of the Lord. Who say to them
that despise the Lord, ye shall have peace, who run when they were not sent,
and prophesied when God spoke not unto them. Who prophecy false things in the
Name of the Lord, the deceit of their heart, and think to make the people
forget the Name of the Lord, and seduce the people with their lies: Who
prophecy out of their own hearts, and follow their own spirit. The Apostle
describes them to be false Prophets, who bring in damnable doctrines, contrary
to the doctrine of salvation, which we have received, and denying the Lord that
bought them. But this cannot be applied to them, who preach the Truth of the
Gospel entirely, Of false B^e thren, see Gal. 2.4. 2 Cor. 11.26 With Heretics
and Apostates, be they Princes or p^ivate men, no Ch^istian Pastor or people
may Communicate. Bilson Christ. Subj. part. 3 p. 78. Infidells be without the
Church, of their own accord, and Heretics be put out. Idem. 79. Matthew 7.15.
Bevvare of false Prophets. Assentior Chrysostomo qui poshemam vo^em non de
haereti is sed de iit acripit qui vulge (...) no^lne dicebantur Tales autem
es^e ut, qui corrup^am vitam specie vi (...) and larva ^eg^^. Lucas ni sallor
eosdem a^t inn^es (...), l^^k 20.20. Hers. re^^ sa^^. (...). ^ ^.
dispense the holy things of God, according as they have received authority
from God, and labor to win men from sin unto God, though in the entrance
into their office, or in the execution thereof, there be somewhat erroneous,
faulty and of men. Consider then how loosely the Premises of the Scripture, and
your conclusion hang together: We must not join our selves to Congregations
or Assemblies that are without Christ, so the Scripture: We must forsake
Churches, and Congregations of Christ: this is your conclusion. They must be
forsaken that refuse the Covenant, and worship strange Gods, so the Scriptures:
We must forsake them who have received the Covenant, and worship the true God
in the mediation of Jesus Christ, because they observe it imperfectly, thus you
must conclude, or you fay nothing to the purpose.

If Prophets in the Old Testament had an ordinary outward calling, the false
Prophets might have a lawful external calling, as well as the true, and then
God says, He sent them not, because they preached the vision of their own
heart, lying and deceitful words, to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and
not the words of Truth, to turn men from sin. They were not called of God,
because the work they went about, was not the Lords, but their own. But this
reaches not to godly Ministers, who preach the Faith of Christ entirely, and
labor to draw men unto God; nor yet unto them, who in some sort are called of
God, according to his Will (but not in favor, or because he is pleased with
their Administration) to do his work, though they be neither qualified as he
requires, nor dispense the holy things of God sincerely and purely as they
ought. When you tell us we must beware of false Prophets, you speak the words
of Scripture: but in your application of it to the Ministers of the Gospel, and
Congregations in England, you rob and spoil the sense of Scripture, which is
not the least degree of theft.

The Priests many times, were no better than the false Prophets: ut the people
is never forbidden to communicate with the^ in the ordinances of prescribed
Worship, though they must take heed to their souls, M^^. 15.16. M^^. 5.20.
that they be not deceived by them. The Scribes and Pharisees were blind
guides, who did neither teach the way of life, nor walk therein, and yet our
Savior forbad not the faithful to hear or communicate with them in the
Worship of God. He charged his Disciples to beware of their leaven, M^^th.
16.12. and 23.16. Luke 12.1. Amsw in Song. cap. 1. v. 6.
and let them alone, because they were blind leaders of the blind: but so
long as they preached the truth, and woshipped God aright, he never prohibited
them to hear and communicate in the ordinances.

To beware of false Prophets then, is not evermore in body to separate from
them, A Deo ^ocati itque constitutt sunt, ut leg^^n Moses in Sy^^gugis populo
prae^^gant, etc. Quale ^unque (...) sunt, (...) est recipl^^a^, si ve^o (...)
cons^n a^^^, i^ ^^^lenda (...). Pise it. in Matthew. 23.2, 3. Aug. in Ioh. (...)
46. (...) ^^cr^ nolite aud^^c, ^olite faec^e. span^, que (...). Visin. de L^^^
Baptarg. desen. page 1691. P^^^. 5.3.7. Aug. cp. 2^^. (...) vo^abub, (...)
distern^t quotidiana, (...), quodest inimicumnom ni Christi(...) cons^^cure.
Ly^^ expounds this place of the false Church. T^nt. 2. p. 314. CAN S^y.. 4. p.
61.
but not to receive their doctrine, or hearken to the devises of their own
hearts. For of false prophets that teach corrupt things, and mangle the Word of
life, some have standing in the house of God, and do perform the office of
teachers, and dispencers of holy mysteries, whose devises we must so reject, as
that we depart not from the ordinances, nor cast off that which is of God.
Others set up a strange worship, which is not of God, teach their own dreams,
and not the Truth of God, be set apart for real idolatry, or have no standing
at all in the Church of God, and with these, we are not to communicate, because
these things are not of God, nor to be performed by any calling or authority
from God whatsoever. But whiles you speak of false Prophets without any
distinction, you feign a new form of speech, and bring in a new doctrine.

Solomon exhorts to attend unto wisdom, and keep understanding, because
otherwise, he may be deceived by the lips of the a dulterous woman, which drop
as the honey comb. But with what face or conscience can this be applied to them
who preach the faith of Christ entirely, and administer the seal of the
Covenant for substance according to the pleasure of the Institutor? Or to them
that be not rightly qualified, who yet are set apart to teach the truth, read
the Scriptures, and dispense the Sacraments in societies, professing the true
faith, and doctrine of salvation? It will be said, False teachers are
Adulteresses. In some resemblance and similitude they may be so called, but
Metaphorical speeches must not be over-retched. And who are those false
Teachers? Not every man who is not rightly qualified for the Ministry, enters
disorderly, Ainsw. in S^ng, c. 2.15. The taking of these Foxes, is the
discovering and refuting of ^^eir errors, ^^e judging, censuring and c^sting
them out of the Church. 1 Timothy 1.3.18, 19, 20. or wording them, if the, be none
of the Church. 2 Ioh. 10. Qui (...) de^que improvat^ atque dammat^, ^^^coquc^^
posti(...) est Rolioc. in 1 Theol. 5.21. C^fehill ^re^t of one Cross^. page 25.
Stay. against. Sect. 1. p. 2. Pl. page 22. Hen. Amsw. First Ansvv. etc p. 26.
Now seeing such weeds flourished shortly after in the garden of the Lord, is
it not more Life for us (think you to keep that foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, on which Christ's Church is builded, th^n to build upon the boggs
(...).
executes his office remissely: nor every one that now and then mingles his
own devises with the Truth of God. For any one, or all these may be found in
him, who supplieth the place, and stands in the room of a true Teacher, with
whom the people of God may and ought to communicate, not in his sin, but in the
true Worship of God. Sufficient has been said of this matter before, from the
example of the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees: To which this one thing may be
added. That if all must go for such false Prophets, and Adulteresses, with
whom it is not lawful to communicate, against whom any exception may be taken,
in respect of entrance, execution, doctrine and administration, I fear there
will scarce be found a Church or Ministry since the Apostles times, wherewith
the Faithful might lawfully hold Communion.

It is well known, many errors and superstitions crept into the Church,
immediately after the Apostles death, and the Pastors had their hands deep in
the maintenance of them. What one says of Chrysostom (as you cite him) may be
said of others before and after him. He was not without his faults, His golden
mouth, wherein he passed others, sometime had leaden words, which yielded to
the error and abuse of others. I am not ignorant, that in his days many evil
customs were crept into the Church, which in his works he reproves not. And
so much the aforesaid Author had expressed a little before; There is not any of
them (says he) that the world does most wonder at, but have had their
affections, nor I think, that you (adversaries to us and to the Truth) will in
every respect admit, all that any one of the Fathers wrote. My self were able
from the very first after the Apostles times, to run them over all, and
straightly examining their words and assertions find imperfections in all: and
thus far the Author.

What then, must the Faithful disclaim them all as false Prophets, and
Adulteresses, and shun all Communion and fellowship with them in the worship of
God? If boisterous zeal did not blind men's eyes, I should wonder, if you be
not astonished at your abuse of Scripture in this matter: And when you cite
Scripture allegorically in this manner, you may do well to call to
remembrance, what your self have noted out of Mr. CAN. Stay.. 15. p. 135.
Knewstubs against the Heresies of N. N. page 61. To uphold the heresies of N.
N. this is one special and principal practice, that the history, and native
sense of the Word of God is altogether neglected of him, and in stead thereof,
is entertained an allegorical and bastardly construction, foolish and fond
distinctions, which thing utterly defaceth the certainty of the sacred
Scripture, and makes no other thing of it, than a nose of wax.

The Apostle gives charge to beware of dogs. Phil 32. Deodat. Ital. Bible.
That is, profane and impure; thus he calls false Prophets, who taught that
the righteousness and salvation of man did consist in part in the works of the
Law, and imposed a necessi^^e to observe the Mosaicall ceremonies. Act. 15.1.
Zanch. in Ph. 3.2. Sect. de Ca^e^dis falsis Doctor. Bern. sup. Cant. sermon. 33.
A rotten contagion creeps at this day through the who^ body of the Church the
(...), the de perater, the more inward, the more deadly, etc. Ye be called
Pastors, when indeed ye be spoilers, and would God the milk and fleece ^^d
suffice you, ye thrist for blood. The Arch Priest visits his charge to fill
his purse, he betrayethen ^ocent blood, he fills murders, adultenes, incests,
fornications, etc. Hok^^ in sap. lib. lect. 1^2. The Priests or our age are
like the Priests of Baal, they are wicked Angels: they resemble the Priests of
D^g^n, they are priests of Prinpus, and Angels of Heb.

(...) 123. D^v (...) have been brought us against Clerks, (...) Bishops, th^^
(...) not their lives according to the ^^cred Ca(...), which should be a ^^at
the (...), (...).


But who are dogs? False Teachers, who did bark against the doctrine of
salvation by Christ, pressed Circumcision, as necessary to salvation, were
returned to their old vomit, and being formerly of Jews made Christians, were
fallen back to Judaisme. And is there any Question, but we must take heed of
these, and all others of the same kind? And this is that which Zanchy
confirms, by many other Texts of Scripture, Viz. That not only the Teachers,
but the Faithful must learn to know and beware of ravening wolves, blind
guides, who bring not the doctrine of Christ, deny all the Articles of Faith,
or some at least speak perverse things, and draw Disciples after them. But
what is become of shame and honesty, when men apply this against them that
preach Christ truly and entirely, and administer the holy things of God
purely, by authority received from God? Or against communicating with them in
the Ordinances of God, who profess the faith, are called to dispense the
ordinances of Religion, because in some particular, their calling was not
orderly, as it ought, or the persons endued with gifts, as God requires.
Further answer may be taken out of that which has been spoken, to the former
passages, for one answer will fit them all.

To communicate in the true Worship of God, with Ministers no better than
ignorant, idle, proud, cruel, covetous and profane Priests, no better than
Scribes and Pharisees, is neither a vain worship, nor an abetting of the party
in his sin, nor to rebel against the Lord, nor to commit spiritual
whoredom, or to embrace the bosom of an harlot. These are great words to
affright, but they are of no force to hurt, if a man will not cowardly yield
without any combat. No, to communicate with such, when God called us
thereunto, is to worship God aright, to reverence his ordinances, to rely on
his grace, to hearken unto his voice, and submit unto his good pleasure. To
such communicating he has promised and vouchsafed his blessing, their service
is acceptable unto God, because commanded by him, and they have found him
graciously present to cheer and refresh them. It is without question, the
Prophets, our Savior, the Apostles, the Faithful in all ages have
communicated with such in Gods Ordinances, but not in their sin: And what man
well advised will say of that practice, that it was either Rebellion against
God, or spiritual whoredom, or vain worship? The Faithful must not
communicate with those societies in mind or body, where Christ is not at all
present with the presence of his grace and love, nor in those polluted
Congregations, Rev. 18.4.
where real Idolatry is so practiced, that they cannot be present, but they
must partake therein: We have forsaken the Strumpet that made drunk the
inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her fornication, and are gone out of
her, lest we should be partakers in her sins, and receive of her plagues,
otherwise we have divided our selves neither from God nor his Church. Bilson
Christ an. part 3. page 19.
They must not communicate with false Prophets in things of their own
devising, and which they bring merely upon their own brain, and not at all
from God: but if ignorant, scandalous, corrupt men, who neither please God, nor
are approved of him in their Office and Ministration, in a society professing
the entire Faith of Christ, do by authority dispense the Ordinances of God,
the Faithful may and ought to communicate with them, if they want power to
redress and amend things out of order. They must not Communicate in sin, but
they may and ought to hold Communion in the exercises of Religion, with the
true Church of Christ.

The sheep of Christ hear his voice, but will not hear the voice of a
stranger? Joh. 10.5.
But who is that stranger whom the sheep will not hear? From whom they fly
both in mind and body, with whom they must hold no Communion, CAN. Stay.. 11
p. 112, 113.
inward or outward? Thus far you extend the words of our Savior, and unless
they be so meant, they conclude not what you purpose. Is every unlawful
Minister this stranger? Deodat. Ita^. Joh. 10.1. Thieves and robbers are the
false Doctors, who thrust in themselves without a lawful calling, with false
doctrine, and an evil^n ind. The true shepherd is only Christ, the rest are
his servants, and not the owners of the sheep: The sheep must not rule their
shepherds, but they have leave to discern strangers, and fly from thieves
and murderers. Cyp. lib. 1. Ep^st. 4. Therefore the flock, or people obeying
the Lords P^^cepts, and fearing God, ought to separate themselves from a sinful
Bishop. Bilson (...) part. 3. page. 301. 353. CAN Stay. 3. p. 26. Jer. 23.14,
15. Acts 20.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
Is every unlearned, scandalous, corrupt Minister this stranger? Is every one
whom Christ calls a thief and a robber, who enters not in by the door, but
climbes up some other way, this stranger? Is every one that smites, but
feeds not the flock; that makes sad the heart of the Godly, strengthens
the hands of the wicked, mingleth the Truth of God with his own dreams, this
stranger? If these be not strangers meant by Christ, much less the painful,
godly, sincere Pastor, who feeds the flock with sound and wholesome food, and
leads them unto the waters of life? And then this passage is impertinently
alleged. But all these cannot be meant according to your interpretation, for
then absolutely, all communicating with them in the Ordinances of God is not
forbidden, but to receive their doctrine, embrace their errors, or follow
their manners, which was evermore unlawful.

The Godly and Faithful among the Jews, might not refuse to hear the Scribes
and Pharisees, when they had no power to cast them out, and yet they were
thieves and robbers, who corrupted the Law, and without question spoke most
reproachful things against the way and worship of God. The godly could not be
sure that the Pharisees would not deliver such things, neither did they offend
in being present at the worship of God: and yet it will not follow, that a man
may hear any one, or any where. Thieves and murderers in the Church of the
Jews, sprung up with them, and continued amongst them, and neither departed
themselves, nor were cast out by others that had authority. In the Christian
Church diverse false Teachers, ravening Wolves, Antichrists rose up, 1 John
2.19. Tit. 3.10. 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 These. 2.3, 4. Phil. 1.15.
not from among the heathen, or Jews, but in and from themselves, whereof some
went out from the Church, and separated themselves, others were cast out by
excommunication, and delivered up to Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme. Others were tolerated in the Church, either because their heresies
were not so pernicious at the first, or the better side had not power to cast
them out, or they preached the fundamental Truths, but of evil minds. These
in respect of outward order, were lawfully elected or called, but false
Prophets discovered by their doctrine, not by their calling, When the Apostle
exhorts Timothy, not to partake in other men^ sins, does he not intimate that
unfit, unable, unworthy Ministers might be ordained in the Churches, though
unlawfully?
and some of them continuing in the Church, the Faithful are not forbidden to
partake of the Ordinances of God, because they are present, but to beware of
their errors, that they be not infected by them. But, if by strangers we
understand only such as did arise from without, and brought blasphemous
doctrine, directly contrary to the foundation of the Faith, or such as are
justly cast out by the Church, that they might learn not to blaspheme, then
the Faithful might neither communicate with them in public, nor receive them
unto house, but fly from them both in mind and body. But thieves, who lead
not in by the door, Christ, who have strange voices, which the sheep
acknowledge not, who bring another foundation besides Jesus Christ, Atha. ad
solitariam vita agentes, complains against Constantius, That whereas the
Bishops in those days were wont to be lawfully chosen by the people of the
place, and sufficiently examined, and allowed by other Bishops, ad joining, and
openly created in the Church, Constantius in stead of the Church, would have
his ^alace succeed, and for the multitude of people, and right Assemblies (to
elect) he commanded three Eu^uches to be present, and three of his Spies (or
Prolers) for you cannot call them Bishops; that they six in his palace, might
create one Felix a Bishop. And noti^g what manner the Emperor and his Eunuchs
made, he says, In illorum locum juvenes libidinosos, e hnieos, ne catechismo
quiaem imbutos, ne^ non and bigamos, and maximis crimin bus male and entes,
modo aurum darent, ves^i emptorese for^ ad Episcopatu summiserere. Bilson
Christian Subj part 2. page 255.
these are not to be enrolled with such as teach the doctrine of Faith truly:
for they are not strangers either in respect of Sect, Religion, or Laws, they
are of the household of God, they serve the Lord as he has prescribed, and
walk according to his Law. And what is it to wrest the Scripture, if this be
not, when that which is spoken against utter enemies of our Savior Christ, who
refused to be shepherds under him, and his Ensign, is applied to them who are
furnished with singular knowledge, wisdom and utterance, teach the truth of
the Gospel entirely, and lead the sheep of Christ to the waters of life,
whose labors God has blessed, whose voice the sheep hear and receive, in
whose message they rejoice, and whom they follow as they teach Christ. You
pretend the testimony of the learned in this matter, but let the places be
examined, and they will be found, either to make directly against you, or
nothing for you, as I shall have occasion to show in the next Section, and
shall be done more fully, when you shall set down the words of the Authors,
whereupon you build, and attempt from them to make good your conclusion. In the
mean space I will forbear tediously to repeat over and over again, that such
and such make nothing for you, and such and such are grossly abused and
falsified.

Now let us lay the Principles and Inference together, and see if they close.

The Nonconformists complain of many gross abuses in the Ministry, in the
Election, Ordination, Qualities of the Person admitted, and execution of the
function; as, that ignorant, negligent, profane men are set over the flock; and
Non-residents, Pluralists, men of corrupt minds, who discourage the godly, and
hearten the profane. But this complaint they put not up against all, but many
in the Ministry. The Inference you would make upon their ground is, That it is
unlawful to communicate, not only with these men, in the Ordinances of Gods
Worship, but even with the most learned, godly and painful, who teach the
Truth, live holily, dispense the Mysteries of Godliness purely, be approved of
the Congregations, and blessed of the most high.

If I took pleasure in your vein (call it as you please) I could say, CAN.
Stay.. 11. p. 114.
I suspect my sight, and I ask of my self again and again, could the Treat.
write so unskilfully: For if this be not a Non sequitur, then Fools cannot
speak Nonsense. You may take it home, For I know not to whom it can be so
fitly applied as to your self. When this Inference is made good by Scripture,
Reason, or Learned Author, I shall suspect that the Non-conformists do not
walk according to their Principles; But till then, there is just ground to
think, that in making such Inferences, you abuse both your self and others.
That which you add concerning the dumb Ministers out of M. Penry, CAN. Neces.
of Sep. p. 43. Id. Neces. of Sep. Epist. to the Reader.
is besides the point, for he was no Nonconformist, but a Separatist, by your
confession; and if no man of piety will plead for them, yet men of piety,
learning, and judgment do, and must plead (for it is a truth) that there is
not an absolute Nullitie of their Ministry: and this I presume upon better
advice, you will not deny, or if you do, you must not stay in the Separation,
which you have made.

SEC. II. CAN, Necessity of Separation. page 29, 30.
NOne may hear, or join in Spiritual Communion with that Ministry, which
has not a true vocation and calling by election, approbation, and ordination
of that Faithful people, where he is to administer: Id page 46. If their
Parsons, Vicars, Parish Priests, Stipendiaries, etc. be, neither in election
nor ordination made Ministers agreeable to the Word of God, then is their
Ministry false, unlawful, Antichristian, and so consequently they deal with
the holy things of God. CAN. Stay. 11. page 113. All these affirm, That
whosoever takes upon him to preach, without a lawful sending, comes in not
by a lawful election, and holy Church ordinance, but breaks in against
order, by force and favor of men, and by humane laws, he is a Stranger, a
thief, a murderer, according to Christ's sayings in Jolm 10. And thus have the
old Writers expounded the places, as Iraeneus lib. 4. cap. 4 Clemens Alexan.
lib. 1. Strom. Cypr. libs 1. Epist. 6. and 76. Didimus in John 10. ^upert in
Iolm 10. and Theodoret ibid. and others.
But the present Ministeri^ of the Ecclesiastical Assemblies of England, has
not a true vocation and calling by election, approbation and ordination of the
Faithful people where they Administer. Therefore none must hear, or join in
Spiritual Communion with the present Ministry of the Ecclesiastical
Assemblies of England.

Which of the Propositions the Non-conformists will deny I know not: but sure
J am, they are both theirs. Howbeit (it may be) they do not so well weigh
their own Principles, as they should; And hence it is, that their practice is
not so strictly answerable to their Profession, and therefore do give just
occasion (I speak it with grief) unto the Prelates, and their Parasites, to
insinuate against them hypocritical ends, in condemning so grievously the
Ministry, worship, and government of the English Church, CAN. Neces. separ.
Epist. to the Reader. What better should we expect from them, who seek to put
out the light again, which has been by themselves chiefly revealed unto many.
I know what I say, and have good experience of this thing.
and yet to partake in the known evils and abuses thereof. But for my part, I
am otherwise minded than the Bishops in this thing, and do think, that they
do of conscience condemn the state of the Church, but do not maturely
consider the responsive conclusions, which follow upon their Principles. For
which cause I have written of purpose this Treatise, to prove they cannot
justify their Tenants against that Church, and stand members lawfully thereof.

ANSWER.
HANNIBAL said once (says M. Parker) There was not so much as one in all the
enemies camp, that was called Gisco: In an Epist. published in the profane
schis. of the Brownists. Parker of the Cross. part 2. c. y.. 2. As for those
of the Separation, who have confuted them more than we? or who have written
more against them? Some things of truth they hold, with which we think it no
more sin for us now to agree, than Cyprian once to agree with Novatianus in
that which he esteemed right, etc. So whatsoever stir or sedition was moved
by the unbeleeving Jews, it was imputed to the Jews that were Christians, who
were thought to be all one with them. Caesar. Baron. An^al. in anno 201. The
impuritie of the Gnostics, was drawn to the defamation of all other
Christians, no difference being made between them Cicer. Parad. 2. M Sutel.
tract. de disc. ca. 15. page 165. Bell of Chapter Govern. cap. 12. page 151. 152.
Bancroft, tract. of discip. cap. 33. page 430. 431. 432 Laus Querim. Eccles.
page 62. 63. So whereas the Egyptians were diri, ventusi, fa ibundi, jactantes,
vani, liberi, nova um rerum cupientes: the Christians, and all that are there
dwelling, are thought to be the very same.
So may it truly be said now, Not so much as one of the Godly Ministers, that
suffer in England about the Discipline, that may deservedly be called a
Brownist. And the Nonconformists do no more lay the grounds of Separation,
than the Reformed Churches sow the seed of Libertimisme, and Anabaptistrie,
which of all others they have most soundly confuted, and judiciously laid open
to the world, without seeking to justify ought, that elsewhere upon good
reason they condemned to be evil. But it is no new thing to reproach them as
the Authors of errors, heresies, or schisms, who principally labored the
suppressing of them. No man cried down the Error of the Manichees concerning
a good God and an evil, so much as Austine: and yet their opinion is charged
upon them that hold his opinion of absolute Predestination. The positions of
the Stoics answer to the opinions of the Remonstrants concerning Free Will
and power in Man: but the contrary side is burdened therewith. The grounds of
the Nonconformists stand directly opposite to the special grounds of
Separation, and yet they hear from some, that they be Separatists in heart,
from others, that they have laid the foundation, and the Separatists build upon
it, and that such as have made answer to the Separatists, do against
conscience put out the light, which has been by themselves chiefly revealed.

It is true, they complain of abuses in the Church (and not to excuse humane
frailty) sometimes with heat and fervor excessive, and humbly sue for
reformation. But to seek redress of what is out of order, is rather to
endeavor the repair of what is ruinous, than the plucking of it down. It is
one thing dutifully to urge the proceeding of our Church unto perfection,
another, schismatically to leave, and forsake her. Betwixt these two, there is
as much difference, S. B. The rasing of the foundation, etc Epist. to the
Reader.
as is between that child that in tender affection reproves, and labors
the reformation of his Mother, whom he sees by her indiscreet behavior to
become a reproach among women; and him that under pretense of the hate of her
uncomely behavior, should pluck out her bowels, and forsake her.

They complain of abuses remaining in the Reformation, not denying that a
wonderful and gracious reformation is already made, but moving to a through
and perfect reformation of what is wanting and out of order. For willingly they
confess, that next unto the Lord God, every one of them is most deeply bound
unto the Kings and Princes, whom he has used as excellent instruments to
deliver his Church here, out of the spiritual Egypt of Popery. T.C. Repl. 1
fell. 155.
This they willingly confess before men, and in their prayers daily give most
humble thanks to God for; And by their earnest suite, and humble desires, which
they have for further reformation, they are so far from unthankfulness, that
they desire the heap of felicity to the Church and Commonwealth.

Which of the Prophets does not cry out against the Priests in time of the law?
Against their pride, oppression, covetousness, tyranny; that they despised
knowledge, opposed the true Prophets of the Lord, countenanced impiety and
profaneness, and showed themselves enemies to all goodness? Did the Prophets
then, who knew what it was to work according to their own Principles, teach a
necessity of Separation, or give presidents to others to separate by their
example! In all ages of the Church, Platina in vita Marcellin. Hanc autem
calamitatem, quam nostri passi sunt, a Deo permissam refert. Eusebius. etc. Cypr.
de duplici Marty^. Hic discrucior quod non paucos Pastores habeat ecclesia qui
non solum non opponunt sua corpora adversus luporum inciersus, verum etiam
ipfilupos agant, etc. Council Nic. 1. ca. 2. Gratian. did. 48 ca 1. Leo ad Afri
an. Epist. 85. Great. did. 61. ca. 5. Hieron. ad O^e an. ep. ad. Nepoti. T.C.
repl. 1. page 41. Ambr de offic. lib. 1. cap. 50 Great did. 93. cap. 21. Ex quo
i^ Ecclesis, sicut in imperio Romano, crevit avaritia, perit iex de sacerdote,
and visia de Prpheta. Bas in Asceticis. Chry. desacer.
complaints have been made against abuses of this nature by all sorts, ancient
and modern, who never denied the Churches where the true faith was professed,
to be the true Churches of Christ: Cyprian complains thus, Here I am
grievously troubled, that the Church has many Pastors, who not only do not
oppose their bodies against the incursions of wolves, but also they themselves
do play the parts of wolves, whiles they destroy the souls of the simple, they
themselves serving their bellies, gain and ambition; and make merchandise of
the Word of God, and adulterate it with ungodly opinions. The Counsel of Nic^
makes complaint, That many things in the admission of Presbyters and Bishops
was done contrary to the Rule. Leo, That the office of a Pastor, and government
of the Church was committed to men altogether unworthy. Hierom reproacheth the
Bishop of Jerusalem, that he could, as himself boasted, make in one hour a
thousand Clarks: and condemns it in others; That Clerks run to the Bishops
suffraganes certain times of the year, and bringing some sum of money, they
are ordained, being chosen of none. Ambrose shows the abuse in his time, to
be this, If a man asked some of them who preferred them to be Priests, answers
is made by and by, that the Archbishop for an hundred shillings ordained me
Bishop. Nazianzon in Apolog. That they which handle holy things with unwashen
hands, and polluted souls, are more in number than they, over whom they rule;
Miseri in ^iotate, miseri in splendore. And ad Maximum. Ad Pastoralis muneris
administrationem nihil contulerunt, ui (...) quod comam quam turpiter alere
studuerunt, raserunt. And in the same place: De pecumiis jam in ecclesia bellum
geritus. When Basil: of an Heathen was made a Christian, he says That he did
greatly wonder at the dissentions, which were in the Church concerning Faith;
and the contentions of the Governors: because every one leaving the doctrine of
our Lord Jesus Christ, did challenge to himself, by his own authority,
certain rules and orders: Also J perceived dissentions to arise from hence,
because there was no discipline, no knowledge of God, or it was perve^se if
any. Chrysostom; Neque immeritos solum adleg^ sed and idone (...). The Toletan
Counsels complain, that for eighteen years, no Synod was held, Whence came
gross ignorance, and corruption of the Ministers. It would be too long to set
down at large the grave, sharp and lamentable complaints, that Nicholas de
Clemang; Petrus de Aliaco, See Nichol. Clemang. speculum Eccles. Petrus de
Aliaco. reformat. Eccle. Bern. in Conv. S. P. ser. 1. Heu Heu Domine Deus. Ipsi
sunt in persecutione tua primi, qui videatur in Eccl sia tua primatum genere:
Id. in Cant. ser. 76. Parum est nostris vigilibus, quod non servant, nisi and
perdant, Gildas. See Vsser de primord. Eccles. Br^^. H^oper on the 8 Command.
page 74 79. Whitaker. de pont. Romans presat. ad Audito res. In sch smatis
remedium hoc primo inven^um est, quod ipso morbo magis pericudesum fuisse,
molti virt sancti and prudentes judicarunt. Quod quamquam non statim apparuit,
tamen misera experientia demceps demonstravit. Tum enim ambitio irepsit in
Ecclesiam, and Episcopi caeperunt non minus de dignitate suarum sedium, quam de
Christi grege cogitare, etc. Gregor. Nazianz. orat 2. page 399. They intrude
themselves unto the most holy Ministeries with unwashen hands and minds, as
they say, and before they are worthy to come unto the Sacraments, they affect
the Sanctuary it self, and circum sacrasanctam mensam premuntur and
protenduntur, esteeming this order not an example of virtue, but a maintenance
and help of life.
Bernard, and our Gildas, have published against the Ecclesiastical Governors
of their times, for their ignorance, pride; luxury, riot, drunkenness,
persecution of all true godliness, covetousness, rapine, contentions,
brawles, simonie, and what not? And since the time of Reformation, not the
Inconformists only, but the godly Bishops, and Martyrs themselves, have
observed, bewailed, and reproved these abuses. Father Latimer, in his Sermons
generally, but in his Sermon of the Plough, is plain and large against the
pomp and idleness of Bishops, who Lord it over, but feed not the Flock of
Christ, muzzle the people in ignorance and profaneness, live riotously, hunt
after preferment, but seek not the winning of souls unto God. Bishop Hooper
complains, saying, It is great pity to see how far that office of a Bishop
is degenerated from the original in the Scripture, it was not so at the
beginning, when Bishops were at the best, as the Epist. of Paul to Titus
testifies; that willed him to ordain in every City of Creete a Bishop. And
as sharply and closely he censureth the Bishops of his days, for arrogating to
themselves so much wit, as to Rule and serve in both States, in the Church,
and in the Civil Policy, and to the contrary, professes, That one of them is
more than any man is able to satisfy; and that it is not possible that one
should do both well, and that it is a great oversight of the Princes, and
higher Powers of the earth, so to charge them with two burdens, when none of
them, as he says, is able to bear the least of them both. The accusations
which are brought against both the Ministers and members in the Separatists
Congregations are not few, nor light, nor such as can be wiped away with
reproaches. All these have borne witness of the great disorders and
corruptions, which have been in the Church of God, but they never deemed the
society was to be abandoned, because of these great and erroneous blemishes,
rather they sought the redress and reformation of what was amiss.

If some things of man be mixed with that which is of God, as humane
superiority with divine Ministry, the pure wheat with some chasse, the holy
Sacraments with rites savouring of superstition, a found Christian is not to
cast away what is of God, as a nullitie, fruitless, defiled, Antichristian,
Idolatrous, because somewhat humane is annexed unto them, nor in defense of the
good to be charged or condemned, as going cross to that which he taught
against the evil. Aug. de fid. and bon. oper. tom. 4.4. Nos vero ad piam
doctrinam pertinere arbitramur, ut and canes in ecclesia propter pacem
ecclesiae toleremus. Iun. animad. in Bell. contr 5. l. 1 ca. 3. l. 1. ca. 3.
not. 24. Speaking of Popish ordination, says, A part ad totum non procedit
argumentatio: In ordinatione aliquid nihil: fac^unt, ergo nihili faciunt
ordinationem. Quod Dei, quod ecclesiae in ea est, permagni facimus; quod a malo
est facimus nihilt. Calvinus autem eo in lo^o agit de rutibus adventitiis
solum, non de ordinatione tota simpliciter. Imposition of hands, whereby the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit were given unto Believers, was peculiar to
the Apostles. Act. 8.14, 15.19.6. and vide Beza annot. major. in Act. 19.
Synops. purior. Theol. disput. 24.. 32.33. Jus Pastores ^^gend^, est penes
Ecclesiam, ac ^o^inde p^bi convenit cum Presbyteris. Ius eos ordinandi solis
Presbyteris est propri^. CAN. Neces. of sep. c. 1. p. 8. Jun. animad in Bell.
cont. 5. l. 1. ca. 3. not. 9, 10. Bell. de Cler. l. 1. ca. 3.. Accedat.
If an unmeet Minister be set in office, by whomsoever the election is made, he
is of men, or humane: but forthwith there follows not a nullitie of his
Ministry. If a fit Minister be chosen disorderly, in that choice there is
somewhat humane, but the Office or Ministry is of God. In the body we can
distinguish between the substance and the sickness which cleaves unto it;
betwixt the substance of some member, and a bunch or swelling, which is a
deformity, but destroys not the nature, takes not away the use of that part
or member.

But what answer can be given to the argument drawn from their grounds? which
Proposition in the syllogism propounded, can they deny, seeing they are both
theirs?

If both be theirs, they cannot deny them, but he that has seen you by your
writings only, knows by experience, if he has made any trial, it is not
safe to trust your bare saying, or confident Assertion.

The Nonconformists disclaim the Major, as none of theirs: and the Assumption,
so far as it is true, makes nothing against them.

First, the Nonconformists never held Ordination by the people, where he is to
administer, to be necessary or essential in the calling of a Minister. For in
their opinion, ordination belongs not to the community of the Faithful but
to the Presbytery, or College Ecclesiastical, and may and ought to be
performed by the Presbyters of neighboring Congregations, if they have none of
their own, or not a competent number. Thus you your self relate their
Position. Moreover, every officer in the Church, must be ordained by imposition
of hands of the Eldership, the whole Church joining with them in fasting and
prayer.

Secondly, They give not the sole power of Election to the community of the
Faithful, but require their consent in the election, by the guidance and
direction of their Governors, See Calvin Epist. 131. and Instit. l. 4. cap. 3..
15. T. C. repl. 2. page 1. 196.197. Iun. Eccles. 3. p. 1. Non solus judicat,
sed praeeunte and moderante Clero and Presbyterio: soret enim proclive labi in
illud incommodum, si populus solus eligerit. Non est autem ab ^o tantum
periculum, ubi conjunctus est Clerus, and actioncan dirigit Presbyterium,
praesertim consilio and auctoritate vicinorum Episcoporum ecclesiarumque
accedente? Iun. contr. 5. l. 1. ca. 7. not. 24. Aurcolus in 4. Sent. did. 24.
art. 2. ra. 3. ea quae sunt ordi number omnes recipient immediate a Christo. Horb.
Irenic. l. 2. cap. 11. prop. 13. page 179. Itaque potest cuiquam, etc. Fr. de
Victor. in rel. de potest. eccle. Q 2. W E. The Church plea.. 8. page 78. A
dispute. par. 3. cap. 8. page 167. Of him who is obtruded and thrust upon a
people without their own election, it is well said by Zanchius, That he can
neither exercise his Ministry with a good conscience, nor yet be profitable
to the people. See Fulk in Rhem. in Ephe. 4.13. As some people be of that
disposition, that they know better to be governed, than to govern. Great. de
jure belli. lib. 1. c. 3. page 49. so it fares with some Christians, that it
is better they should be provided for, than left to provide for themselves.
and the Ecclesiastical College, to whom the Government of the Church is
committed. They allow not that every small company should do as they please,
or stand upon their own bottom; But as the Church is to be governed by common
counsel, and consent of the Ecclesiastical College, so the election and
choice of the Pastor or Teacher, is to be made by the direction and counsel of
the Senate. A Pastor should not be thrust upon the people without their
knowledge and approbation, neither should the people proceed therein without
direction of the Governors.

Thirdly, The Minister does not derive his power or authority, either
vertually or formally from the people, but immediately from Christ, whose
servant he is, for the Churches use and benefit, in whose name he must execute
his office, whose message he must deliver, whose seals he must dispense, and
to whom he must give account. This is that which Franciscus de Victoria, the
master of Canus affirms (though his words be ignorantly drawn to another
purpose, I suppose you know by whom) That all Bishops do derive Jurisdiction
and power immediately from God.

Fourthly, If the people have given away their power of election, or be not fit
to choose, through their ignorance or simplicity, or that liberty be taken
from them, they conceive it to be a maime or defect in the calling of the
Minister; but this defect does not make a nullitie of the office, or acts done
by virtue of that calling, which he has: For in every true Church, where the
Word of God is entirely Preached, and received, and the Sacraments for
substance rightly administered, there is a true Ministry, and a true calling
to the Ministry, though in some things maimed and faulty. In the Church of
God, and no where else, all sound and saving truth is to be found: for the
Church is the pillar and ground of Truth; and where the profession of all
saving Truth, with the right administration of the Sacraments is found, there
is the Church, which ordinarily cannot be had, maintained or continued, without
a true Ministry, nor that without a true calling.

The saving truth of God, Gratian. Decret did. 63. cap. 22, 23.
and a true Ministry are essential to the true Church, consisting of all it
parts, and partaker of the Ordinances of grace. Something of the se remain in
every complete society, Platima in vita Benedict. 2. In the Primitive Church,
the people which were Laymen, chose their Pastors, and for a long time the
Bishops of Rome themselves were not chosen without the consent of the Princes,
etc. and the Emperors were possessed of it as their right, ever since the days
of Ch^rles. Bilson. Christ. Subject. part 3. page 168. Sol. Iarchi. 2 Mac. 4.7,
8, 26, 27. Joseph Antiq: lib. 20. cap. 18. and l. 18. cap. 4. Ctrnel. Bertram.
de pol. Iudaic. cap. 18. Council. Laed c. cap. 13. Non est permittendum turbis,
etc. Iun. animadv. in Bl^. contr 5. lib. 1. ca 7, not. 16.17.
which has any thing of the Church, and for substance and essence, they are
true in every true and lawful complete society; But as the profession of the
truth may be found in all fundamental points, though mixed with many errors:
so for Truth and existence, the Ministry may be lawful, though in many
particulars delinquent and deficient.

In the true Church then, there is a true Ministry, But the true Church has
continued there by the blessing of God, where the Election of Ministers has
been given away by the people, or taken from them.

In later times, the High Priesthood was bought and sold for money, and
sometimes it was made annual, that every year new Priests were created, as
those Governors, whom Kings change every year: that as every man would lay
out more or less money, he should obtain, or lose the Priesthood. Which may
be seen in the examples of Jason and Menelaus. Nevertheless, so long as the
Church of the Jews continued the Church of God the Priesthood continued also.

In the Primitive Churches, when the people had a voice in the choice of their
Teachers, oftentimes there were factions in the Church, the people stood
against their Guides, and the Guides against their people, and the people were
divided one against another. And sometimes, either through sloth, or for peace,
the Pastors left the election of Officers to the people, Ruffin. lib. 11. c.
10.11. Theod. hist. lib. 4. ca. 6. August. Epist. 110. and 225. Socrat. hist.
lib. 7. ca. 34, 35. 39. Council Antioch. cap. 18. Sozom. hist. l. 2. ca. 18, 19.
Naziatrz. in Epit. patris. Euagr. l. 2. cap. 5.8. Theodor. l. 5. ca. 23.
Gratian. did. 63. ca. 11, 12. Cypr. l. 3. epist. 14. and 10. W.B. The Church.
plea.. 8. page 90. T.C. repl. 2. par. 1. p. 212. Cypr. l. 2. epist. 5. and l.
4. Epist. 5. and l. 3. epist. 22. and the like he did for Optatus, Satuus
Caesernius and Numidicus. Calv. Inst. l 4. c. 4.. 10. August. epist. 223.
Theod. l. 1. ca. 23. Socrat. hist. l. 2. ca. 19. Sozom. l. 3. c. 20. Socrat.
hist. lib. 7. ca. 28. W.B. The Church plea. 8. page 80. Centur. 1. ca. 4.
Centur. 6, 7. col. 591. Centur. 2. c. 7. p. 134. 135.
and the people challenged it unto themselves, and sometimes again they took
it from their people, and challenged it to themselves. But in the mids of these
broils, he was accounted a true Minister, who was elected, whether by the
Guides, or by the people, or by the Emperor, so he taught the doctrine of
Salvation truly. And if this be not admitted, what shall be done, when the
people and their Elders be divided in the choice of a fit Officer or Guide. If
the people prevail against their Elders, he whom they choose is no Minister to
them, because not chosen by their Suffrages: if the Elders against the people,
he whom they approve is no Minister, because he wants the peoples voice. And if
the people dissent, they must separate and excommunicate one another, because
to the one part he is no Minister, whom the other approve.

Though Cyprian teach, That Ministers should be chosen by the people, yet this
form of Election was not in some Churches in Cyprians time, who were esteemed
true Churches, and true Ministers. And Cyprian himself appointed Aurelius a
Reader, without advice of the Church, by the authority of his fellow-Ministers
then present.

Pinianus was ordained of the people, Elder of the Church, against Augustines
mind and will. Athanasius made Frumentius Bishop, and sent him to the Indies,
he created Presbyters in other Churches, and when he came into Egypt, as many
as he knew addicted to the Arian haeresie, he put them out of their place, and
whose Faith he tried and approved, to them he committed the Churches. The
Church of Cyzicena gave this honor to Atticus, that without his consent, it
could not choose a Bishop. You will not deny but the Ministry of the Church
for the first, second, and third, and fourth hundred years after Christ, was
true, and might be joined withal. For thus writes a friend of yours (and as
it is supposed by your aid.) It is affirmed by the Centuries of Magdenburg,
that from Christ's ascension, unto Trajans time, which is about an hundred
years, every particular Church was governed by the Bishops, Elders and Deacons,
and describing the state of Christian Churches, from Trajans reign unto
Severus ( that is, from the year of Christ 100 to 195) thus they write, The
order of Government was popular, for all Churches had equal power of teaching
purely the Word of God, administration of the Sacraments, excommunication of
heretics and wicked persons, loosing the penitent, the election and ordination
of Ministers, and the deposition of them again for just cause. And even unto
Constantines time, The Primitive purity of Church Government was not yet
defloured, with the dregs of man's invention. ^ig^em. in Apoc. 12. page 505.
506.
Neither had Satan brought in Prelaticall pride into the sheepfold of the Lord;
but Pastors looked every one to the health of his own flock. And a little after
he cites Epiphanius, ^. ^. Ibid. page 90.
Hierome, Ambrose, Cyrill, Hilarie, and Gregory Nazianzene, as making for him
in the matter of choosing Ministers. But most certain it is, within this space
of time, many things were done, in the election and ordination of Ministers,
which are directly cross to that which you require as essential in his
calling, See Iun. eccl. l. 3. cap. 1. See S^crat. l. 4. (...). (...) 21. Gr^e.
16, 17. etc. 35. Gr. lat. 29. and ca. 36. Gr. ca. 30. lat. Sozom. l. 6. ca.
18.20. Evagr. p. 2. c. 8. Socr. hist. 13. l. 4. c. 10.33. and Theo. l. 4. c. 6.
Ambr. offic. l. 1. Bills. Christian Sub. part 2. page 28 2. Sozom. l. 7. cap. 8.
Socrat. h^st. l. 5. ca. 8. Just in Novel. Inst. 223. cap. 28.9. Council.
To^^^an. ca. 2^ Greg. epist. l^b. 40. ca. 78. To Constantia the Empress. The
Bishop of Salona was ordered, neither ^, nor any responsarie witting thereof;
which thing was never attempted under any of the Princes, your predecessors,
etc. Yet I obeying their graces Precepts, did from my heart remit unto the said
Maximus, this his presumption, as freely, as if he had been ordered by my self,
etc. Council. tom. 2. Council. Parisien. can. 8.
if at any time you can prove that all things were observed; which I do not
believe.

Ambrose himself was chosen Bishop, when he was only Catechumenus, before he
was baptized; so that he was constrained to teach that which himself had not
learned; yesterday catechized, to day a Bishop. The Election in all things not
to be approved as consonant to the rule (for the Canons were strong against it,
and Saint Paul seems not willing that a novice should be a Bishop) but never
thought or esteemed to be none at all. Of the election of Nectarius, see
Sozomene and Socrates. Justinian ordained, If any man build a Church, or house
of prayer, and would have Clerks to be planted there, if he allow maintenance
for them, and place such as be worthy, they shall be ordained upon his
Nomination. And the Toletan Council decreed. That as long as the founders of
Churches do live, they shall be suffered to have the chief and continual
care of the said Churches, and shall offer fit Rectors to the Bishop to be
ordained: And if the Bishop neglecting the founders shall presume to place any
others, let him know, that his admission shall be void, and to his shame, but
if such as they choose be prohibited by the Canons as unworthy, then let the
Bishop take to promote some whom he thinks more worthy. In these particulars,
the consent of the people is too much abridged, as in some other particulars
they took too much upon them, or they gave their right away, when yet the
calling of the Minister, or the office whereunto he was called in those cases,
was not a nullitie. Jn many things (says the Council of Paris, which was the
complaint of the Nicene Council long before) the old custom is neglected, and
the decrees of the Canons are broken. But the Ministry of the Word, and
Sacraments was not made void thereby.

The godly learned, consonant to the Scriptures, have evermore distinguished
betwixt an error in admission into an office, and a flat nullitie of the office
it self. The Ministers election into his office, Neque tamen ubique ea in
part felix fuit Ecclesia: alicubi enim haeretici locum docendi adepti sunt:
alicubi etiam omissa accurata diligentia, invocatione and electione, minus
idonei rerum habenis sunt potiti, ut Irenaeus ad Victorem scribens testatur.
Illiric. catalog. test. lib. 2. tit. Eccles. Gubern. Hatina in vita Dam^f 2.
Adeo enim inolevera^ hic mos, ut jam cuique ambitioso liceret Petri sedem inv
dear. Id. in vita Benedict. 4. Vbi cum ipsis opibus lascivire caepit Ecclesia
Dei, versis ejus cultoribus a severitate ad lisciviam, etc. T C. repl. 1. page
23. Ibid. Leo. Epist. 40. Council. Ni^^^. 2. August. oper brev. collat. cap 5.
and ^i. 2 con^r ep^set Parmen. ca. 13. Georg. P^nce An^t sol. 66.
ought to be according to the Rules of the Word: before he enter into the
Ministry, he should be blameless, apt to teach, sound in Faith; and much
more is he to approve himself to be such a one in the execution, considering
that falls in the execution are much more dangerous to the Church, than before.
But defects in the election do not make the calling it self utterly
unlawful. If one blameworthy be elected or tolerated after, he is not to be
reputed as one that ministers altogether without a calling. Therefore the
Non-conformists never taught that the Minister is not to be heard, or that we
must not hold communion with him in the Ordinances of Worship, who is not
elected and ordained by the society where he is to administer; though they
maintain the consent of the people to be essential to the full complete call
of a Minister to that place and people. Thus they do profess in answer to
this and such like accusations. Where (says T.C.) do they reason thus, The
Word of God is not preached, because the Mnisters are not rightly proved and
elected, etc. Is it all one to say it is not purely preached, and it is not
truly preached, etc. They nver said, that there is no Ministry in England,
nor yet do ever conclude, that there is no Word, nor Sacraments, nor
Discipline, nor Church.

Herein they affirm or teach nothing, but what the godly learned in all ages
have acknowledged. Anatolius consecrated of Dioscorus, was approved of Leo and
Tharasius. The Orthodox Fathers professed, so the Donatists would return to
the Catholic, true and Apostolical Faith or Doctrine, they would not disallow
their Bishops, that they might understand (says Augustine) that Catholics did
not detest Christian consecration, but humane error. We use this moderation
(says George Prince Anhalt) That they who are called forth to Parochial
offices, if they promise that they for the time to come, will preach the Word
purely, and administer the Sacraments, according to Christ's institution, we
receive them, Horumque contenti vocatione, See Great. Decret. 2 part. ca. 2. Qu.
7. ca. 8.18, 19, 20. and. ca. 1. qu. 1. ca. 52. Socrat. hist. l. 1. ca. 9. Art.
Small. par. 3. art. 10. Stay.. 11. p. 133. Par. in Heb. 5.4. and Stay.. 4. p.
30. Par. in Romans 10.14, 15. Legitima autem vocatio ecclesiae est, quae in
quavis ecclesia publica authoritate ordinis causa ad aedificationem instituta.
Dan. in 1. Tim 5. page 363.364. and page 343. Stay.. 4. page 30. and. 11. page
113.

For. Iren. l. 2. cap. 11 prop. 13. tit. de Haeretic. Certe ad agnoscimus de
omnibus clericis haereticis, quoad jus liciti exercitii, and quoad alios u^ab
little communione abstincant, and cis non obediant: sed non est accipiendum de
onmibus haereticis quoad valorem exercitii in Sacramentorum administratione:
licet iniustae eorum censurae, etia^ ipso iure nullae sint.


and muneris demandati commissione, ordinationem and manus impositionem non
iteremus. So Art. Small. Si. Episcopi suo officio recte fungerentur, and cur am
ecclesiae and Evangelii gererent, etc.

Pareus is praised by your self, as an interpreter one of a thousand, and often
cited by you in this matter, as one that condemns the hearing of them that
are unlawfully sent. But according to Pareus. He is lawfully sent, who is
called, according to the order which is instituted by public authority in
every Church, for order sake, and to edification. Danaeus sharply taxes the
manner of calling Ministers, which be conceived to be in use in England, and is
again and again alleged by you in this question: but he does admonish
withal, that we must distinguish between a calling maimed, and none at all,
Ex his autem omnibus (says he) apparet quam nulla sit, vel non legitima eorum
verbi Dei Ministrorum, vel ecclesiae Pastorum vocatio, qui solius regis, vel
reginae, vel patroni, vel episcopi, vel Archiepiscopi authoritate, diplomate,
bullis, jussu and judicio fit vel eligitur. Id quod dolendum est, adhuc fieri
in iis ecclesiis, quae tamen purum Dei verbum habent and sequuntur, veluti in
media Anglia. Nam Anglos homines alio qui sapientissimos, acutissimos, and
pientissimos, in istis tamen papisticae idololatriae, and tyrannidis reliquiis
agnoscendis and tollendis, scientes prudentesque caecutire mirum est. Itaque
praeclare sentiunt, qui omnem illam chartulariam and episcopaticam curionum and
pastorum Ecclesiae creandorum rationem, item ex solo episcopi consensu, and
diplomate ministrorum verbi caelestis vocationem, approbationem and
inaugurationem damnant, tollendamque ex reformata ad Dei verbum Ecclesia
censent: quod ordo Dei verbo praescriptus in ordinatione hujusmodi personarum
sit praetermissus, ac violatus, sicut perspicue apparet. Denique and Senatui
Ecclesiastico and populo Christiano jus omne suum atque suffragium misere sit
hac ratione and in hoc genere vocationum ecclesiasticarum ademptum, and in unum
quendam Episcopum magna tyrannide atque abusu translatum. Dominus Deus talibus
corruptionibus, quae adhuc in Ecclesiis ipsius supersunt, and defenduntur,
mederi magna sua misericordia dignetur and velit, quae tandem certe magnam
ecclesiae Dei ruinam secum trahent and ipsum sacrosanctum verbi ministerium
reddent efficientque vel mercenarium, vel omnino contemptibile and abjectum.
Quod Dominus avertat.

Vna modo Quaestio superest in hoc argumento, Nimirum quid de little
administratione sit sentiendum, qui non sunt legitime vocati, atque utrum iis
sana conscientia adhaerere debeamus? In qua certe distinguendum est, Aut enim
est omnine illegitima vocatio ejus, qui ecclesiam aliquam administrat, vel non
est omnino illegitima, sed tantum ex part. Illegitima omnino est ea, in qua
omnia Dei verbo praescripta, sunt praetermissa vel violata, ut si quis seipsum
intruserit privata authoritate. Non omnino, sed tantum ex part illegitima est
ea, in qua tantum quaedam ex illis non observata fuerunt, sed praetermissa.
T.C. to his Sister An. Stubs. This is the stone that you often, or rather
always stumble at, That if there be any thing wanting in the Church, which the
Lord has required, that in stead you should thereof conclude, that the Church
is with us imperfect; you conclude it is no Church at all. Whereas in the
constitution of a man's body, some parts are required to the being of a man, as
the Head, heart, etc. and some to comeliness, as hands, etc. So it is in the
body of a Church: some things are required to the being of a Church, and other
things to the beauty and perfection of it. If it be not of the being of a
Church, always to have a Ministry, much less is it of the being of the
Church, always to have the free choice thereof.
Ergo cujus omnino illegitima vocatio est, is certe pro privato habendus est,
ac hujusmodi vocatio pro nulla. Itaque neque sacramenta confer potest, neque
reliqua negotia ecclesiae gerere, and quae gessit pro nullis habentur, nisi
fortasse esset extraordinaria ejus vocatio, id est, quae signis testimoniisque
certis a Deo confirmata esset. Solaenim propagati Evangelii and fructus qui
inde multus emergit, consideratio non confirmat hujusmodi omnino illegitimam
vocationem, utique neque faetus enatus illegitimam copulam, quae intercessit
inter adulteros. Vitium autem illud tolli potest, si postea ordine and legitime
vocetur is, qui primum illegitime in Ministerio versabatur. Qui autem ex
partetantum illegitime est electus and vocatus, veluti si per Simoniam quis
munus adeptus est, and non legitimo populi vel Senatus ecclesiastici consensu,
consensu tamen gradum obtinet, non est habenda pro omnino nulla hujusmodi
vocatio, sed vitium illud est corrigendum. Itaque isti Sacramenta confer
possunt, quia utcunque non omnino veram and satis legitimam vocatione^ habeant,
habent tamen aliquam. Sic Scribae and Pharisaei in cathedra Mosis sedebant. Sic
Caiaphas in Pontificatu summo crat, quem pretio redemerat. Itaque exemplo and
Apostolorum and Christi ipsius, qui eos monuit and reprehendit, non autem
secessionem a corpore Ecclesiae fecit, ab iis nos segregare in alium caetum non
debemus, nec a toto Ecclesiae corpore (Jd enim esset Donatistarum haeresin
revocare) sed pacem Ecclesiae, quantum in nobis est, colere nos oportet, etsi
illud vitium quod in eorum personis and electione inhaeret, damnare oportet,
and quantum possumus tum emendare, tum etiam emendatum velle.

Hac ratione fit, ut etiam a sacrificulis Papisticis collatus Baptismus non sit
in Ecclesia Dei repetendus, and pro nullo habendus. Etsi enim in Ecclesiae Dei
illegitimam vocationem Papistici Sacrificuli habent, tamen ex consensu populi
habent aliquam. Est autem aliud ( ut ait August.) August. contr. Parmenian. l.
c. 13.
aliquid prorsus non habere, aliud aute^ aliquid perniciose habere; aliud aute^
aliquid salubriter habere. Quod tertium solum nobis eligendum est. Sed tamen,
uti Magistratus vitio creatus, Magistratus tamen est propter populi consensum,
Lib. 5. de l^ng Latin.
quemadmodum docet Varro: ita isti Sacrifici, etsi vitio creati sunt Episcopi
and Presbyteri, ut (...), potius quam (...), sint merito appellandi, tamen
quadantenus Presbyteri sunt and Episcopi, praesertim apud eum populum qui in eo
consensit. Thus far Danaeus, whose testimony I have rehearsed at large, that
every man may see with what fidelity you quote Authors, 1 Admonit. p. 1. CAN.
Neces. of sep. c. 4.. 2. p. 173.
as making for you. You cite out of the admonition, that the Non-conformists
complain, That they have not scarce the face of a Church. But this accusation,
long since has been answered, that in saying the face of the Church does not
so much appear (for so the whole process of their book does declare, that
they mean when they say, That we are scarce come to the outward face of the
same:) T. C. repl. 1. p. 175. Albeit I have showed how u^true it is, that the
admonition affirms, that there is no Church in England, yet I cannot pass by
the secret Philosophy, whereby Mr. Doctor would prove that the Authors of the
admonition affirm it T.C. repl. 1. p. 23. T.C. repl. 1 p. 51. and 2. repl.
par. 1. p. 369. Hos. 4.6. CAN. Neces. of Sep. p. 9. and 31. T.C. repl. 2. par.
1. p. 273.
they grant that we have the true Church of God: but that for want of those
ordinances which it should have, and through certain the deformed rags of
Popery, which it should not have, the Church does not appear in her native
colors, and so beautiful, as it is meet she should be prepared to so glorious
an Husband, as the Son of God.

Master Cartwright severely reprehendeth the abuses of the Ignorant Ministers,
which in respect of the place which they occupy, are Idols: because they stand
for that, and make show of that, which they are not: and thereupon he adds,
admit you them as often as you will, the Lord pronounces, that they shall be
no Ministers to him, which have no knowledge. This you cite many times. But in
two things, Master Cartwright explaineth himself: first, That through
ignorance of that which they do, some of them may be good men, and secondly,
that his meaning was to note, how unworthy they are, as of the office, so of
the name of a Minister of the Gospel; not to make void their Ministry? such
as it is, in the administration of the Sacraments, which faith he, I confess,
as in the Popish Priests Baptism, for that they be the public officers
appointed thereto, although unduely administered, to be the holy Sacraments of
God.

Out of Master Brightman, B^ight. in Apoc. 3.
you make a large discourse of the base and shameful beggerlinesse of the
Clergy; as that the Curates are both in very deed, and in all men's account, a
company of beggarly fellows, and those that by means of their more full purses,
walk more lustily, they run up and down, bribe, impudently, importunately
beg, and flatter, CAN. Necess. of Sep. p. 19, 20.21.
to compass Ecclesiastical promotions, etc. But you tell us not, how he does
immediately after, in many words, and with strong reasons, consonant to the
Non-conformists Principles, disprove and censure your Separation, as wicked and
ungodly, which because you omit, I will present unto the Reader. Sed
nunquidergo (says he) destituti sumus ab omni bono? nequaquam; sed gemino
adhuc fruimur electis salutari: quorum primum est, introitus Christi ad ^os qui
aperiunt, Secundum suavissimum, eorundem apud Christum accubatio. Illud est
dulcissimum solatium recipiendi Christum, quod percipiunt Sancti, quoties ad
verbum praedicatum aperiri corda per fidem opera Spiritus sentiunt. Tunc enim
ingreditur and nobiscum caenat, Parker of the Cross p^t 2. cap. 9 2. page 113.
The second slander of the ceremonies ^ccuseth us for Dona^ists, whom the
Anabaptists ^^vive, with either of whom have we to do? For besides that we
make no Separation, as they did then, and there do now we are as for both from
h^ir judgment, and from their practice, as our ^^^sers, etc. The first
position of the Donatists was, That the Church is pure, without spot, and
without wrinkle in this life, and whereas Christian Churches tolerated famous
men, advanced also one Caecilan, accused of re^a, se, they held it their duty
to separate from them, as being no true Churches. (...) see here a perfect
image of the Brownists, and of the Anabaptists, but not so much as any
li^^ament of any English Protestant Preacher, that is desirous of reformation.
impertiendo seipsum benignissime and jucundissime; quemadmodum quidem Zachaeum
cupientem illum videre, and in Sycomorum ascendentem descendere jussit, and
sibi parare apud se hospitium. Luke 19.5, etc. Nec (...) caenat, qui sic
amplectentibus eum hoc iis tribuit, ut filii Dei fiant. Joh, 1.12. Ille
vicissim nos excipit, ut un^ cum eo caenemus, quoties integris animis accedimus
ad Sacramentum caenae. In qua perfidem nos carne sanguineque suo pascit,
lautissimis deliciis, supra omne quod vel dici vel cogitari potest. Quo sensu
dictum est apud Lucam, cap. 13.29. Tunc venient ab Orient and Occidente and
Borea and Austro, and discumbent in regno Dei, i. e. homines ex omnibus oris ad
Evangelium confluent, amplectentur doctrinam regni, vereque Christi participes
fient, cujus pignora capient, Panem and Vinum, discumbentes ad ejus mensam in
c^lebranda Sacra caena. Loquitur enim de vocatione Gentium, qu^rum fidem and
ascensionem in totam veritatem per un^m sacramentalem actionem designat. Hos
jam convivas Christus vocaret, cum interin, Judaei, de quibus agitur in illa
parabola, prorsus a ratione salutis abhorrerent, uti factam jam vidimus per
multa secula: Quo pertinet etiam illud, quod ibidem afferunt exclusi Judaei,
postulantes sibi aditum, propter pristinam familiaritatem edendi bibendique in
ejus conspectu, supra. V. 26. q. d. Nos saep^, Domine, communicati mensa tua
hilare convivium tecum agitavimus, eden do ex tuis sacrificiis: an fores nunc
contra nos obserabu? Haec enim ratione Iudaeis idem erat cibus sacrificiorum,
quod panis and vinum nobis. Neque tamen haec ita sunt accipienda, quasi gaudium
electorum finibus hujus vitae circumscriberetur, sed quia caena quae peragitur
in terris, est pignus aeterni convivii in caelis. Haec igitur docens duplex
adbuc and ingens bonum in Anglicanae Ecclesia residere, Praedicationem nimirum
verbi, and legitimam Sacramentorum administrationem. In quibus utrisque se
Christus suis impertit, mutuum convivium cum eis celebrans, ipse primum per
auditionem a nobis exceptus, deinde caena sui corporis nos vicissim excipiens.
O nos igitur sordidissimos, quoties a verbo audiendo refugimus, Christum enim
convivam respuimus. O nos impios contemptores, quoties recipiendo Sacramento
cum fratribus nos subducimus: Christum enim vocantem ad Caenam spernimus. Sed
haec adiiciuntur in singular solatium piorum: Etenim qui non trepidarent and
de fugiendo quamprimum ab hac Ecclesia cogitarent; cum audirent exosam esse
Christo conditionem ministrerum, quos brevi non resipiscentes ev^miturus sit ex
ore, nisi verbis ipsius Christi certiores fierent de sua cum co co^municatione?
Laus igitur tibi, mitissime Agne, qui fores occlusas contra offendens, non
statim te proripis furore percitus, nosque pro meritis omni ratione salutis
orbas, sed luculentam adhuc tui copiam relinquis omnibus, qui tibi per verbum
pulsanti aperiunt, and suavissimam tuam invitationem per Sacramenta non
spernunt: Igitur scelestus and blasphemus est little error, Parker de polit
Eccl. lib. 1. ca. 14. Quo ^ pr^ese^^^^ cum Anglia ^^^ba vitae aeternae ^a^eat.
Ioh 6.68. Ibid. Non in ^urid^ jectione, sed i^ fundament^ ipsius elemolitione
separatio dunt axat licita. J^id. Aquibus vos separate? 1 Timothy 6.3.5. Ac
loquitur Paulus de fund^ (...) corr^ptione doctrinae ill us quae est secun.
pietatem. Separavit Discipu^os Paulus? Act. 19.9.28. Athae separatio a Iudaeis
erat ipsa Evangelii fundament^ blasphemantibus. Postremo siparationem illam
(...) praec pitur. 1 Cor. 5.11. Psalm. 17.4. 2 Pet 28. 2 Timothy 3.5. At nulla in
^is Script^ locis (...) privata praecipitur, quae samiliaritate abstinct
mal^feri^torum hominum (...) Nullam igitu separationis vestrae in Scripturis,
a^ exemplum piorum homin^m, aut precept^ ophetarum and Apostolorum ^x^at, etc.
qui sic ab ha^ ecclesia deficiunt, quasi Christus hinc prorsus exularet; nec
ulla spes salutis manentibus esse posset. Cogitent hic Christum convivantem cum
suis. An pudebit eos illic discumbere, ubi vident Christum non pudere? An illo
sanctiores and mundiores erunt? Sed quare se non convincunt suo ipsorum usu?
Non possunt inficiari, quin prius in Christum creded runt, quam fecerunt a
nobis divortium: unde haec fides? Annon ex praedicatione in nostra Ecclesia?
Numquid ergo praedicare quis potest nisi mittatur? Romans 10.13, etc. Quid ergo
verbum propter labem aliquam externae vocationis tam perverse respuunt, cujus
vim divinam in cordibus sentiunt? Etiamsi fructus ipse non magis culpa liberat
depravationes nostras, quam vera proles adulterium. Nec igitur nobis in iis
acquiescendum est, nec iis. a nobis propter aliquos naevos deficiendum.
Quamobrem redite ad unitatem Ecclesiae, quae vos genuit and aluit. Si fugiatis
hunc Christum, qui cum electis in nostris caetibus caenat, ac eos vicissim
excipit, profecto nusquam invenietis. Interim cogitemus etiam nos, quantum
nobis ipsis malum accersimus, qui mordicus retinendo superstitiones nostras,
fratres in tantum periculum coniicimus. Certe si quid momenti habet, quod olim
confirmavit ipsa veritas, praestaret hujusmodi hominibus suspensa mola asinaria
in collis, demergi in profundo maris. Matthew. 18.6. Vtrisque sanitatem mentis
precor.

Here we see the Non-conformists agreeable to the Scripture, sound reason, the
consent of all Antiquity, and their own Principles do plainly distinguish
betwixt a maime or defect in the calling of a Minister, and no calling at all:
that it is great ignorance, or (to speak most favorably*) inconsiderateness
to charge them, as if they went against their own Principles, in holding
Communion with the Churches of England in the ordinances of Gods worship.

And if haste had not blinded, Robinson against Bern. reasons discuss. p. 285.
this you might have observed out of the Separatists themselves. There is
(says one speaking of Baptism) in this point a further consideration to be
had, unto which both the Scriptures, and our own experience do lead us:
namely, that as the Lord has his people in Babylon, his I mean, both in
respect of election, and of personal sanctification: so has he for their
sakes there preserved (notwithstanding all the Apostasy and confusion which is
found in it) sundry his holy truths and ordinances, amongst which Baptism is
one. But if his ordinances be preserved, or any one of them true for substance,
of necessity some truth of Ministry, whereby those ordinances be administered,
must be preserved also.

It is an injury to the people (as the Non-conformists hold) Whitak, de pont.
Romans contr. 4. qu. 1. cap. 1. Si velimus Christum ipsum respicere, fuit semper
ecclesiae regimen monarchicum, si ecclesiae Praebyteros, qui in doctrina and
disciplina suas parts agebant, Ar^stocraticum: si totum corpus ecclesiae,
quatenus in electione episcoporum and presbyterorum suffragia ser^bat, ita
tamen (...) semper Praesbyteris servaretur, Democraticum. Dan. in 1 Timothy 5.
page 352.
that a Minister should be thrust upon them against their wills, or whom they
never saw, nor heard of. But if the people be few, simple, apt to be deceived,
unable to judge of the fitness of a Minister, they stand in need of direction,
not only from their own Elders, but from other Churches. The practice of the
Apostles will confirm this: for sometimes men were propounded unto the Church
to be chosen, and sometimes the choice was wholly left unto them. And was not
this for our direction, that more liberty may be given, where the danger is
less, and more caution and restraint used, where the danger is apparent, that
if they be left unto themselves, either an ill, or an unfit choice shall be
made? In reason it is evident, for the child's consent is required in marriage,
and the more able he is to choose for himself, the more liberty may Parents
grant him in his choice, but if he be not able, or less able, the more
watchful must they be over him; and so in this matter.

The Presbyters are to go before the people in the examination, Heb. 18.7.
Tert. in ^pol. c. 39.
approbation and designement of a man fit for the Ministry: for they are
guides, to whom the chief care and direction of things Ecclesiastical does
belong. As for the people, it is not their office, and for the most part, they
are unable to judge of those things. To the people therefore it pertains
only to give their consent to him that is chosen, or to show their reasons why
they cannot approve of him, who is propounded, but no testimony of Scripture,
no example, no reason teaches, Kuclin. Catech. Hollant. de legit. ^ocat.
Minist. Th. 10. Pleb^damus p^testatem propanendi si quas habet^e usa^ion^s
ca^sas.
that the whole business should be committed to the desires and requests of
the whole and sole multitude.

The consent of the people is not required to the common election, whereby a
good, godly, learned, fit Man was chosen to the Ministry, but to the singular
election of a Minister, whereby he is chosen to be set over this or that
congregation. Or if that expression be liable to some exception, Ion. animad^
in Bell co^^. 5. l. 1. ca. 3. not. 3. and ca. 7 ^ot. 7. Ibid. not 24.26.
The consent of the people is not required in this, Whether such a man be fit
for the Ministry and meet to be set apart for the work of the Lord: but
whether he be fit or meet to be their Minister, by whom they may be edified,
and builded up in Faith and holiness. Of the former, they have no calling or
right to judge: but in the latter they have great interest.

Brotherly society requires, that we mutually admonish, exhort, reprove and
comfort each other, as occasion is offered, and when need requires, it is the
duty of neighbour-Churches to lend help to their brethren, in the choice and
election of their Minister. Iun Eccles. l. 3. ca. (...).
For if Churches have not fit men amongst them for the Ministry, nor able men
to make choice for themselves, they are to be helped in love, without prejudice
to their liberty, and not to be discarded and cast off as unworthy the name of
a Church: When the Scripture wills, that one should admonish another, it is
not only a commandment to every singular man toward his fellow, Heb. 3.13.
Romans 15.14. Romans 12.12 Car^w. repl. 2. par. 1. p. 23 1.
but also to one whole company toward another society. St. Paul, when he
teaches that all the faithful are members of one mystical body of Christ, who
ought to have a mutual care one of another, laid the foundation of this
policy. Bellar asks, Quo jure unus populus episcopum alterius populi eligere
potest? Junius answers; Bellar. de Cl^r. l. 1. c. 7. Iun. Ibid. cap 7. not.
13. and eccld. 3. c. 1. Not 24.
Certe charitatis jure and communionis sanctorum: nam populus infidelis ipse
non potest eligere, utpote nondum vocatus, sed postea vocandus ad Christum. And
a little after, to Bellarmine, objecting the dangers which may follow in
popular elections, he answers. The danger is not so great, ubi conjunctus
est Clerus, and actionem dirigit Presbyterium, praesertim consilio and
auctoritate vicinorum Episcoporum and Ecclesiarum accedente. And after that, Et
boni vicini quoque accedant ex ordine, Not. 27.
and fratres alti ex communi officio charitatis, si quando opus est, prout
Ambrosium fecisse Nediolanensi Ecclesiae narrat Theodor. hist. lib. 4. cap. 7.

In the Primitive times, one Church might elect and choose a Pastor for another,
and the Governors of one Church were chosen by the confent and suffrage of
others. Ignatius writes thus to the Philadelphians, It behooves you as the
Church of God, to choose a Bishop. Of what Church would Ignatius have the
Philadelphians to choose a Bishop? Not of their own, The Church of Christ was
guided by the common con^en^, and mutual agreement of both parts, as well East
as West, as a pears in the case of Athanasiu^ (...) Arian. Haec quidem
Aegyptii ad omnes and ad episcopum Roman^^ I^l um scrips^^e. (...) apol. 2.
Sozom l. 3. c. 7.10, 11. Ignat. ad (...) (...). Theod. l. 2. ca. 4. Basil. Ep.
48. (...) Athan. and ^1. occiden^ (...) and 69. (...) and Gallis and 70. Gall.
et Jtal. ep^se. and 74. occident. ep se. See (...) (...) Or to fend some
sufficient legate to heal the breach that was made, and quench the flame that
was kindled in his Church at Antioch. (...) Govern. ca. 7. pa. 76. (...) 13.
Cyyrian meant this of such mutual and and concord, as might profit the Church,
and well beseem the servants of Christ, but allows not that men should run to
(...) for help, against the judgment and acts of their Pastors. Cypr. (...)
Epist. 3. and 4.
for in the beginning of his Epistle, he greatly commends the Bishop which
they had already. But he exhorts them to elect a Pastor of the Church at
Antioch, as the words before going do make it evident. All Bishops (says
Cyprian) sunt mutuae comcordiae glutine copulatae, that if any one hold
haeresie, the rest should help: and therefore he moved Stephanus the Pope to
write to the Bishops in France, that they should depose the Bishop of Arles,
and to the people, that they should choose another in his room. Theod. l. 5. c.
23. Cypr. l. 4. epist. 8. See Iun. Eccles. l 3. c. 1 Amb epist. 82. See what
Socrates reports of the election of Chrysostom. Socr. hist. l. 6. ca. 2. Theod.
hist. l. 4. c. 6 See Theod. bust. l. 5. c. 8. Sozom. l. 7. c. 8. Socr. l. 6. c.
2. Iun. eccles. l. 3. c. 1.

Erat sanetum talis politia in Ecclesia, sicut membrorum in uno corpore, ubi
omnia uni compatiuntur, prespuiunt and medentur. Illitici catal. test. lib. 2.
p. 109.


Theodoret testifies, In the ordination of a Bishop, All the Bishops of a
Province ought to be called together: Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, was confirmed
of the Bishops of Africa. Gregorius Presbyter, in the life of Nazianzene,
affirms of the Bishops of Macedonia and Egypt, that they contradicted the
election of Nazianzene, because he was made Bishop before they came: Ambrose
writes, That his election was confirmed of all the Bishops of the East and
West: and Theodoret, That Valentinian the Emperor confirmed it also.

Election therefore was not ever made by the particular congregation, where the
Pastor or Teacher was to administer, but other Churches, and specially the
Guides, by common consent were called to assist the Church in that weighty
business. And this the Non-conformists judge not only lawful, but meet,
expedient, necessary in some cases. And therefore in many particulars, they
except against the proposition, as none of theirs, and against your confident
assertion, that you were sure the propositions were both theirs, when as it is
neither found in them, nor in any writer, ancient or modern, nor in the holy
Scriptures.

And when you peruse the testimonies alleged, Rhemists annot. in Ioh. 10.. 1.
be judge your self, whether you did not grossly mistake, or abuse your
Reader, when you cite the Rhemists, as if they pleaded for the Parochial
election of a Pastor, as only lawful.

As for the Assumption, It is true, the Ministers of the Church of England are
not ordained by the particular Congregations, where they administer, nor is it
necessary to a true and entire calling, that it should be so. That they be not
approved of the particular society, is false in many of them: for they are
chosen by their consent, to be their Ministers, though not absolutely to the
Ministry it self. And in case they be not so called, it is a maime and
defect, Parker de polit. Eccl. l. 1. c. 14. Deducere quidem conantur illi ex
majoribus nostris minores quasdam, sed and absurdas and inconsequentes. Neque
enim si necessaria disciplina sit, and in verbo Dei tradita idcirco, separatio
sicubi corrumpatur, sacienda s^atim est, nulla connexionis vi hoc porisina
sequitur.
which should be reformed, whether it be through the ignorance of the people,
or the Laws of the Kingdom, or the pride and covetousness of them that
thrust themselves into that calling, or neglect of Patrons, or what else
soever: But this maime does not make a nullitie of their calling, nor the Word
and Sacraments dispensed by them to be ineffectuall. For in every Church where
the doctrine of salvation is soundly and entirely preached and professed, the
calling of the Ministry is for substance true and lawful. The Nonconformists
therefore in reproving the abuses of the Ministry and yet holding communion
with the Church of England in the ordinances of worship, See Calvin. Instit. l.
4. c. 1.. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc.
do walk according to their own Principles, the doctrine and practice of the
Churches of God in all ages, and direction of the holy Scritures.

The Non-conformists reprove the tumults of the people in election, without the
direction of the Presbyters, Whitak. de pont. Romans contr. 4. qu. 1. c. 2 p. 16.
I^a v. admissa est populi multitudo, ut vitaretur omnis (...), ne ecclesia
esset (...). ut Act. 19.32.

Bilson. perpet Gov. Epist. to the Read. Right Apostolic Bishops were such as
were left or sent by the Apostles to be Pastors of the Church, and Governors of
the Presbyteries in every city that believed, so long as they ruled well: and
in their stead, as their successors, to receive charge of ordaining others for
the work of the Ministry, and guiding the Keys with the advice and consent
of such as labored with them in the Word and Doctrine. Id. ca. 4. Without
proof, the Church must not believe, nor regard thy speech: and proof thou
have none. One and the same person cannot be both Accusant and Deponent: and in
the mouth of one witness, though his testimony were received, yet may no man
be condemned. See Beza annot. Maier. in. Matthew. 18.7.


both their own and Neighboring Churches: so did the Ancients. The Ordination
of Bishops by themselves alone, or their Chaplains, and that of many at a
clap: so did the Ancients. The thrusting of Ministers upon the people without
their knowledge or consent: so did the Ancients. The ordination of Ministers
without cure or charge: so did the Ancients. The ignorance, idleness, pride,
luxury, pomp, covetousness, contention and schism of such as thrust
themselves rashly, ambitiously, profanely into offices, by favor, money,
flattery, or other corruption: so did the Ancients. They reprove these, and
such like abuses, and humbly seek and sue for reformation, but tolerate what
they cannot amend, and hold communion with the Churches of God in the
Ordinances of Religion: and so did the Ancients.

And if the Ancients did neither lay the grounds of Separation, nor walk
contrary to their own Principles, in holding communion, it is great ignorance,
at least, to charge the Nonconformists, as if they walked not according to
their own rules, when they do not separate.

Nay, if the Non-conformists should not disallow both your positions and
practice of Separation, they should not walk agreeable to their own
Principles, or the truth of Scripture. For you hold, the power of the keys
originaliter, and executive, is given to the community of the faithful, many
or few, yea though but two or three joined together in a Church way. This the
Nonconformists approve not: You hold it is necessary and essential to the
calling of a Minister, that he be approved, chosen and ordained only by that
congregation, where he is to administer. This the Nonconformists altogether
dislike. You hold all Ministers that be not chosen and ordained after your
form propounded, to be unlawful, Idol, Antichristian Ministers. This the
Nonconformists judge to be Antichristian. The consequence of your Positions is
this, That since the Church of the New Testament was established upon the
earth, there was scarce a true lawful Ministry to be found, where with the
faithful might lawfully hold communion in the worship of God. This the
Non-conformists do detest and abhor. Of other your positions in the Sections
following.

SEC. III. CAN. Stay against Stray. Sect. 1. page 4, 5.
WHatsoever God has bestowed upon his Church, as her privilege, the same is
to be found in his Word: But it is not mentioned there, that Beleivers (as
their privilege) ought to hear Antichristian Teachers.

The proposition is unquestionably certain by these Scriptures. Psalm. 19.7. 2 Timothy 3.15.16. Isai. 8.20. Ioh. 15.17. Act. 20.27. Besides, Contra Gentes.
this is the unanimous consent of learned writers. The Scriptures (says
Athanasius) do help us with the knowledge of every truth, etc.

The first part which is only controversall is evident and clear, Anno. in 1
Cor. 10.. 21. in 1 Reg. cap 5. v. 19.
by these Scriptures. Levit. 17.3.4. Deuteronomy. 12.5. Prove. 5.8. Hos. 4.15. Matthew.
7.15. 2 Cor. 7.15, 16, 17. Rev. 18.4. Song. 1.6, 7. To this all sorts of
Writers assent, Zanch. on Phil. 3.2. The Authors of the Admonition. page 27,
etc. Yea the Papists themselves, Rhemists and Doway Translators.

ANSWER.
THe sinews of this Argument are cut already in the first Section, if ever it
had any, and therefore a few words may now suffice. In this reason you take for
granted, that which is most false, little less than blasphemy; to wit, that
all Ministers in the Church of England be Antichristian. For they are in
respect of the substance of their office, the Ministers of Jesus Christ, set
apart to preach the Gospel, dispense the Sacraments, and administer the
Discipline of the Lord Christ: and many of them the approved servants of
Christ, furnished with gifts from above, sent forth by authority to preach the
Gospel of God, and dispense his Sacraments, which they faithfully execute,
according to commission received from their Lord and Master, the King of the
Church, who works by them, and blesses their labors, if ever ordinary
Ministers had cause to speak of, and rejoice in the blessing of God, to the
praise of his name.

But to let that pass, Antichristian Teachers (if I must speak in your own
language) be of diverse sorts:

1. Such as be not called in every point according to your platform, or at
least whose calling is in any respect maimed or defective, though they be
godly, learned, painful, every way fit, set apart by authority, and approved
by the Church. If Antichristian Teachers be taken in this sense, true Believers
living in societies with them are bound to hear the Word, and partake in the
Sacraments, because they be the ordinances of the Lord Jesus, who is present,
knocking at the door of the heart, and will come in and sup with them that
open unto him. So long as we teach the same doctrine which the Apostles did,
we have the same power and authority to Preach, which they had. B^s. Chrill
(...) part 3. p. ^
Look what reasons soever can be alleged to prove that Christians ought to
join together in holy communion, the same will strongly convince, that
ordinarily, or occasionally we must hold society with such Ministers in the
ordinances of piety and godliness. And if this Ministry be Antichristian,
diverse, if not most worthy Martyrs of Jesus Christ, that have withstood
Antichrist unto blood, have stood under some ordinances, in their first
original, Antichristian, or of men in some respects, which did not overthrow,
though it might be some blemish unto their Ministry.

2. Such as be not rightly called by men, because not rightly furnished with
gifts, or faithfully executing their place, or teaching erroneous doctrines and
traditions of men, but yet set apart to an office which is of God, and in
communion of men professing the true Faith, are called Antichristian Ministers.
And if it be taken in this sense, the faithful are bound in conscience to
hear such, if they live in their societies: because they be the Ministers of
Christ in a sort, though they be not approved of him, and do his work for the
good of them that be heirs of salvation. But in so doing, they do not
communicate with the Ministers of Antichrists apostasy, but with the Lord
Christ in his holy ordinance, by such means as he has appointed. Hieron. l.
1. Com in Ephesians. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Hierome notes, that there are four sorts, who are employed in the businesses
and affairs of Almighty God. The first, such as are sent neither of men, nor
by men, but by Jesus Christ. The second, such as are sent of God, but by man.
The third are such as are sent of man and not of God, who are they that are
ordained by favor of Men, not rightly judging of the quality of them who are
to serve in this calling. Who yet are not simply denied to be sent of God, as
if they had not commission from him, but therefore only, because if the
choosers and ordainers had done their duties, they should have made a better
choice. For being sent by men that have authority, though abusing the same,
we cannot say they have no true or lawful Ministry: for then were all
ministration of the Sacraments, and other sacred things void, performed by
scandalous, ungodly Ministers, and such as by sinister means get into these
holy places. The fourth are of such as are neither sent of God, nor of men, nor
by men, but run of themselves, and have no calling at all: who are neither
Ministers of Christ for themselves, nor others. Thus far Hierome.

3 Such are Antichristian Ministers, as teach false doctrine, be set apart to
an office merely of men, contrary to the Word of God, and live in communion
and society with men professing real idolatry, as members of that society,
though somewhat of God be joined in this their profession. Whereunto may be
referred such as being tried, are found to be false Prophets, censured and cast
out of the Church by them that have authority. Of which sort are those
Heretics, which are condemned of their own conscience, and after once or twice
admonition, are to be shunned.

4 Such are Antichristian, as be merely from men, dispense only the things of
Antichrist, and have nothing of God at all. If by Antichristian Teachers be
meant false Prophets, Thom. Becon. his humble supplicat. unto God, etc. written
in Queen Martes days. Vol. 2. Purge our temples of all Popish abominations, of
ceremonies, of Images, of Altars, of Copes, of Vestments, of Pixes, of Crosses,
of Censers, of Holy Water buckets, of holy Bread Baskets, of Chismatories, etc.
above all, Idolatrous Priests, and ungodly ignorant Curates.

Chaloner. The Orig. and progr. of Haeresie. This change of their use, by
occasion of Altars, and other ceremomes which crept in, as also by reason of
the figurative speeches of the Ancients, etc. produced in the end, a doubt of
the change of the substance, etc. The Pope first Breve.


in this third and fourth acceptance, I grant the faithful must hold no
communion with them, because God has forbidden it, and these are false
Prophets, who have no calling, teach their own dreams, minister not the
things of God, but of men, and either never were members of the true Church,
professing the entire faith, or upon their discovery, are cast forth as
unsavorie salt. And this the passages of Scripture, quoted to prove the
controversall part, as you say, do confirm, Whereunto answer has been given
already. And the authors of all sorts alleged, do consent: for it is most
manifest, they speak of false Prophets, who have no calling, teach false
doctrine, were never members of the Church, or springing up, and continuing in
the Church for a time, are censured and cast out, that they might not molest,
tare and devour the Flock. But in this sense, the Ministers of the Church of
England be not Antichristian: that which is spoken against false Prophets,
cannot be applied unto them.

And here consider how plentiful you are in proving that which was never
questioned; as that the Scripture is perfect, to make the man of God wise unto
salvation, that false Prophets must not be heard or believed, that the
Faithful must come out of Babylon, etc. But that the Ministry of the Church
of England is Antichristian, and the Teachers false Prophets, as the Scripture
uses the word in the Texts alleged, this we must take upon your bare word, or
most grievous misapplication of the holy Text.

Paul the Fifth (you say) in a certain Bull, sent to the Catholics in England,
charge them by all means not to go to the Parish Churches, or hear their
Sermons, least they incur the wrath of God If this testimony will stand in
any steed, the Pope himself does not esteem our Parish assemblies
Antichristian, for then his Catholics should not incur the wrath of God by
going unto them. And what you can gain by this witness, I know not, unless
it be to show, that how contrary soever you seem to be unto the Pope or
Antichrist, yet in this you consent and agree with him, to condemn Christian
communi^^^^^ in our Assemblies in the holy exercises of Religion. CAN. (...) p
6 (...) to it, (...) bring (...) himselves und^^ greater curse, by using their
to agues, and pens to raise up again one part of the Kingdom of the Beast,
which the Lord before had consumed with the breath of his mouth.


Nay, the sentence of the Pope is mild in comparison of that brand which you
set upon communicating the ordinances of God in our assemblies, viz. That it
tends to the putting down of our true King, Christ Jesus, and to raise up
Antichrist again, that bloody Tyrant; which bold ignorant censure must needs
work the soul of every sober minded Christian to suspect, that in defense of
this cause, you consulted with fury, more than with truth, and hoped to win
more with swelling words of vanity, than weight of reason. But my purpose is to
try your strength, and for unadvised censures, vain scoffs, and
mis-application of common received Truths, I will leave you to the examination
of your own conscience.

SECT. IV.
CAN. Stay against. Sect. 3. page 16, 17. and Sect. 2. page 14 and Sect. 4.
page 62. and Sect. 7. page 89.
TO worship God in any other way or manner than he has in his Word prescribed,
is unlawful. But to hear Antichristian Ministers in false Churches, is to
worship God in a way and manner which he has not prescribed. The Major, No man
dares deny, I assure my self. For it is manifest and certain by the whole
course of the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Levit. 10.20. Psalm. 119.133. Mic. 7.18.
Hos. 9.15. Ioh. 4.23. Matthew. 15.3.4. Col. 2.8. 2 John 16.17. Moreover, all
sorts and sects of writers acknowledge this for a Truth. Zanch. explic. in
Coloss. 2.23. tom. 4. page 319. Luther com. in Galat. cap. 6. page 871. Brent.
in Amos. cap. 4.

Touching the second part: J may spare all proofs, and send them to their own
consciences. That this hearing is a worship, the same is manifest and clear to
any that have an eye of reason, Howson sermon. in Psalm. 118. p. 7.
and any light of Religion shining in them. None to my knowledge, saving a
Popish Parasite or two, ever held otherwise. That this worship is done in a way
and manner, which the Lord never appointed, it is as clear as the Sun at noon
day, and cannot with any modest face be denied, etc.

ANSWER.
THis is an old garment new turned, and the same answer which was made to the
former, might suffice to this: wherein the thing to be proved, B^ls. Christ.
subj. part 4 p. 345. God has not charged us to be curious in searching his
Essence, but to be careful in observing his Will. He neither takes, nor
requires any thing at our hands, beside his Worship; That it we yield him
according to his Will, we honor him as our God: if we alter that which he has
appointed for himself, or add any thing unto it, he rejects all our
service, as done not unto him, but to the conceit of our hearts, which by
nature is no God, etc.

Great. Ca^s. 11. Qu. 3. c. 101. Sats, qui praeest. Aug. de Conser. Evang. l. 1.
c. 18. Socratis sententia est, Vnumquemque Deum, sic coliopercere, quomodose
ipse colendum esse praeceperit. Aug. in Qu. ex veteri Teslam. Qu. 43. Constat
^^den stultam non solum minime prodesse, sed etiam obesse. Chry. in Matthew. hom.
51. Disca^ us Coristum ex ipsius voluntate honorare. Nam qui honoratur, ^o
maxim honor laetatur (...) vuit, non quem nos optamus. Bills. d^ffer. betw.
Christ. Subj. part 1 p. 7. Touching the Sacraments, I (...) Baptism and the
Lords Supper, etc. We swerve not a jot from the example of Christ and his
Apostles; the Scriptures will not lie, let them be judges.


is fairly passed over with a brave flourish of words, and nothing else. If
you meet with such company as will be ashamed not to see, because you cry out
so vehemently, It is as clear as the Sun, it cannot be denied with any modest
face, You may lead him blindfold. But if a man will build upon his own faith,
and not be led by your fancies, he shall never see it proved by any evidence
that you have, or can bring, That by communicating in our Assemblies in the
ordinances of Religion, God is worshipped in any other way or manner than he
has prescribed. But seeing this reason is brought so often, and for so many
purposes, I will examine it more particularly.

If the meaning of your proposition be, That no positive worship, or
substantial means of worship is lawful, but what is in special appointed, or
instituted of God, and that no duties of Religion be necessary to salvation,
but what are taught in Scripture, then we grant it is true, and confirmed by
the course of Scripture, though many passages cited by you, will not reach unto
it. For the law of nature commands all men, who have any sense of a Godhead,
to receive, and not give rules of Religion and Worship. The holy care of the
Patriarchs was to reverence and obey that which they had received, and to
attend upon further direction, but of themselves not to appoint or undertake
any thing as necessary to salvation. Divine institution of legal and
Evangelicall obedience, and worship, is equally full and complete in all things
necessary, which it seemed good to divine Wisdom to determine, not leaving
any thing of this nature more undetermined in time of the Gospel, than it was
in time of the Law. As the Jews had a commandment, neither to add ought unto,
nor take ought from the law, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
which the Lord gave unto them: so the Apostles received a charge, to teach
whatsoever the Lord commanded them: Whence it is truly observed, Matthew. 28.20.
Zanch. de Ecript.
that men may not teach their own doctrine, but whatsoever Christ has taught
them: for he reserveth this authority to himself, to be the only Teacher
and Author of the doctrine, Genev. Bible, annot. in Matthew. 28.20. Show but one
word, element, or action added, omitted, or altered in either of them, etc.
Galv. Instit. l. 4. ca. 10.. 1.2.5.

Hon. Ainsw. first answ. p. 26. That he taught any thing as needful for
salvation, without warrant from the Scriptures, I deny.

Harm confess. Helvetic. confess. cap. 24. Ang. confess. ca. De discrim.
ciborum.

Chamier tom 4. de Sacram. l. 1. c. 13.. 8.

Bills differ. betw. Christ Su^j. par. 1. p. 25.

This is the duty that Baptism requires of us, to believe no teacher but one,
which is Christ, to follow no stranger, to regard, or obey no Lord or Lawmakers
in the Church, but only the Son, whom the Father appointed to be Master, Leader
and Ruler of the Gentiles. Basil. ser. de fide. It is an evident sliding from
the faith, etc. either to depart from that which is written, or to receive that
which is not written.


The King of the Church is her only Lawgiver at all times.

But if the way or manner of Worship be stretched to the circumstances of time,
place, order, phrase of speech, and such like, not determined by God in
particular, but left to the liberty of Christians, so the general rules of
Scripture be observed, then the proposition is not true, the Scriptures do not
confirm it, it was never acknowledged by Divines of any sort or sect that have
appeared to the world. For what is in general only Divine, but in particular
left without determination from God, that in it self is indifferent and
variable: of which sort were the hours of the morning and evening sacrifice,
their Synagogues, Oratories, and places of Worship throughout the land of
Canaan, their course of reading, and many the like.

What God has commanded in his Word, that is not left to the liberty of
Christians: What is prescribed as necessary, worship, holy, that he has not
left undetermined: But that which may be done this way, or another, at this
time, or another, in this form of speech and method, or another, that in
respect of this order, time, method, or phrase of speech, is not necessary,
holy, or worship.

Any circumstance, as time, place, or whatsoever else, if it be either
appropriated or commanded of God, it is necessary in point of conscience,
holy, and worship, as in conscience it must be observed, and submitted unto.
But to place necessity, holiness or worship in these things, when they be not
determined or commanded, is Will Worship, or superstition; lawful they be, as
agreeable to the Word; but not necessary, because not determined by the Word.

The time was when it was lawful to offer sacrifices upon the high places,
Drus. ad dissic. loc. O at. 12. p. 571. Rivet. in Hos. 4.13. Ainsvv. annot. in
Levit. 17.5. Iun. annot. in Levit. 17 5. and in 1 Reg. 3.3.

Illud in Theologia bonum est, quod Deus praecepit, lex enim Deiperfecta est
bonitatis moralis regula in Theologia, and prohibitio Divina perfecturest index
Theologieus mali iae m^ralis

Hen. Ainsvv. 3. ans. p. 151. Explications of Gods Law by them ^^u^h of his
Ministers, are allowed of God. Neh. 8.8. These are not additions, such as God
forbids. Gal. 3.15. 15 Our question is of other, or more laws or Doctrines
than God has taught. Scotia Confess. art. 20. Iua. these. theol. c. 6. these.
11.12. Quaecunque vero in carcumslantiis posita sant, corumtradi^i^nes in
ecclesi^^ a esse au^^esse posse, verumtamen pat. lares, temporaliliberas
agnoscimus; Atque barum quidem traditionum quae in circumstantiis versantur sex
sor Paulo 1 Cor. 14, etc. Dan. in 1 Timothy 3.15. Calvin. Inst. 4. l. c. 15. 19.
and 17.. 45. (...) resp. ad lib. de pii very offic. p. 413. Th Beza. cansess.
c. 5. art. 18.


viz. when the place for Sacrifices was undetermined, and then it had been
Will Worship to put holiness in places, or opinion of worship. But when God
had chosen out, and appropriated one place for Sacrifice, and none other, then
it was a matter of necessity, holiness, and worship, to sacrifice there, and
a great sin to do it any where else.

The reason hereof, was not simply because it was not commanded, for when it
was lawful to the Fathers of Old, it was not commanded, but left undetermined
only, and used by them as a circumstance or adjunct allowed, not as a matter of
necessity, holiness or worship; not could they have used it so without
superstition; as on the other side, after the strict commandment given to
Israel, to sacrifice in the place which God had chosen, and none other, and the
place of worship precisely determined for typical signification, it was a part
of true worship, in conscience necessary: for them to do otherwise, was
grievously to transgress, and not to do that which was commanded as
necessary, holy; and worship, had been profaneness. For that which is
commanded, may not be neglected, neither is any thing to be done, which is
repugnant thereunto.

But many things in the worship of God are not commanded or determined by God,
but left to the liberty of Christians; many things were unprofitable, and
needless to be determined particularly by divine authority, as being easily
discernable by the light of nature, and common reason: and many things could
not be determined, because one order in them could not fit all ages, times and
places in the world. The divisions of the Chapters and verses, as they are in
our Bibles, and the Sections of the Law, as among the Jews, are of men: and so
is the phrase of speech and method used in Prayer, Preaching, Administration of
the Sacraments, and the very words of Translations, wherein the Scriptures are
read, and cannot be one and the same in all societies. And so are the
circumstances, how often, at what hour, on what day, in what place, the Pastor
shall preach, which are particular determinations of the Church, and variable.
If you say, these things are prescribed in general and by consequence, because
they are done according to the rules of direction given in Scripture: Of
necessity you must confess the proposition is ambiguous: for sometimes
prescribed, shall import, as much as determined, instituted, commanded,
sanctified; if not appropriated: and sometimes it shall note no more, but left
at liberty, or indetermined. Neither will that sense stand in the proposition,
Synops. purior. theol. disp. 35. these. 17. Ab omni traditionum humanarum jugo
liberas habeant conscientias, cum solius Dei sit, res ad religionem pertinentes
praescribere.
for then it should be lawful to place opinion of necessity, holiness, or
worship in those things which are undetermined, or not commanded of God, which
is contrary to the whole scope and drift of Scripture, and the judgment of all
Orthodox and sound Divines, new and old.

To proceed more distinctly, because it is a matter much insisted upon, and as
much mistaken, and misapplyed by many.

Worship is as large as the Commandment, nay as the whole Word of God. Bald.
de cons. l. 4. c. 3. To the precepts of God, nothing is to be added. Deuteronomy. 12.
Now God has commanded these things which are necessary. The rites of the
Church are not necessary: wherefore if the abrogation, or usurpation of any
rite be urged as necessary, then is an addition made to the commandment of
God, which is forbidden in the Word, etc. Dea. 12.2 and 4 1, 2. and 5.32 Lev.
18.4. Pr^v. 30.6. Ambr de parad c. 12 tom. 4. Nihil vel (...) gratia adjunger^n
^s debemus mandato. Nihil vel quo^ bonum videtur add^ndum. Addendo de proprio
semipl. ^um Dei intellexit esse mandatum. Docetnos (...) praesentis series
lection is, nequ. detra^^re aliquid debere diviris mand ^is, neque addere.
For so it is ordinarily defined, A work commanded, done in faith, and then it
must needs extend it self as far as the Commandment. And if to obey God in
conscience of his Commandment, in all actions, Civil and Sacred, of Piety,
Justice or Mercy, be to Worship him, then to believe whatsoever the Lord has
taught, relying upon the truth and credit of the Revealer, is worship also. And
hence it is, that the Worship of God is usually divided into Immediate and
Mediate Worship: which comprehends all duties which we owe to God or Man. Now
if the way or manner of Worship be taken in this acceptance: then the sense of
the Proposition must be this, That no action, great or small, done to God or
man, religious or sociall, is lawful, unless it be prescribed of God.

And let us consider the passages of Scripture, alleged by your self and
others, whether if rightly quoted, they do not affirm as much.

Whatsoever I command you, that shall ye observe to do, Thou shall not add
thereto, neither shall thou take ought from it. To what might they not add?
From what might they not diminish? Is it not from the whole Law of God, which
teaches the whole duty of Man, both toward God, and toward Man for the Lords
sake? Hereby the Lord establishes his Word, and his only, and his whole word,
to be the entire rule of Faith and manners. Hereby God appoints his own Word
and Law, to be the only rule of his Service, without imitating the customs of
others, or devising any thing of their own, says Master Ainsworth. But if by
the Service of God, he understand the positive Worship of God only, or the
immediate only, he straitneth the meaning of the Text overmuch: Annot in Deuteronomy.
12.32. Procopius in loc. verba enim Domini cum plena and perfecta existant
auctarium nullum admittunt. Chrysostom. in 1. ca. 2. Epist. ad Tim. hom. 2.
Si^quidem sidci dogma pervertat, etiamsi angelus sit, obedire noli. Annot. in
Lev. 18.4. Tert. de praescript: advers haeret. It is not lawful for us to
devise any thing of our selves, nor follow that which others have devised. See
Cham. pans^. tom. 1. l. 8. c. 6. Rainold. apol. these. sect. 2. p. 205, 206,
207. Hen Ainsw. part 3. p. 150. He infers, that general admonition touching
all the ways of God, and not the Ten Commandments only. Doway annot. in Deuteronomy.
4.2. and 12.32. Henry Ainsw. 2. Answ p. 55. Prove. 30.6. Lo here all additions,
and not only things contrary are forbidden. Ex. 23.13. Chrysoft. oper.
imperfect. hom. 20. in 7. cap. Matthew. Every Teacher is a servant of the Law,
because he may neither add of his own sense unto the Law, nor according to
his own conceit, taking any thing from the Law, but preach that only which is
found in the Law. Qu. Co. p. 67.
For it speaks plainly of the whole Law, and is fitly alleged to prove the
perfection of the Scripture in all matters necessary to salvation, and not
concerning the Worship of God only. Israel might not add either to the
Statutes or Judgments of the Lord: and if by Statutes be meant Decrees for
Religion, or the Worship of God only, (which cannot be proved by the use of the
Word) by judgments, they cannot be understood likewise. By this says Master
Ainsworth, God forbids all inventions of men. Eccl. 7.29. the works of
their own hands. Jer. 25.6. and the Statutes of the Kings of Israel, which
they after made without the Commandment of the Lord. But the inventions of men
respect the Commandments of God in general, and not the Ceremonial Ordinances
only, nor yet the immediate worship of God alone. He shall do good service to
the Papists, that shall limit the Texts in that manner: for by such like
distinctions, they seek to elude them, when they are produced to prove the
perfection of the written Word of God, in all things necessary to salvation.

Ye shall take heed (says the Lord) to all the things that I have said unto
you. But this cannot be restrained to the ceremonial precepts concerning Gods
Worship, but must be referred to all things that God gave them in charge. David
prays, Psalm. 119.133. Direct my steps in thy Word, and let none iniquity
have dominion over me. But what can be more plain, than that David does not
speak of the worship of God alone, but desires that all his counsels,
thoughts, manners, actions might be directed according to Gods Word: because
the Word of God is the rule of all our actions? In which sense also it may be
affirmed, That Negative conclusions in matters of faith, and duties, Hen.
Ai^sw. 2. Ans. p. 55. The (...). cited sc. Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 12.32. Speak of Gods
Commandments in general; you take one in particular, and because one is not
all, therefore all must not be all. A D^spute, part 1. cap. 4. p. 8. The laws
of the Church declare unto us what is fittest in such things as are in their
own nature indifferent, and neither enforced by the law of God, nor nature. Id.
p. 21. As when the Church ordains that in great Towns there shall be a
Sermon on such a day of the week, and public Prayers every day at such an
hourt, etc. First book of Scottish Discip. In great Towns, we think expedient,
that every day there be either Sermon, or Common Prayer, etc. Zanc. in quartum
praeceptum in tract. de discip. Eccles in fine. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.. 30,
31. E^fi fateamur non ^nviti ex insita and naturali Dei ^ognitione, ersi
corrupta, sequietiam in genere Deum esse colendum. Item non solum interno
affectu cultum illum fieridebere, sed etiam externo actu. Negamus tamen,
naturali leg? determinatam esse speriem il am externi cultus. Rivet. in Genesis
exercit. 42. Sec Scul^et. Ethic. lib. 1. Neither Angels nor men can make a
Sacrament Ca^seh. art. 4. p. 104.
follow well from Scriptures silence.

If the way or manner of Worship, be put for immediate Worship, then it extends
as large as the Commandments of the first Table, and the sense of the
proposition must be, That no Worship, public or private, must be performed to
God for substance, manner or time, other than that which God has prescribed in
his Word: which holds not true, unless it be added, That no worship must be
performed as necessary and holy for substance, manner and time, which God has
not prescribed. For what shall we say of the time of rivate Prayer in the
family or closet, the form of catechizing, and translations of the Scripture,
the times for public Lectures, and exercises of Religion upon the week day,
and ordering and government of Schools, and Universities? for these things are
not for time, words and manner prescribed, or determined of God.

If the word, Worship, be taken more strictly for substantial Worship,
commanded in, or referred to the first and second Commandments, usually known
by the titles of inward and outward worship, Natural and positive instituted
Worship (though perhaps the terms be not so fit, if better were found out)
then the meaning is, that no Worship of God, inward or outward, natural or
positive, is lawful; but what is prescribed and determined of God in his Word.
But then there want not difficulties: for how should Worship be natural, if it
must be instituted and prescribed? If the light of nature or reason teach it,
which is planted in the heart, by the singer of God, how can it be unlawful,
unless it be prescribed by an external word of institution? What shall we
say of outward gestures, made in and upon the body, to declare the hidden
affection of the soul; must these be prescribed, and determined, or fall under
this censure? When the Word informs me to call upon God in the Mediation of
Jesus Christ: does not reason it self without any further institution, teach
me to kneel, lift up my hands, etc. At least, if worship be natural, or
positive, must there be a distinction of the institution or prescription of
this worship also? Does not positive Worship require one manner of institution;
natural another?

If the way or manner of Worship be restrained to positive, or instituted only,
it is most true; No worship is lawful, which is not in special commanded, or
appointed of God in his Word. But then the Texts of Scripture, quoted by you
for proof, will not speak unto it.

Ye shall not do (says Moses) after all things, Deuteronomy. 12.8.
which we do here this day, every man, all that is right in his own eyes.
Some Greek copies have it, (...). Others (...), which is according to the
Hebrew. Ainsw. annot. in Deuteronomy. 12.8.
And the speech of Moses seems to mean the true Service of God, which was not
yet perfected, neither could be in their travells, Iun. annot. in Deuteronomy. 12.8.
and Analy. in loc. P. Martyr. in 1 Reg. 8. Vetabl. Nefeceritis, id est, Non
facietis omnino ut nos, etc. hodie; ante ingressa^ viz. terrae sanctae hic
facimus, i. extra terram sanctam. Deodar. Italic. Deuteronomy. 12.8. i. concerning
sacrifice, the law of which they did not observe exactly, by occasion of the
continual wandering of the people. Ainsw annot. in Rev 10.19. De^dat. Ital. in
Lev. 10 ^9. The Lord has showed great wrath against me by the death of my
sons, how then can I cate of this sacrifice to bear the si^s of the people,
according to the ordinary law, the Lord not being pleased with me myself.
Others would have it, That he could not eat, because he was in heavinelle, it
b^ing ^cet he should eat those things with joy and thanksgiving. Vatabl.
annos, in Loc.
as it was after in Canaan, v. 10.11. Not that they sacrificed after their
fancy (says the Geneva notes) but that God would be served more purely in the
land of Canaan. Jun. upon this place notes. Etsi oblationu^ lex unasemper fuit
ab initi^ praescripta a Deo, non potuit tamen usque adeo in ambulatoriis
Israelitarum castris observari, ant summo jure ab illis exigi, prout ostendit
Antithesis, Verse. 11. vide Number, 28.6. The Doway Divines, on the place, give
this observation, In the Desert, they could not observe the Ceremonies of the
Law, but coming to rest, they were bound to keep all one set form of holy
rites. The conclusion from this Text is, That God is pleased to dispense with
his people in his own prescribed Worship, until, if he has appointed,
determined, or appropriated a certain form, time and place, they have
opportunity to serve him at that time, in that place, and after that form.
But thence it follows not, that he has determined, or appropriated a
certain form of place, or that no other Worship may be tendered, but what he
has in particular appointed, or prescribed. This I say, cannot be concluded
from the Text, though I grant it is a truth rightly understood, as I said
before.

Such things (says Aaron) have befallen me, and if I had eaten the
sin-offering to day, should it have been good in the eyes of the Lord? In these
words Aaron excuses himself, by reason of his sorrow, which made him unfit
and unworthy to eat of those holy things. Deutr. 12.7. and 26.14. Hos. 9.4.

The Doway Divines, somewhat to the same purpose. Natural grief of mind,
made Aaron both unwilling to eat, and less apt to complete all the
ceremonies: so without sin he omitted that pertained to his own commodity,
offering it unto God. The Geneva notes, Moses bare with his infirmity,
considering his great sorrow, but does not leave an example to forgive them
that maliciously transgress the commandment of God. The vulgar reads it,
Quomodo potui comedore eam, aut placere Domino in ceremoniis mente lugubri?
Vatablus, or Leo Judah, Taliaque mihi acciderunt, et si comedissem hostiam pro
peccato hodie number hoc been factum esset in oculis Domini? Or, Mihi autem
acciderunt hujusmodi, si igitur comedissem, hodie oblationem illam pro peccato,
an placuisset Deo? And the sense of the place he gives thus, Mihi tamen mortui
sunt filii mei, quod certe argumento est illorum sacrificium Deo non placuisse
(ignorabat enim Aaron causam mortis filiorum) Si igitur comedissem quod mibi
debebatur, ex ea oblatione quomodo placuissem Deo, quum oblatio ipsa non
placuerit? q. d. Non putavifore Deo gratum, quumea victima non fuerit placatus.
Jun. annot in loc.
Iun. gives the words another sense. Ego quoque non satis attendi ad officium
mihi imperatum lege, sed per imprudentiam peccavi ut filii mei supers^ites
^^ejusdem negligentiae and perturbationis reus sum: gratumne ei foret, si ego
adhut-in peccato haerens, peccatum populi expiandum in me transtulissem.

The conclusions from this Text of Scripture, may be such as these; That
oftentimes the letter of the Law gives place to great necessities; or that
Gods worship, where he has prescribed and determined the manner, must be
performed as he has appointed. But that no other service may be tendered unto
God, than he has instituted (though that be a Truth) or that in every title he
has determined the manner of his Service, that cannot be gathered from this
Text.

All their wickedness is in Gilgal (says the Lord by the Prophet) for there
do I hate them: Hos. 9.15. Hos. 4.15. and 1^.11. Amos 4.4 and 5.5.
for the wickedness of their inventions I will cast them out of mine house: I
will love them no more: all their Princes are rebels. The wickedness of
Gilgal was that horrible idolatry, wherewith it was polluted, and by their
inventions, we must understand their idolatrous Worship, set up directly
against the Commandment of God. And by the house of God, neither the land
which the Lord gave them to possess, or the family of God is meant: but the
condition of the people of Israel, will not suffer the Sanctuary or Tabernacle
to be understood. For they set up Altars, and sacrificed in Gilgal, where was
neither the Arc, nor Sanctuary of the Lord, and when God had expressly
forbidden either to multiply Altars, or to sacrifice in any other place than
that which he had chosen unto himself. Cypr. Cecilio fratri. ep. 68. Non
hominis corsuetudinem sequi oporte^, sed Dei veritatem; cum per Isaiam
Prophetam Deus loquatur and dicat; sine causa autem colunt me mandata and
doctrinas hominum docentes and iterum Dominus in Evange^o hoc idem repetit
dicens. Reiicistis etc. Matthew. 15 3, 4. Col. 2.8. Rivet. ad Genesis praelect. 44
Quiequid ad colendum Deum ab hominibus institu tur sine Dei mandato, vanumest.
rsal. 19.13. Math. 15.8. Heb. 11.6. Romans 10.17. Non camen-negamus posse eos
quiecclesium regunt pras^ribere aliquid fingulare de circumstantiis, ad Dei cul
um perti^e tibus, ex v^r^^ Dei gener^libus axio^atis ut de leco and tempore
pabli orum conventuum and si^dibus quae ad pretatem ecclesiasticam pertinent,
sed negamus in talibus forma^iter cul um Det consistere. CAN, Stay sect. 2. p.
9. Melan^th, l. 4. c. de distinct. Keckerm. Thcol. l. 1. p. 59.
directly contrary to Gods Commandment, is unlawful, therefore it is
unlawful to worship God in any other way or manner than he has instituted?
The thing concluded is true, but it hangs to the Premises as a rope of sand.

Two passages of Scripture are rightly alleged by you (the rest are mustered
up merely to make a show, and argue your great inconsiderateness in citing
Scripture) against will worship, and superstitious rites, or empty shows of
Religion. For the soul of Religion, is to do acts with relation to Gods
Commandment, and where there is no Commandment or Institution, there can be
no conscience of worship, no expectation of a blessing. In this sense therefore
the proposition is to be admitted. But in a matter of such importance, so much
insisted upon by your self, it became you to deal distinctly, and prove
substantially what you affirm, and not to confound things that differ,
confidently to affirm what you can never make good, and heap up Scriptures
and Authors to no purpose.

You say, it is a certain rule (as Logicians teach) Things are really to be
distinguished; which in themselves are to be separated each from other. But the
rule is, That all things are really distinguished, which may be separated each
from other, as the body is really distinguished from the apparel, because the
garment may be separated from the body, and the body from the garment. How
truly you understand, or fitly apply that Maxim, it is needless to examine
further: but what you observe in your Pistoler (as you style him) that is most
true in your self and some others, that ignorance or neglect of distinguishing
things that differ in this matter of Gods Worship, is one maine cause of great
error and going astray.

In proof of your proposition also, you lavish somewhat, when you say without
limitation, That all sorts and sects of Writers acknowledge it for a truth; For
the Papists generally hold the contrary, as you know. But this is a thing with
you very usual and common.

The later part of your reason, which you smoothly pass over, as a matter
clear, and manifest, and for proof whereof, you send us to our consciences,
in conscience we utterly deny, and by the Word of God are assured of the
contrary, viz. That to join with our congregations in the ordinances of Grace,
is a Worship of God prescribed in his Word, commended of Christ, and blessed of
him to them that in conscience obey his Commandments. The Worship there
performed, is that which the Lord has instituted, the doctrine of salvation is
taught entirely, the Sacraments rightly administered, the sacrifice of Prayer
offered unto God in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, our only high Priest, who
is present in the Congregations, by the presence of his grace, graciously
inviteth men to come unto him, and sweetly refreshes them that in truth of
heart draw nigh unto him. Thus God is worshipped in our assemblies, and this
worship is performed by such as are called of God, and many approved of God in
their Office and Ministry.

That the Preaching and hearing of the Word is a Worship of God, if the word,
Worship, be taken largely to comprehend both all natural worship, and all
means instituted and ordained, whereby God is pleased to teach and instruct his
people, will easily be granted, and such as deny it, are justly to be taxed.
But that distinction of Worship must be admitted, which is taught in Scripture,
and the more exactly terms are distinguished, the more clearly the fraud of
the Adversary is discovered, and the better able shall we be to confute them,
unless we had rather do it with big words than weight of reason.

Only here observe your partiality. CAN. Necess. of Sep. p. 72. Idem. 222.
For to show the necessity of Separation, speaking of outward. Worship used in
the assemblies of England, you say; As for Preaching, it is held to be no part
of Divine Service, and for proof, you quote Howson, Sermon. in Psalm. 118. page
18. CAN. 19, Syon plea, 326. And, Touching Preaching, it is no Essential part
of their Ministry. But against your Pistoler, to prove that hearing is
Worship, CAN. Stay.. 3. p 17.
you sing another note; None to my knowledge (saving a Popish Parasite or two,
Howson, Sermon. in Psalm. 118. page 78.) ever held otherwise; viz. but that
hearing was Worship. And they by men of better judgments have been sharply
blamed for it. But let us hear how you go forward in this Argument.

CAN. Stay against Stray. Sect. 3, page 17, 18.
The Church is an Idol Church, Hos. 14 8.2 Cor. 6.14. Par. com. in 1 Cor. 10
v. 14.
and the Ministry an Idol Ministry: And if be Church he an Holl, the
Ministry a^ Idol^, who (...) a^ Idol, etc. In the words then of the Prophet,
What have we to d^^ any more with Idols? What agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols? Little children, keep your selves from Idols? Again, my dearly
beloved, (...) from Idolatry. But how, mente and corpore, faith Pare^s, that
is, the worship and reverence of Idoll^.

ANSWER.
The Assumption you leave naked, to shift for it self, because you find it an
easier matter to declaime against Idolatry, and holding communion with
Idolaters, in their Idoll-service (which no man ever doubted) than to make
proof, that to join in the ordinances of Religion in our assemblies, is
willworship or superstition. But if you prove little, you have learned to
accuse manfully. An Idol Church, an Idol Ministry, an Idoll-government, who
does not tremble at such thunder cracks?

But first you should call to mind what you answer to your opposite. CAN.
Stay.. 3. p. 20 Arist. de interpret. l. 1. c. 6. prapter nostr^m ^ffirmare vel
negare nihil sequitur. CAN. Stay.. 7. p. 89.
As for your bare saying, it is far from proof. To affirm or deny
(according to Aristorie) is of no consequence. We cannot take his bare saying,
de jure and fide, to be a rule of faith to us. For our consciences are not
(like Samsons shoulders) strong enough to bear it. If it may suffice to
accuse, who shall be innocent? And if the cause may be carried with clamors and
outcries, you are sure to win the victory.

2 Suppose our Church and Ministry be an Idol in some respect, it is not a
real Idol, but Metaphorical, not absolute, but in some consideration: for
the Word preached, and the Sacraments Administered in our societies, are the
true Gospel, and entire Sacraments of Jesus Christ; which could not be, if our
Church and Ministry was absolutely an Idol, a mere nothing. But to draw
illimited conclusions, from a real Idol, to a Metaphorical, from an absolute
Idol, to an Idol in some consideration or respect, is a new Logic never
taught in the Schools, nor learned from the Scriptures.

The idle, Zech. 11.16; 17. Isa. 56.10. Ezekiel. 34.1, 2, 4, 5. They will not be
able to do the work of Pastors; where of they bear the name, that is, they
will never be but Idols. T.C. repl. 2. p. 1. p. 369 Jere. 5.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 32.4,
5.
careless, unprofitable co^etous, pro^d, scandalous shepherd, who fills the
room, but does not the office of a shepherd, is an Idol shepherd: But the
faithful were not to fly from them, both in mind and body, so as to have no
communion with them in the Ordinances of God.

In the days of the Prophet Iere^ie, the men of Jerusaiem in general, both
rich and poor, were Idols who had eyes but saw not, ears, but heard not. But
the Prophet had not learned in mind and body, to fly from, and have no
society with them in the worship of God. The stiff-necked, and disobedient
Israelites, the uncircumcised in heart and life, were they not Idols? A people
not a people? Though those their vices must be shunned, yet we have not found,
that Moses and the Prophets did fly from the ordinances of God, because they
must have nothing to do with Idols. Every thing that is empty of goodness
required, and so does fail or frustrate expectation, may be called an Idol, a
thing of no worth, vain and fruitless. So an Hypocrite is an Idol; the
husband, wife, father, friends, who are not faithful, do not their office,
Job 13.4. (...) Nihist, as Merar. Montan. Tremel. and Iun. render it. Job 6.15.
1 Cht. 16.26. Heb. Sept. (...) Hieron. idola Psalm. 96.5. Sept. (...). Hieron.
verse. ex Hebr. sculptile. Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5. with Hal. 1.16
may be called Idols. Job says to his friends, Ye are Physicians of no value,
because they had deceived him, as David says, All the gods of the people are
vanity, or vain. The covetous person is an Idolater, and his goods are Idols:
must therefore these goods be destroyed, and the persons be abhorred? Nay the
outward Ordinances of God themselves, Circumcision, Baptism, the Lords Supper
may be called Idols, things of no value, that presit not, as separated from the
inward grace or thing signified. And if we shall annex your Assumption, and,
now then in the words of the Prophet, What have we any more to do with Idols?
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Will you grant the
conclusion, or condemn the inference, as unlearned, foolish, perverse, not
free from gross abuse of Scripture?

3 Our Church and Ministry is not free from spots and stains, Job 3.24. Romans
2.28. Ier. 9.25.26 Sardis vera Ecclesia est, etsi vocem Christi plene non
audiat, etsi illius obedientia plena non sit, etsi in plenum ficut oportuit ab
Ethniasmo non fuerit reformata. Apo. 3.2. Park. de polit. Eccl. lib. 1. ca.
13.. 1. Bright^. in Apoc. 3.2. Ambr. in Luc. lib 6. cap. 9. Tom. 5. Fides
igitur in primis Ecclesiae quaerenda mandetur, in qua si Christus habita or sit
haud dubie legenda. Si qua est ecclesia quae fidem respuat defe endaest. Ibid
Petra tua Ch^istus est, fundamentum Ecclesiae fides est, St non in petra
fueris, in Ecclesia cris; petra est Christus. Hieron. in Symbol tom. 4. Ita est
Ecclesia sancta, quae fidem Christi integramservat. Stapleton relect. cont. ^.
qu. 4. art. 5. Fides verae Ecclesi^ vita est. Bilson Christian subject. part.
2. p. 365. Where faith fails, the Church fails; and he that affirms your
doctrine to be false, denies your assemblies and multitudes to be the Church.
we freely confess to the praise of Gods glorious grace, and heartily beseech
his Highness to supply what is wanting, to amend what is out of order, and to
remove what is superfluous. But not withstanding any defects or corruptions
that can be charged upon us, the Church and Ministry is true and sound,
enjoying whatsoever is essentially necessary to the life and soul of a true
Church and Ministry, given by Christ, and such as the Kings of the earth are
bound by Gods law to protect and maintain. For our Church is built upon Jesus
Christ, the sole foundation of his Church. We acknowledge Christ our only King,
Priest, and Prophet. God has given unto us the Tables of his Covenant, and we
have received them and his free and gracious. Covenant is confirmed by the
true and effectual seals, which he has annexed unto his promise, and
committed unto his Church as their prerogative. Christ's Name is truly and only
called upon in our Assemblies: his Gospel is entirely Preached, and savingly
received by his people, and he is present with his Ordinances to bless them,
to the worthy partakers. If any stubble be laid upon the foundation in respect
of the Church or society, it is done ignorantly, for ought we can judge, and
with a mind teachable and ready to give place when light does evince it: at
least it is not in points fundamental, that is, such as are so maine, that
without them there is no salvation, or of so clear consequence from them, that
who so is truly persuaded of the one, cannot but see the other.

The passages of Scripture annexed, are grossly abused, and so are the Authors
alleged: for they speak of real Idolatry, and Idols, from which we must fly:
but cannot so much as colourably be applied to separation from the worship of
God in our congregations, because of some abuses which are not reformed. But
you go forward, and we must follow you.

CAN. Stay. Sec. 3. page 18.
If it was Isreal's great sin to carry the oblations under the law, to a place
(howbeit sometimes lawful, and where their godly Ancestors had before truly
worshipped) because they had no commandment so to do: then certainly, more in
fault are those (which with the worship of the Gospel) go where it was never
lawful publicly to serve God, and where their forefathers never to this day
rightly served him.

ANSWER.
Here yout^g what we shall never grant, If a mortal enemy may both accuse and
judge, and proceed upon no better ground than suspicion, you may quickly
condemn any man of heresy. Bilson. Chri. part. 3. page 203.
nor you be able to prove, to wit, that our Church is an Idol Church, our
Ministry an Idol Ministry, and that our forefathers never rightly served God
in our Assemblies: which is an easy kind of disputing, if you get a reader as
credulous and willing to be mislead, as you are peremptory in passing
sentence. But if we should believe you herein, we should belly the mercy of
God, and condemn the generation of his Saints.

As for the high places of which we read often in Scripture, it was lawful
for the Fathers of old to offer Sacrifices upon them, when it was not precisely
commanded, but only the place for sacrifice undetermined. But after that God
had chosen, dete^mined, and appropriated a peculiar place for sacrifice where
it was to be offered and not else where, Alsted praecog lib. 2. page 369. Tert
de dololat. It is no hurt, that the same God by his law forbad a similitude to
be made, and by an extraordinary precept commanded the similitude of the brazen
serpent to be made; which may be applied to this purpose, with a little
variation. Deuteronomy. 12.13. and 14.23. 1 Chr. 17.6. 2 Chronicles. 6.6. Psalm. 78.68.
Rivet. in Hos. 4.13. Colendo verum Deum in collibus est in exce^sis contra Dei
legem et rium praeseripium. Zanch. in Hos. 4.13 Laudabile exercitua illud
^sraelitis videbatur, and tamen est scortari. Quare? quia sacrilegium e^
discedere a verb Domini. Verbuma. Domini jusserat ut taxtum Harosolymis, and
ritibu^ a Den irstitutis, sinc sa^^^ Deum coleren^. See. lun. Annot. in 1. Reg.
33. and 2 Reg. 22.4. 1 King. 15.12, 14. King. 22.43. 2 King. 12. (...) King
25.4. 2 King. 15.35. Bilson Christ subject, part 4. page 340. Gods act (...) no
warrant for you to break his savv. By his law he restrains you not humselfe
from the making of any such similitudes. 2 Kings 4.15.19.
then it was a great sin for them without extraordinary dispen ation or
commandment to offer in those places, where their godly Ancestors had truly
worshipped before, not because they had no commandment so to do (for that may
be said of their Ancestors, they had no commandment to offer there) but
because it was expressly forbidden. And here you may see how the first part of
the sentence does cross the later: For if godly Ancestors did truly worship
God in the high places, when they were not commanded, then the Israelites did
not finne grievously in carrying their oblations thither, because it was not
commanded. What moved you so to write, and to allege Authors, as if they
affirmed the same, I leave it to your conscience to judge. This is sure,
neither Scripture nor Author cited, does speak with you in that matter, but
plainly profess, that it was unlawful, because it was expressly forbidden.
That exercise (says Zanchie) did seem praiseworthy to the Israelites, and yet
it is to play the harlot: Why? because it is sacrilege to depart from the Word
of the Lord. But the Word of the Lord had commanded, that they should worship
the Lord only at Jerusalem, and by such rites as he had instituted.

The Kings who are commended in Scripture, who yet took not away the high
places, as Asa, Jehosaphat, Amasias, Azarias, and Jothian, they were not
commended for suffering the high places, but that they were constant in faith
and religion, although they fell into some peculiar sins. But withal, the
abuse of the high places in the worship of God, was no light sin, but very
grievous, because it was properly and expressly against the divine law and
precept.

As for the ten Tribes who departed from the house of David, they shined
grievously, in that they worshipped the Calves, and that in a place of worship
elected of themselves, contrary to the word of God, leaving and forsaking that
place which the Lord bad chosen to himself. They professed the true God, and
turned not aside to the gods of the Heathen, and in that respect are called the
house and family of the Lord: 2 King. 10.16.31 Hos. 9 15. 1 King 12.31. Lev.
17.7. Hebr. Sep. (...). Iun. demonibus. Deu. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.10. Ex. 32.1.8
Acts 7.41. 1 Cor. 10.7. 1 King. 12.28. and 14.9. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Heb. Sept.
(...). See Ainsw. Annot. in Lev. 17.7. et Iun. ibid. Rainold de Idolola. l. 2.
c. 3. Isa. 44. Qu. Co. page 61. CAN Sta.. 3 page 18. Babingt. in Lev. 17. See
Iun. in Lev. 17.3. 4, 11.
But as they sacrificed at Bethel, and committed Idolatry in worshipping the
Calves, so their service was abominable, and their Priesthood appointed for
that service, a mere nullitie and humane device.

Thus all the Jews and Gentiles are said to sacrifice unto Devils, who
sacrificed in such sort and place as God had forbidden, especially it they
sacrificed unto Idols, though in them they sacrificed unto the true God in
their imagination, as the Israelites had done when they made the golden Calse,
and sacrificed unto it: and Ieroboams Idols are called Devils, and he is said
to make Priests for the high places and for Devils. Further this Ordinance of
God was typical, and did shadow forth Christ, as the learned do observe, and
not without ground and warrant. All Altars, Sacrifices, Priests, and the Temple
it self where the Altar stood, were but types and shadows of Christ. You your
self cite out of Bishop Babington, that hereby was signified, that only in the
Church by faith in the chief high Priest Christ Jesus, sacrifice and service
accepted of God, is, and can be offered and done, and no where else. By the
erudiments (says another) Christ was shadowed among the Jews, and expiation
made on the cross by his blood.

From hence briefly let these things be observed. 1 That the Jews sinned by
facrificing in the high places, and the Israelites at Dan and Bethel, because
God had forbidden it expressly, but against communicating in our assemblies, no
such prohibition can be brought forth, which happily might be the reason, why
you had rather say, because they had no divine precept for it, than because it
was forbidden, which yet you know to be most certain. 2 Though it be not
lawful to communicate with the people of God in their sins, yet we may
partake in the ordinances of worship, with such as offend grievously in the
worship of God, as the Prophets and faithful, communicated in the ordinances
of God at Jerusalem, with them that sacrificed upon the high places. 3. That in
Idolatrous and false Churches, that which is merely of men is vain and
fruitless, and a mere nullitie, but if among them, something which is of God
remain, it is not to be esteemed a thing of naught. 4 We must neither
forsake all societies, wherein we epsy many things repugnant to the Word of
God, nor cast off every thing in those societies, wherewith we must not hold
communion, as false, vain and ineffectuall. In Idolatrous societies, Cyp. lib.
1. c. 4. The people must not partake with the sacrifice of a sacrilegious
Priest.
there may be some truth which I must not cast away, though I must not hold
society in their Idolatry. In the true Churches of Christ, there may be diverse
errors and abuses, wherewith I must not communicate, though I must live and
hold fellowship in the society.

I am bound to keep the unity of that living body, S. B. Second answer, page
20.
whereof I am a member, even with some inconvenience of sickness and unsound
parts, but I must not join my self to a strange body and so become a member
of Satan. 5. They that communicate in the Worship of God in our Assemblies do
neither bring a strange oblation, nor go to a place forbidden, for the worship
is of God, and the Congregation assembled in his Name, and he is there present
to feast them that draw nigh unto him in truth of heart.

Can. Stay. Sect. 3. Page 19.
Ought we not to believe, that as God had commanded us to worship Him, that is,
to hear his Word, receive the Sacraments and to use other His Ordinances: so
He has also called and separated unto himself a Church, a Communion of
Saints, and holy ones, in and amongst whom these holy things are to be used,
and that we are to look in what fellowship we receive the holy things of God,
as what the things are we do receive. In a word, ought we not to be persuaded,
that as the legal Sacrifices out of the Tabernacle or Temple, within whose
circle they were prescribed by the mouth of God, were unlawfully offered: so
all the Ordinances and exercises of the Church under the Gospel done out of a
true constituted Church are altogether and every way sinful. Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7.


ANSWER.
God has separated unto himself a Church, and amongst them he is to be
worshipped according to his own appointment. But this Church is of larger
extent than that which you call a true constituted Church; we read that the
Lord did choose a certain place for sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 7.
after which it was unlawful to sacrifice in any other; and so we read also
that the remaindes of the Paschall Lamb was to be burnt and the flesh of the
Ram of Consecration with the bread that remained unto the morning, Exodus
12.10. Exodus 29.34. Levit. 15.19. I yield the Scripture a witness of my sense,
and my exposition without the Scripture, let it be of no credit. Orig. Hom. 9
in Jer. CAN. Necess. of separ. page 2 11. Can. Stay. Epistle to the Reader.
John 2.19, 21. 2 Cor. 6.16. So the Altar is put for Christ in the Ancients.
Ignat. ad Magnesian. To one Altar, to one Lord Jesus Christ. Ad Philadel. one
Altar to all the Church. Iren. adv: haeres. l 4 ca. 34. est Ergo Altar in
caelis. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 4.
and the flesh of the peace offering: But that all Ordinances of the Church
done out of a true constituted Church, in your sense, should be altogether
unlawful, or that the Ordinances are tied to your Church constitution, as the
Sacrifices were to the Temple, that we read not: and how then shall we be
persuaded of it? Remember your own request. Let the Scripture speak in the
points between us, for without it nothing is to be affirmed, and beyond it
nothing to be concluded.

Principally, of old the Temple shaddowed Christ, in and through whom we must
present our service unto God, and then the Church of Christians: but that the
external constitution of a Congregationall society is represented thereby, in
such sort as if it be thus, or thus constituted it should be lawful to join
with them, but if this or that external rite be lacking, it should be
unlawful to join in the worship of God, is most unprobable. In all ages the
Lord has had his Church, in which he has been worshipped. But evermore the
faithful were not to bring their sacrifices to the Tabernacle, or Temple. And
if the Lord had chosen not that place for sacrifice, other service pleasing and
acceptable might and ought to be performed in other places.

Therefore that Sacrifices should prefigure all Ordinances and exercises of the
Christian Church, Fulke in Matthew. 23. Sect. 7. The Lords Altar that was in the
Temple, was a figure of Christ's only true sacrifice once offered. Bishop
Babin. comfort. notes upon, Exodus 27.
and the Tabernacle and Temple the external frame and constitution of a
Church, is an unwritten tradition.

It is more reasonable a great deal to compare the external frame of the
Jewish Church with the outward order which God has instituted for the
Evangelicall Churches, and worship with worship, substance of Religion with
substance, and then it will follow that as the faithful and religious Jews
might and ought to hold society in the Ordinances of Religion, when many
things were amiss in the external frame and constitution of the Church; as
the Priests idle, covetous, profane, the people dissolute, impenitent,
rebellious: so the faithful in the Christian Church must hold Communion in the
Ordinances of Grace, though in the constitution of the Church the Officers and
members much be out of order. Doway annot in 3. book of Kings page 7 15.
The Doway gloss has much more probbaility than yours. To conserve unity (say
they) there was but one Tabernacle and one Altar for sacrifice in the whole
people of Israel: Whereupon, when the two tribes and an half on the other side
Jordan had made a several Altar, all the Tribes that dwelt in Canaan
suspecting it was for Sacrifice, sent presently to admonish them, Aug. Epist.
48 Quis non impudentisseme, etc. vid page seq: Omnis ea distinctio in re
Theologica est inanis fictio, quae ex Dei mentiri nescis authoritate non
accipitur, quaeque rem ipsam de qua agitur tollit, etc. Martin: de persona
Christ. page 632.
etc. but what end shall we have, if every man upon his own head may devise or
Coin significations of Gods Ordinances? What is this, but to bring in a new
word, to set up Sacraments upon our own heads? Herein we say to you, and them
as you to your opposite: I require the voice of the Shepherd, Read it me out
of the Prophets Show it me out of the Psalms, etc. In the interpretation of
the Types and Figures of the Law, men's judgments if the Scripture go not
before them are of small credit.

Can. Stay. Sect. 3. Page 20.21.
If that be true in the Philosopher, Opposite a sunt simul natura, Arist Topic
l. b. 6. Bonum est cujus contrarium est malum. Rhetor. l. 1. If we take a
str^ct view and inquiry of that Ministry, Worship and Government, which
they left at Dan and Bethel; it will appear evidently, that the same was not
more salfe, idolatrous, and unlawful than the present Ministry, worship and
Government of the English Assemblies is, by the Non-conformists affirmed to be
Jeroboams Apolog in his Arrow against Idolatry. CAN Necess. of Sep. p. 85.86,
87, 88. Course of Comfor. p. 161.162.
Opposite things in nature are alike. Again, That is good whose contrary is
evil: It must needs follows, that as some Churches are visibly true in
respect of faith and order: so others may be true too having outward order,
albeit the members thereof have no faith at all. The which assertion is not to
be answered but abhorred. The ten Tribes which departed from the Lord, from
his Temple, Sacrifices, Priests, Altar, and other holy signs of his presence
at Jerusalem; from the time and still after were not Gods Church, so the
Scriptures show, Hos. 2.2. and 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Ier. 3.8. Amos 9.7. etc. And the
Israelites when they worshipped at Dan and Bethel, were not in respect of faith
and Doctrine more corrupt, than the other now is, Mr. Amsworth, and the Non
conformists, affirm that the Apostate Jews could justifia their way and
course of Religion as well if not better than the other.

ANSWER.
The Philosophical Maxim to which you have reference is. Arist. de Caelo.
lib. 2. cap. 3. Text. 19.
Posito une contrariorum ponitur and alterum. But as you cite it, It is as hard
to be found as your translation is to be understood. That it is not universal,
appears out of Arist. himself, who puts down the contrary Maxim as true
and certain. Arist. Gategor. l. c. 11 de contrar.
Non necessarium est, Si contrariorum alterum sit and alterum esse. Nam si
omnes sint sanitas quidem erit, morbus non erit. So in the first Creation of
all things, all things were very good and there was nothing evil. All things
created are finite in act, but amongst things created there neither is nor can
be a natural infinite. Truth and false-hood, good and evil, Piety, and
Idolatry are opposite, and that before ever false-hood, evil or Idolatry had
any being in the world. Contraries we know expel one another, Or if one be
necessary in the subject the other cannot be in it, at least in the intense
degree, as if fire be hot it cannot be cold; Now it is necessary, that every
thing created be finite and good as created, and therefore good had a being
before evil. If it be objected, that opposites are relatives, and relatives
are together in nature, the answer is, they are relatives secundum dici, as
they speak, not secundum esse, which may be said to be together in nature;
Not that both are in act existent out of their causes, but because the nature
of one being known the nature of the other may be known, whether it be, or be
not, whether it may be or may not be. We know likewise, that not only good
is opposed to evil, but evil to evil, as covetousness to prodigality and
this the Philosopher himself confesses. So that these propositions must be
rightly limited or they are both false. Par. in Romans 10.15 Legitima Vo atio
ecclesiae est, quae in quavis Ecclesia publica authoritate or dinis causa ad
aedisicatione^ instituta. Neque umformis est omnium ubique quead circumst
intias exter^^s sed libertati Ecclesiae relacta.


These Philosophical Rules are impertinently alleged by you, for the
external order or government and entire profession of faith are not opposite,
they may be separated in part, and they may and ought to be joined together.
The faith and doctrine strictly taken may be entire, when the external order
is pure and holy: and the order may be maimed and defective, when the doctrine
is found in points fundamental: And the doctrine may be very corrupt and
rotten, when the external order is observed according to the rule; and
therefore a Church may be true in doctrine and profession of faith, strictly
taken, when for matters of order it labors under great defects; though in
respect of outward order and government, it cannot be the true Church, when it
destroys the foundation of the faith. For if the faith be taught entirely,
Rivet. in Hosea 4.6. Etsi ad ordinatienem externam, nihil ijs deesset, and se
pro sacerdotibus gererent, tame^ illos reijeit Dominus. Sic Pontificiorum
sacerdotes adhuc retinen^ aliquam ministerij formam externam, etc. CAN. Stay.
Sect. 11 page 115.
and the Sacraments rightly administered, it cannot be but the ministry in
that Church must be true for substance, what other defects soever it labor
under.

But if the foundation of faith be overthrown, or the ministry whereunto men
be set apart be strange and merely devised, there can be no true calling or
ministry, but false and impure.

If this distinction of a true Church and Ministry, for substance of Doctrine
in points fundamental, and external calling and government, be denied
absolutely, I shall desire you to unty a Knot or two, which your self have
knit. The Scribes and Pharisees were blind guids, corrupt Teachers, false
Prophets, in respect of their doctrine: covetous, ambitious, and otherwise
profane, in respect of their conversation: upon what grounds then were they to
be heard? because they were called and ordained of God, CAN. Stay. Sect. 3
page 60. Ier. 2.11, 13. and 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Ezekiel. 16.47, 48, 49 Mat. 11.21, 22,
2 Chro. 11.13, 14. 1 Reg. 12. Hosea 4.6, 9. and 5.1. ^ Reg. 19.10, 18 2 Reg.
17.28. Par. in Romans 11.2, 3, 4 Dub. 3. Samaria etiam erat de Iudaeorum
s^nagoga, l. cet corruptissim^ and Apostatica Siquidem Jfraelitae ctiam crant
de popu o praecogni^o: and alioqui Elias and Elizaeus, al i^ pr^phetae ibi non
docuissent.
that they should preach the Law o God in the Synagogues to the people, and
exhort them to the observation thereof. Is not here the distinction of true and
false Teachers, in diverse respects? Rebellious Indah justified her sister
Samaria in some respects, and in some other continued the true Church of God.
From the time that the ten Tribes departed from the Lord, his Temple,
Paiests, Altar, etc. it was unlawful to hold communion with them, because they
committed I^olatry, and wilfully left the place which the Lord appropriated
for his service and sacrifice: but still they retained something of a Church,
and were not to be esteemed altogether as heathens as the very places quoted
do t^stifie.

That the Israelites when they worshipped at Dan and Bethe^, when they
committed real Idolatry with the Calves, played the Harlot upon every high
hill, and under every green Tree, forsook wilfully the place which God had
appointed for sacrifice, and offered sacrifices in places forbidden, rejected
the Lords Priests, and made of the basest of the people-Priests for that
service which the Lord abhorred: that they were not more corrupt in Doctrine
and worship than the Church of England by the confession of Non conformists, is
an assertion beyond all credit. I may fitly put you in mind, what Origin says
of Celsus his works, CAN. Stay. Sect. 5 page 39.
which you apply to your adversary; There is no danger least any faithful man
should be subverted by your sayings: for you talk but reason not: yea in your
talk you keep no compass, but all men may feel how grossly you mistake.

Master Ainsworths Arrow against Idolatry, I have not seen, nor know not how
to come by it. But if you will bring forth his or your own darts in this
kind, they shall be tried and examined by the Word of God. You are not afraid
not ashamed to write, that the Non-conformists affirm the worship of our
English Assemblies to be as false and idolatrous as the worship of the
Israelites at Dan and Bethel. But for proof, you bring the bare testimony of
one alone, and him no English Nonconformist. And if his testimony had been
truly alleged, can you with truth and honesty charge that upon all, which you
know is disclaimed by many, spoken only by one, and he no member of the English
societies: But that one shamefully abused likewise, for when he says the
Idolatry of these times does equal, if not exceed that of Jeroboam, he intends
the Idolatry of the Romish Synagogues, but accuses not the English
Congregations, as if they stood guilty of that sin, or the like degree. For he
acknowledges the Church of England to be a glorious reformed Church; though in
some things not thoroughly reformed as she ought. Course of confor. page 142.
Wherefore, says he, for conforming to a glorious Church, but in that wherein
she was never raformed. And what wonder if all the reformed Churches crept not
forth of the Romish deluge equally accomplished? Course of confor page 183
What greater wonder than that any should be found free of the smell of that
Wine, of Fornication, whereof they all for so many years were drunk.

Your pen runs over almost every where with pernicious I dolatry, Aug. Ep.
48. Quis non impudentissine nitatur alie uid in allegoria positum prose
interpretari: nisi haheat manifesta testimonia qu^^ lumne (...) obscura?
blasphemy and such like outcries, and for color of what you say, pretend the
names of men, who indeed and truth from their hearts detest your rashness and
inconsideratnes: Whereas if you would be persuaded to talk less, and reason
more, and give milder words, and bring stronger arguments, and deal sincerely
in the testimonies which you use, you should ease your reader, and spare your
Conscience.

SECTION 5.
Can. Stay. Sect. 5. Page 37.38.
THe Word preached by false Ministers is not that word unto which God has
promised a blessing of increase. Or it is not the ordinary way and means, Id.
Sect. 15. p. 132.
which the Scripture speaks of to beget men to the faith. For as a false
forged constitution makes a Church a real and substantial Idol. So all that
comes from it, is touched with the Idolatry of that constitution. This is a
ruled opinion of many Divines, The State makes all the public actions to be
formally good or evil. For as the Temple sanctifies the gold, Matthew. 23.17.
the Altar the offerings: so the Ordinances of the Church under the Gospel are
sanctified unto us. Bucer. in Mat. 23.17
That is (as Bucer truly speaks) in the use of them made lawful to us, in
that they have their rise from a true and right power.

Seeing therefore the Church in Question wants a right Constitution it must
follow that all spiritual actions, done in it (whether Prayer, Preaching,
Sacraments, Censures) as they are there done, are none of Gods Ordinances,
though true it is, in themselves they are of God. If the false Churches of whom
we disputed, CAN. Stay. Sect. 15. p. 131.132. Id. Sect. 2. p. 8.
be that spiritual Babylon mentioned in the Revelation, cap. 18.4. then it is
unlawful for Gods people to go unto them, to perform any spiritual or
religious action, and so consequently not to hear the^e. But the first is
true, Ergo, the later is true also. The proposition needs no proof, because
our opposites and we herein are of opinion alike. The assumption is manifest by
these reasons. Artopaeus in Rev. 18. page 198. Flac. Illyric. in Rev. 18.4 Par.
com. in Hos. 4. page 506. Bulling. in Apoc. ca. 18. con. 76.
1. The words in the Text prove it plainly, Come out of her my people, that
is, remove your selves from all false assemblies, covenant together to walk in
all the ways of God, serve the Lord among your selves in spirit and truth, and
return not from whence you are come. But repent rather that ye have suffered
your Consciences to be wrought upon by any unlawful Officers. And thus do
the Learned interpret the place, namely of such a coming out, as that we may
not be bodily present at any of their worship. 2 Cor. 6.1. Ioh. 5.21. Zech.
11.17. Botlac. prompt. allegoriar. cap. 21. de Minist.

It is like that filthy bird, which carries this Motto, Contactu omnia saedat.

The publisher and others with him have committed appatant Idolatry, maintained
it in the Church, and sought thereby to pervert the right ways of the Lord.
Jd. sect. 1. p. 7. Id sect. 15. p. 133.


A false Church state is rightly likened to the leprosy spread in the walls of
the houses of the Lepers, because of the pollution which it causes to the
persons and things. Take for instance a City or Town, if the civil State or
Corporation, which they have be usurped, aevised or derived from a false power,
all their public administrations are unlawful, and every one partaking
thereof offends: So all administrations done in a false Church (whether
prayer, Preaching Sacraments, Censures) are unclean actions and do defile
every receiver, J say, because of the Idol State, which is devised out of a
man's brain, and used as a means to serve God in it and by it.

All the Ordinances done after the invention and will of Antichrist can no
otherwise be judged, than a brood common to the nature of the breeders, that
is, the Devil, and the Whore of Rome, the Father and Mother that did beget
them.

ANSWER.
THe Faithful are commanded to come out of spiritual Babylon and not to
communicate with her in false worship or Idolatry, Revel. 18.4.
as the Text does confirm, and your opposites grant. And therein it was
needless to muster up the testimonies of the Learned, to give evidence in a
case maintained and practiced notoriously, sc. that we must fly from the
society of Rome, and not be present to behold their worship. Your labor herein
is superfluous, but that the Names of Learned men here numbered up, might serve
to cover your nakedness, when you come to the point in controversy, wherein
you prove just nothing at all.

But our Churches wherein the Gospel of Christ is purely preached and
professed in all points fundamental, the seals of the Covenant of Grace
rightly administered, who are separaced from spiritual Babylon in mind and
body, and have fled from her worship and Idolatry, who are built upon Christ
the true and firm foundation of his Church, and by Christ himself
acknowledged for his people, and graced with his favorable presence: Our
Churches, I say, cannot be deemed or reputed spiritual Babylon, without great
injury to Christ his truth, his Church and Saints.

By spiritual Babylon in this book of the Revelation, is meant Rome
Christian; departed from the faith, guilty of the blood of Saints, stained with
manyfold and fearful Idolatries, the mother of fornications, who has made
drunk the Kings of the earth with the cup of her poisons, as might be
confirmed by the Scripture it self, the joint consent of learned orthodox
Divines, and the testimony of Papists themselves.

But to brand the Churches of Christ since the reformation, who have renounced
Antichrists doctrine, worship, and idolatries, and embraced the entire faith of
the Lord Jesus, with that odious hateful name, is contrary to the truth of
God, evident reason, and the judgment of all approved godly learned men.

You miserably corrupt and pervert the Text, when you give this to be the sense
thereof, Remove your selves from all false Assemblies, covenant together to
walk in all the ways of God, serve the Lord among your selves in spirit and
truth, and return not from whence you are come. This is not to interpret
Scripture, and learn of them what we are to think, but to rack Scriptures
to our sense, and make them speak according to our fancies, which is an high
point of Antichristianisme.

If you will stand to your principles, within two hundred years after Christ,
or less, there was not one true Christian society in the whole world, which
did walk together in all the ways of God, and serve God in a Church state
among themselves. And will you say, the faithful are charged of God, in this
passage of holy writ, to remove and separate from all Christian assemblies,
that then were in the world, and to serve God among themselves. If corruption
in doctrine, manners, worship, government, and orders, make a false assembly,
Rome was a false assembly long before the Lord gave commandment to his people
to depart thence and separate themselves.

Israel for a time continued in Egypt and Babylon, viz. until the Lord sent to
bring them forth: and the Church lay hid in Babylon, and that by the providence
and approbation of God, long after Rome was miserably corrupted and defiled.
The matter is notorious, and therefore to spend more words about it is
needless. He that considers the state of things, long before the faithful
separated from Rome, and what is written in defense of that separation, which
the reformed Churches have made, cannot be ignorant thereof. If to come out of
Babylon then, had been to remove from all false assemblies, as you gloss it,
it was necessary the commandment had been given much sooner, or the
faithful should have departed without leave or commandment from God.

I might say to you in your own words, CAN Stay.. 15 page 135
This is to gratify the error of Montanus, who professed that he knew more
than the Apostles. For the Apostles knew nothing of our removing from all false
assemblies (as you understand it) and covenauting together to walk in all Gods
ways, and serve God among themselves. If this had been known to John, when
he foretold the Apostasy from the faith, and the rising of the great Whore,
he would have made more haste to warn the faithful to be gone out of the
Churches, and to have withdrawn themselves, it being a matter of such weight and
importance, and so needful to be done, diverse hundred years, before it was
ever once thought upon, When the words of a Text are plain, a gree with the
circumstances of the place, the analogy of faith, and other Scriptures, for
men then to leave the native sense, and to force a sense contrary to that the
letter expresses, it is to wrest the Scriptures, as you say, and not to
expound them by the true rules and Canons of Divinity. CAN Stay. 15 p 135.
Rev. 18.2, 3. Exite ab ea p^pu^^ m^. At agit angelus de Babylone mylica, de
synagaga nempe Romana, quae ipsa fidei and Evangelit sundamenta corrasit. Park.
de polit. Ec^^ l. 1. c. 14.
Lay this rule to the present interpretation, which you make of this passage in
Scripture, and whomsoever you accuse, you shall find your self to be a
perverter of Scripture, in degree far above him. For your interpretation is
contrary to the scope and drift of the place, the rules of faith, and consent
of other Scriptures. It speaks not of leaving all administrations in false
Churches, as you speak o^ false administrations and false Churches, but of
separation from spiritual Babylon, which was the habitation of Devils, and
cage of every unclean spirit and of every unclean and hateful bird: which
cannot be said of all administrations which you are pleased to accuse as
false. If it may be, spare your words, and let us hear your reasons, for if
they be ought they will carry more weight.

A devised constitution (you say) is an Idol, Whitak. de pontif. Romans cont. 4.
qu 2. p. 146. Si semel ea consuetudo aut lex obtinuerit in Theologia, ut
liberum sit cuivis distinctiones comminisci, nihil in omni religione certum
fixumque remanebi^. Quis enim non eo modo quid vis labefactare poterit?
Eaplorandae ergo distinctiones dil genlius and a judic ndae sunt, eaque magni
facienda est regula, nullas in in Theologia probandas esse distinctiones, nisi
quae aper^is Scripturarum loc^s nitantur.
and all that comes from it is tainted with the idolatry of that constitution.
You will say, it is a false Church constitution, if the Minister be not chosen
and ordained by the congregation alone, where he is to administer; if a man be
received into the society, who is not a visible Saint; if any idle, ignorant,
careless, scandalons, corrupt, usurping Minister be chosen, ordained or
suffered; if any notorious or scandalous person be admitted to the ordinances;
if any stinted Liturgy, or form of Catechizing, administration, or prayer be
used: with sundry the like, which in your esteem, are arguments of false
constitutions. Churches, Ministry, and Worship. Now tell us plainly, is every
such Church-constitution an Idol, and that which is done in these Societies
unholy and unclean? If so, then there was never any one age, wherein the
Church-constitution was not an Idol, and the worship of God performed in that
Society, leprous, unclean, poisoned with Idolatry. The Temple sanctified the
Gold, and the Altar the offering: but the Temple, and Altar are not types and
figures of external Church-constitution. Where do you read this, in the Law,
or the Prophets? etc. And if you read it not, how dare you affirm it. Besides,
Lev. 16.20. Number. 7 10. 1 Reg. 8.63.
the sanctification of the oblations depended upon one Temple, and Altar
therein, yet so as both Temple and Altar were sanctified by the offering.

But if we may speak as you do, A devised constitution is twofold, 1 Absolute
and in every respect, when neither Doctrine, Ordinances, office or persons are
of God: and this constitution is altogether false, a nullitie, an Idol, if you
please so to call it. 2 In part corrupt, maimed, defective, but having
something of God: and that which is done in such a constitution is not false, a
nullitie, tainted with the idolatry of the constitution. This distinction is
neither devised, strange, nor new, but that which has ever more been
acknowledged in the Church of God, and is manifest in Scripture, if we take
the word, devised constitution, as this Author does. For Heretics and
Schismatikes, though they be not of the special number of them, that hold the
entire profession of divine truth in unity, and in that respect be a false
constitution; yet as they profess the truth of God revealed in Christ, though
maimedly or in part only, and as they administer the ordinances or Sacraments
of God, that which they do is not a mere nullitie.

Heresy is Idolatry, and cannot bear children to God, in that it is heresy,
but heretics See D. Field of the Church, l. 1. c. 14. Aug. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. l. 1. c. 10 See Chamier. panst. tom. 2. l. 16 c. 4. Hieron. ad Algasiam.
Antichristus sedebit in templo Dei, vel Hie osolymis ut quidam putant, vel in
Ecclesi^, ut verius arbitiamur. 2 These. 2.3. Whitak. de po^^. Romans cont. 4. q.
5. p. 681. Licet Ecclesia papistica non sit vera ecclesia, retinet tamea
aliquas p^aerogativas and reliquias ecclesiae Dei ergo di^i potest aliquo modo
templ^ Dei misore prophanatum, plus quam se^uiu^ti^^m, pene dirutum alque
eversum, etc Habet illa e^clesia Scripturas, e^sicerrup^as, and p^eris^ue
ignotas, tamen aliqui allas legunt and intelligent, and hinc doct^^^am
salutarem hauriu^. Fst apud illos quoddam minis^e^ium, and aliqua verbi prad
catio quae valet sine dubio nonn^llisad salute^ est ibi baptismus quoad
substantiam, etc. Calv. instit. 4. c. 2. par. 11 CAN Stay. 15. p. 136. and. 7 p
93.
may bear children to God, in that they profess and practice, that which
Christians should, and do both profess and practice: and have received that
degree, order, office, Ministry; and calling, which is holy, by virtue whereof
they do administer the holy things of God.

The Church of Rome is a false constitution, but baptism administered in that
Church is not idolatry, nor a mere nullitie. If the Church of Rome were not a
Church in some respects, but a mere Idol, the Pope could not be that
Antichrist, a principal rebel, a notorious traitor against Christ. If we
speak absolutely, or compare Rome with Churches truly Christian, it is no true
Church, but the Synagogue of Satan: But if we speak of it in opposition to the
Jews, of Turks, or other professed Infidels, it has so much of a visible
Church, as a man cannot say it is no Church at all; so much true doctrine is in
it, as suffices to support the title of Antichrist, and some ordinances are so
administered, as that it cannot be said, they are mere nullities.

In the true Church many wicked ones are found, that are no less profane,
sacrilegious, enemies to peace, the vassals of Satan, possessed by the Devil,
dead in sin and accursed of God, than heretics or schismatiks, who yet for that
they have that order, office, or degree of ministry, which is holy, do no
less nor with less effect administer the holy sacraments, than those who are
the samplars of all piety and virtue.

The faithful and holy Ministers administer and receive the Sacraments with
good profit, and benefit to themselves and others. The hypocritical, with
benefit to others, not to themselves. The profane being not put from their
places, do officiate with hurt to themselves, scandal to others, but to the
everlasting comfort of them that partake worthily. The heretical and
idolatrous administer the Sacraments, that are holy, and in their own nature,
the means, pledges, and assurances of salvation, but without benefit to
themselves and others, that continue in sin. Thus the Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and faithful, have held communion in the Ordinances of grace, with
such whose calling and conversation was not approved of God.

You say, the Martyrs first and last would not receive this distinction, lest
to save their lives, they should lose their souls, and you reckon up many,
who, as you write, would rather give their bodies to the fire, than hear or
receive the Sacrament, in false Churches or Societies. But in this you lavish,
as in every thing else, and hide the truth under the ambiguitie of the phrase.
The Martyrs laid down their lives, rather than they would defile themselves
with idolatry, be present at the Mass, or join themselves as members of that
Antichristian Synagogue: in all which they did, as becomes the faithful
servants of Jesus Christ. But you cannot produce one Martyr of your opinion,
who denied, that any thing of God was to be found in those Assemblies, or that
refused to join in the pure ordinances of God, with Societies separated from
spiritual Babylon, because of some defect or may me in their Church
constitution.

In the whole Catalogue of Martyrs, try if you can bring forth one, who in
these things was of your mind. And what a vain thing is it to pretend the
example of all the Martyrs, when there is not one among them that does approve
your cause. If the example of the Martyrs be of any weight with you, as here
you bear the Reader in hand: CAN Neces. of separation, p. 190, 191, 192.
of necessity you must condemn your rash and presumptuous censuring, your
unadvised sinful separation, from the worship and ministry in our Church, as
Antichristian and Idolatrous. For certain it is, the Martyrs stood members of
our Societies, and dyed in the defense of that doctrine and worship, which we
profess and practice. Many words you spend in answer to this reason, and
reproaches you cast upon your adversary, but one word is not to be found that
makes directly to take away the force of the Argument.

It was the answer of Frederick Duke of Saxony, who being prisoner to Charles
the fifth, and promised releasement, if he would go to the Mass, Summum in
terris Dominum agnosco Caesarem, in coclis Christum. The like did the Prince of
Condee: but neither of them did refuse to join with the reformed Churches,
because they deemed their Church constitution defective or erroneous, in this
or that particular. To pretend the consent of popish and protestant Divines in
this matter, is egregious ignorance, or impudency, for it is well known they
are all generally of another mind.

Your instance from a City or Town, Similitudes be no syllogismes. Earthly
similitudes of your making, may not control the heavenly precepts of Gods own
giving. Bilson. Christ. part. 4. page 322. Have you no surer ground of your
catholic doctrine for adoring Images, than a single similitude taken from the
civil and external reverence that is yielded to Princes seats and seals? Id
p. 329.
if the Civil power be usurped, is not to the purpose, nor true in all
respects. Not to the purpose, because what is of God in these Societies, is not
done by power, merely usurped, but by power and virtue from God, though in the
ministration, that which is evil be not approved of God: for wheresoever any
supernatural truth of Christian Religion is taught, and any ordinances of
grace dispensed truly for substance, there is some truth of ministry though
many ways polluted. And where the entire faith is professed and received, and
the ordinances of grace administered truly, there is a true ministry for
substance ordained of God, what other defects or maimes soever it may labor
under.

Not true, because in the Civil estate, That which is done by power, usurped,
and unlawful, in some cases is a nullitie, but in other some it is available
and stands in force. For it is a rule in the Civil law, That it is one thing
to be a true Magistrate, another to be in the Magistracy, or to execute the
Magistrates office. From which distinction, is gathered this general ruled
case, or sentence, That the acts of him that was a false or unlawful
Magistrate may be lawful and just. And the same may be said, and was ever
held in the Church of God, of corrupt and ungodly Ministers, though they be
not true Ministers, that is, approved fit, and rightly qualified, yet so long
as they be in the place of Ministers, the acts of their ministry be good, that
is, effectual, and of force, if they observe the form of administration
prescribed by Christ.

CAN Stay. Sect. 15. page 133.
The Lord has not promised to them his blessing and acceptance: what the Lord
may accept or will, we dispute not, only this, I say, whosoever hears in a
false Church, cannot by any promise that he has in the word of God, expect
Gods blessing on that which he does: the reason is, because a true constitution
of a true Church, that is, where men are gathered according to the Gospel of
Christ, is that only lawful religious society, or communion of Saints,
wherein God will be honored, whereby he will be served, and whereto he has
promised his presence and acceptance, so then howsoever we are not bound unto
hearing in a true Church, necessitate medii; as if Gods grace were tied to the
means this way, yet as they say in Schools, necessitate praecepti: if we
consider Gods commandment, CAN Stay.. 3. page 59.
so we are bound to Church hearing only in a true Church, and in no other
Church can we expect Gods presence, promise and acceptance. Such Churches unto
whom God has made no promise in his word, to bless the things there done,
ought not by Gods people to be resorted to; but God in his word has made no
promise to bless the things done in a false church; therefore Gods people are
not to go unto false churches. The proposition cannot be excepted against:
for, 1. The Scriptures prove it clearly, Jer. 23.21, 22. Exodus 20 24. Psalm
134.3, and 147.13. Again, there is no duty charged upon us, but there is a
blessing promised unto the due performance of it. The assumption is as clear,
and thus we prove it. If false churches have not the promise of Gods presence,
they cannot from the word of God expect his blessing upon what they do, but
the first is true, Ergo, the second. The Major which is only controversall we
prove thus. If every false church be an Idol, Exodus 20.4, 5. And God require
his people to come out thence, Rev. 18.4. threatened to destroy it, Rev. 20.8,
9. and will do it, and promise his presence unto his true church, Mat. 18.20.
Then he is not present in the false: But the first is true, therefore the
second.

ANSWER.
You struggle hard, as all men may perceive, but set not one foot forward. Our
Church is an idol, therefore we must not hold communion with it: God has
promised no blessing to his ordinances therein, because the Church is an Idol.
This is your circle wherein you walk up and down. But to help you out of this
mire, if it may be: 1. Romans 3.2. Can 1.6. Rain. de idolola. l. 2. c. 1. p. 2.
Where you take it for granted that our Church is false, and therefore Christ is
not present with us; we on the contrary are assured, that we are a people in
covenant with Christ, to whom he has committed his heavenly oracles, and
seals of the covenant, amongst whom he feeds his flock in green pastures,
and causes them to lie down by the still waters, with whom he is present when
they meet together. Mat. 18.20. Exodus ^0.24. Psalm. 134.3. Ioh. 10.4.5.
He has set up his tabernacle amongst us, and dwells with us, and watches
over us, and works by his Ministers, not only to call men unto salvation, but
to nourish and build them forward unto life everlasting. We are separated from
Idols, we hear the voice of the true shepherd, and follow not strangers, but
fly from them; we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for salvation, and worship
him sincerely, according to his will. He stands at the door knocking, and to
such as open unto him he comes unto them, and they sup with him, and he with
them. And therefore Christ is our Shepherd, our King, our Savior, and of his
rich grace and love does embrace us as his people, and the flock of his
pasture, bears our prayers, and accepts our service. This is our glory that
Christ is ours, and we are his, and it were better for us to dye, than that our
glorying herein should be made void.

Secondly, seeing this term, False Church, is so familiar with you, we will
consider what it means, and how far it does stand true, that God has made
no promise to bless things done in a false Church. These words, True and false
Church, are used often to signify, as much as pure and corrupt, found and
languishing Church. And as there is scarce a Church so pure, which has not
some impuritie, nor so true, which has not some falsehood admixed: so there is
no Church so false or impure, which has not somewhat of God, or some
supernatural Christian truth within it, For if no supernatural Christian
truth be received or professed, there is no Church. Infidels being clean
without the Church, deny and utterly reject the principles of Christianity.
Heretics or false Christians, in respect of general truths which they openly
profess, are Christians, or of the Church, but in respect of their particular
errors, condemned of all men that be of sound belief. A Church is not to be
esteemed false for some corruptions, nor impure for some disorders, no more,
than we account him a sickly man who now and then finds some weariness or
distemper. Neither is a Church to be accounted true, because of some truths
which they profess, Act. 2.41, 42, 46
worship, which they practice, or use of the Sacraments, which they retain.
The notes of a pure Church are, entire profession of the Gospel, and saving
truth of God, the right use of the Sacraments, holiness of conversation, the
sound preaching of the word of life, fervent and pure calling upon Gods name,
subjection to their spiritual guides, whereby they may be directed and built
forward in the ways of life, mutual communion in the ordinances of worship,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
and Christian fellowship with all Saints, and true visible Churches of Jesus
Christ.

Those Churches to which all these notes agree truly, are to be esteemed
pure in their measure: but those to whom all do not agree, or not so truly,
they are to be esteemed less pure or true, and that in comparison more or
less according as more or fewer of these notes, common, special or proper,
shall be found more or less pure amongst them.

Where all these notes are to be found purely, the Church is excellent for
degree, pure and famous; where any of these is wanting or impure, the Church is
so much defective or impure, though it may be pure in comparison of others.

The profession of the true faith, Acts 14.22.23, 27
and the framing of our life and conversation according to the direction of the
word, with the right administration of the Sacraments and comely order, Ier.
4.22. Mat. 13.14, 15. Isa. 30.9, 10, 11. and 5.7, 8, 9 etc.
are signs of a Church in a good state and condition. But it may fall out,
that the profession of faith alone by public preaching and hearing of the
word, administration of the Sacraments, prayers and thanksgiving does take
place, when good order is neglected, and if life degenerate from the
profession: for in this case she cease not to be the true CHVRCH of Christ,
so long as it pleases him not to give her a Bill of divorce.

True doctrine in all points, and the due and right administration of the
Sacraments in all things according to the word both for substance and
circumstance, is the note of a pure Church, and in good plight. But true
Doctrine in the maine grounds and Articles of faith, though mixed with defects
and errors in other matters, not concerning the life and soul of Religion,
and the right administration of the Sacraments for substance, though in the
manner of dispensation some things be not so well ordered as they might and
ought, are notes and marks of a true and sound Church, though somewhat crased
in health and soundness, by errors in doctrine, corruptions in the worship of
God, and evils in life and manners.

A false Church is that which holds neither the truth of faith entirely, nor
the integrity of divine worship, nor comely order which God has appointed for
the government of his house, nor holiness of conversation. But adds to the
Articles of faith, to that which is worshipped, and to the substantial means
whereby God is worshipped, and to the holy Commandments, which God has given
for the direction of his people, or detracteth and perverteth the right sense
of faith, not considering that which is worshipped as is meet, mangling the
Ordinances of God, and transforming the lawful manner of worship into another
form, and inverteth the holy Commandment by corrupt glosses and sinister
interpretations, which destroys the life and power of godliness.

One false Church may be more corrupt and rotten than another, as being more
deeply tainted in matters of higher importance and more generally than
another: as some may be corrupt in matters of faith, others in doctrine and
worship both, Ier. 2.11, 13. 2 Reg. 16.3. 1 Reg. 18.21. Ezekiel. 16.20
and some in all the particulars mentioned. Thus Israel worshipped God and the
Calves, yea the Lord and Baal.

And as one false Church may be more corrupt than another, Hen. Ains. 2. part
page 62. Did not the Priests, rulers, and people condemn the Prophets of God
sent in all ages; and was not Jerusalem the holy City and seat of the
Priesthood guilty of their blood? Luke 13.33, 34. was not vile and gross
Idolatry practiced often in Judah and Jerusalem by the Priests and Princes?
Ezekiel. 23.11. Did not Judah forsake the Lord and turn their faces from his
Tabernacle, shut the doors of his house, quench his Lamps, and neither burn
Incense nor offer burnt offering in the Sanctuary, unto the God of Jsrael? 2
Chro. 29.6, 7. Vriah the Priest made an Altar Idolatrous like that in Damascus,
and polluted Gods Worship in the Temple, 2 Reg. 16.10, 11, 12, 16. Pashur the
son of Immer the Priest being Governor in the House of the Lord persecuted
Jeremy for preaching the truth, Jer. 20.1, 2. and himself prophesied lies,
ve. 6. See Ier. 32.31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Mic. 3.11. Mal. 2.8, 9.
or at one time than another: so one false Church may have more of God in it
than another, and at another time. For the less grievous the errors are which
the false Church holds, or the less abominable the idolatry which it
maintains, the more divine truth it embraces, the more effectual is that
worship of God which it retains.

The true Church of God which is comparatively pure, may be called false though
improperly, in respect of that corruption in doctrine and manners, errors,
schisms, divisions, superstition or prophanenes, which through humane frailty
and negligence cleaves unto it.

And a false Church may comparatively be called a Church true or pure in
respect of them that be more grossly defiled, as it has more truth and purity
in it.

Also the true Churches of God have sometimes bin distinct visible societies
from the false Churches, and by many degrees in themselves more pure from
tincture and infection, than at other times and some others have been. As in
the days of Abiah, Judah was by many degrees more free from pollution than
afterward.

In Paul's time the integrity of Rome was famous: Corinth many ways reproved:
They of Galatia much more out of square. But the true and Orthodox Church has
sometimes been so mixed with others in outward society, that it has been
hard to find in the whole world a distinct Congregation of sound and entire
professors of all supernatural truths, who joined in the use of Gods Holy
Ordinances, but the members of the true visible Church were dispersed and
scattered, and mingled with false Christians or false worshippers in society,
and the true Church lay hid in the false.

Now to apply these things.

1. If by a false Church you understand a Church erring in points of faith
exceeding dangerous, and corrupting the pure worship of God with real
Idolatry, with whom the faithful may not lawfully hold Communion: yet then
that which they have of God amongst them, though not rightly administered, is
effectual by the blessing of GOD according, to promise.

As Baptism administered by the Heretics holding the form of Baptism, and of
Popish Priests, is true Baptism, and not to be reiterated. For one and the
same society may in one sense have somewhat of the true Church, and in another
be the Synagogue of Satan: and their Ministers exercise the Ministry and
service of Christ, when they themselves be the bondslaves of Satan. It is
true, God threatens to destroy such societies, and is highly displeased with
the service that is done there as such, because it is not done as it ought: but
as he is pleased to continue his Ordinance, so he is pleased to give it force
and validity according to his institution. And it is not strange that God
should be displeased with a thing not done according to his institution, when
the institution it self he does approve and bless to some according to his
free covenant.

2. If by a false Church you understand a Church maimed and corrupt with errors
in doctrine and manners, neglect of discipline, disorders in Ministers and
people, then as occasion may be offered Christ has bound the faithful to be
present at his ordinances in such Assemblies, and promised to bless them that
draw nigh unto him therein.

In the Church of Corinth there were Divisions, Sects, Emulations, 1 Cor. 3.3.
1 Cor. 6.1, 2. 2 Cor. 10.10. 1 Cor. 15.12. 1 Cor. 5.1. 1 Cor. 11.19, 20.
contentions and quarrels; going to Law one with another for every trifle, and
that under Infidels. Paul's name and credit was despitefully called into
question there, the resurrection of the dead was denied by some; that
wickedness was there wincked at, which was not heard of among the heathen; the
Lords Supper was horribly profaned, things indifferent used with offense, 2
Cor. 12.20, 21. Ambr. in 1 Cor. 11 They stood striving for their oblations.
Hier. in 1 Cor. 11. In Ecclesia convenientes oblationes suas separatius
offerebant. Apoc. 2.4, 5, 6. Apoc. 3.20, 21.
Fornication not repented of, and idolatry practiced in eating meats sacrificed
to Idols in the Idol Temple. And all this notwithstanding, the assemblies were
kept, the faithful frequented the Ordinances and God did bless them according
to promise. Ephesus was extremely decayed in her first love, and though
threatened to have her candlestick removed unless she repent, Christ does
never lay his charge upon the faithful to depart from his Ordinances. Of
Laodicea it is said, that she was neither hot nor cold, and then we may easily
conceive she was overgrown with corruptions, the proper fruits of negligence,
security, self conceitednesse, etc. For which unless she repent, a terrible
judgment is denounced against her: and yet the faithful are never exhorted to
flee from her society, but to repent of her sin, and the promise is made for
encouragement, that if they open unto him, Apoc. 2.20.
he will come in and Suppe with them, and they with him.

If by a false Church you unde stand a visible society, wherein the fair
greater part is corrupt in the profession of Faith concerning the Articles of
Religion, and in the woe ship of God, by adding and detracting in the
substaniall means, and transforming the object of worship it self; corrupt in
the calling and ordination of Officers, the form of government, the Officers
set a part for the work of God, and the lives and conversations of the members
of that society: If in this sense the false Church be taken, then it may and
has fallen out for a long time together, that the true Church of God has lain
hid in the false, and that by Gods allowance and approbation, Field of the
Church lib. 3. cap. 8.
in which case the LORD commanded the faithful to be present at His
Ordinances, and promised His blessing unto them, though administered in a
corrupt Church and after a corrupt manner.

The true Church in corrupt times has been mixed with the false, not as
actual members of that society as corrupt, but as they have been hid in that
society, as good Corn overtopped with Weeds; or a little gold or purer metal
in a great clod of Earth; God of his infinite mercy so providing for and
preserving his poor people.

In time of the Judges the Israelites did every man that which seemed good in
his own eyes, that is, Judges 1.76. Sept. (...) Ad bujus loci similitudinem
legitur in Sederzata sic, extitit seculum absque rege. Joseph. lib. 5. c. 2. 1
Reg. 19, 10. Romans 11, 3, 4. Hosea 4, 1, 6. 2 Par. 13, 5. Isa. 1, 2, 3, 4, 21,
22 29. Isa. 57, 3. Ezc. 14, 5. Ier. 23, 8, 14 Lam. 4, 13, 14. Ier 2, 8, 11, 13.
Sept. (...). Verse 26, 27 Verse 29.
worshipped God as he pleased. The Prophets testify, that the Church did not
only fail in Israel, but in Judah likewise. I have brought up Children and
they have rebelled against me. Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a corrupt seed. How is the faithful City become an Harlot! Thy
silver is turned into dross, and thy Wine mixed wi^h water. They shall be
confounded because of their Oaks wherein they delighted. The Land ( viz. of
Judah) is filled with Idols, they worship the work of their Hands, the Priests
said not, where is the Lord? and they that should minister the Law, knew me
not says the Lord. The Pastors also offended against me, and the Prophets
prophesied by Baal, and went after things, that did not profit. My people have
changed their glory for that which did not profit. My people have committed two
evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, to dig them
pits, even broken pits, that can hold no water. The house of Israel is
confounded, they, and their Kings, and their Princes, and their Prophets,
saying to the wood, Thou art my Father. All of you have forsaken me, says the
LORD, Her treacherous Sister Judah feared not, but went and played the Harlot
also. The backe-sliding Israel, Ier. 3, 8, 11, and 11, 13, 14. Ezekiel. 16, 46,
47, 48, 51, 52. Ier. 5, 1 and 6, 13, and 7, 28, and 9, 1. Isay 57, 3, 4.
has justified her self more than treacherous Judah. And as she was thus
horribly corrupted with Idolatry, so with profaneness, impenitency,
impudency in sinning, rebellion, stubbornness, oppression, and what not? But
when all things were thus miserably disordered, the faithful in Judah did not
separate themselves from the Ordinances of Religion, or withdraw themselves
into a distinct visible society from the rest. In the age before our Saviors
time it grew exceeding wicked again. Mat. 8.4. Mar. 5.36 Luke 7.4, 5, 9. Mat.
4.23. Mar. 1.21. Luke 4.6. John 18.20. Luke 2.22, 37, 41. Iun. animad. in Bell.
contr. 4. lib. 3. c. 16 s. 14.
But neither did our Savior, nor his Disciples before his death take upon them
to crect a new visible Church altogether distinct from the erring Synagogue,
but lived in that Church and frequented the Ordinances, neither as absolute
members of the Synagogue, nor yet as the visible Church distinct from it. But
as visible members of that Primitive Church from which that Synagogue had
degenerated.

In the New Testament, 2 These. 2.7. Revel. 17.5. Iniquitas sed mystica id est,
pietatis nomine palliata. Gloss. ordinar. Sir. Mysterium iniqui jam incipit
efficaz esse. (...) est vis certa operandi, non autem significandi. Cham.
panst. some. 2. lib. 16. cap. 7. Hesych. (...), praeparatur, adornatur,
instruitur. (...) quoddam doctrinae, quod si (...) sumptum contrarium sit
fidei, Cham. panst. tom. 2. l. 16. cap. s 5. 2 These. 2.3. Heb. 3.13. Matthew.
13.25, 39. 2 Cor. 11.3.13, 15. Jun. cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 16. Generalis
decessio sen Apostasia dicitur universalis ant communis. Vniversalem negamus
fore, semper igitur erit Ecclesia, quamvis lalens. Communem fore affirmamus, ut
affirmat Paulus. Ier. 28.16. and 29, 32. Sept. (...) Deuteronomy. 13.10.
the Apostle tells us the mystery of iniquity began to work in his days:
whereby he understands not common heresies, and corruption of manners, but some
great and hidden thing begun in the Apostles time to creep on by degrees, not
suddenly to vanish, but to continue for many ages, and to grow into an
exceeding high mountain. As the mystery of godliness, which began presently
after the fall, took it complement by degrees, and that at a certain and
appointed time: so it was in this also, which at the first was small, but grew
as things durable by degrees into an exceeding huge bigness. The spirit has
foretold, that there should come an Apostasy or defection, not from the Roman
Empire (for that was not opposite to Christ) but from the faith, and that not
light or in some particular point, or for a short time (for such Haeretickes
there had been already) but grievous, general, and of long continuance.

That which the Prophet Jeremy, when he speaks of false Prophets and their
Prophecies, calls (...), that is, as the 70. translate it, and the thing it
self requires, a declining, a revolt or Apostasy, not every one, but that to
which the authority of the true God is pretended.

And so the departure from the faith is not a revolt to Gentilisme, 2 Timothy 4.1,
2. Aug. De Civ. Dei li. 26. ca. 19. Quem refugam vocat, utique a Deo vero.
but a giving too easy heed and attention to some doctors professing, yet
indeed corrupting the Christian Religion. As when it is said of Paul, that he
taught Apostasy from the Law, the meaning is not that he had revolted to the
Gentiles, or denied the Messiah, or the Law or the Prophets, but that under
pretense of the Messiah he had polluted the purity of the doctrine of the Law
and the Prophets. This Apostasy then was small in beginning, increased in
time, Acts 21.21. Non statim desilitur a bonis initiis ad malum finem, sed per
gradus pedetentim descenditur. P. Ramus Epist. ad Carolum Lotharing. an. 1570.
De quindecim a Christo seculis, primum vereesse aureum, reliqua quo longius
abscederent, esse nequiora atque deteriora. Vsser de siccess. ca. 1. S. 8. Jam
inde a principio Mysterium iniquitatis peragi caeperit, ut mirandum non sit, si
seculie subsequentibus, nonnulla dectrinae pontificiae zizania sensim and sine
sensu succreverint, a veteribus illis, aliud praesertim agentibus, minus
animadversa. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. cap. 32. and lib. 4. cap. 22. Edit. Graec.
Niceph. Hist. l. 4. ca. 1. Neque little qui praecesserunt virtutem assecutos,
neque ita simplicers, ut magistri eorum, orationem consecutos esse.
and grew greater and greater, not perceived at first, not opposed by godly
men, it possessed the successors of holy Teachers themselves. This corruption
of the faith was so brought in by degrees, that the most vigilant could scarce
discern it, when it was first sowed. The successors of Godly men received it,
and the godly themselves for a great while groaned under it, for it was a
clandestine Conspiracy and opposition of the faith, not directly but obliquely,
not in express terms but by consequences.

So that of the first fifteen ages of the Church of the New Testament, that
cannot be denied which Carolus Lotharingus the Cardinal uttered in Porsiaca
responsione; That the first was golden, but the rest, the further they
departed, the worse, and more corrupt they were. Whiles the Apostles lived the
Church remained a Virgin, pure and incorrupt: but within the three first ages
from the rising of the Gospel, her health was crased by errors in doctrine,
superstitious abuses crept into the worship of God, breach of comely order in
Government, and offenses in life, whereof we find the Pastors to make large
complaint. It cannot be denied but that they that succeeded the Apostles did
excel in Piety and Godliness, but withal it is most certain they did
neither attain the virtue of them that went before them, nor teach so purely
and truly as their masters and instructors, as Nicephorus observes; And what
is said of Hon^er in another matter is not unfitly applied to this purpose, few
Children are like to their Parents.

The liberty of man's will and dignity of works was too much advanced: Many
thought the souls of the just should not see God until the day of judgment.
The Sacrament of the Supper was ministered to infants, which abuse is reformed
by the Church of Rome her self: They dipped the Sacramental bread into the
Wine sometimes, and so administered them together. Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 1. T.
C. repl. 1 page 74. Maldonat. in Io. 6 Cypr. de laps. Justin. Mart. apolog 2.
Gyp. lib. 2. ep. 3 ad Caecilium or ep. 63. and epist. 48. Hieron. in Mar. cap.
14. Polydor. de inveator. rer. lab. 5. cap. 91. Just Mart. qu. 155. Basil. de
Spir. Sanct. Of the controversy about the Feast Easter, See Eusch. lib. 5.
cap. 23. Sozom. l. l. 7. cap. 15. Socrat. l. 5. cap. 22. Altars brought into
the Church by Sixtus the second about 265.86. Sewide Apol. art. 3. div. 26.
Tho. Beacon. 3. vol. Sup. print. Land. 1562. Which others think came into the
Church about the year, 590.
They carried it home with them, and laid it up in Chests to be received
privately; Wine was mixed with water in the administration of the Sacrament of
the Supper. Deacons preached. Women Baptized, Baptism was stained with
superstitious rites and Ceremonies in daily use, many rites and Customs
practiced which had no ground in the Word of God, and sundry things observed as
Apostolical, which were directly contrary to the Apostles Doctrine or example.
Within two hundred years after Christ, there was crept into the Church many
idle Ceremonies, and the simplicity of Christ's Ordinances refused. Each man as
he had either credit or authority, presumed of himself to add somewhat to
Christ's institution, and the flesh delighting in her own devices, Tertul. de
Coron. Milit.
delivered the same with a strait charge, as if Christ Himself had taken order
for it. In Tertullians time we may find many strange inventions taken up in
Baptism. Three dippings in the Water; Tasting Milk and Honey; Abstaining from
all other washing for a seven night after. Cyp ep. 72. ad Bonifacium. Cyp ep.
34 Cyp. de laps. S. 4. Eusebius. Hist. l. 8. c. 1
In Cyprians time there was consecration of water, and such estimation of oil,
that no man was thought to be a Christian, that was baptized without it: of
the memorials of Martyrs; and what blemishes appeared in the conversation of
Christians, who list may read in Cyprian and others. Sabel. Enead. 7. l. 4.
Nuda fuit abinitio anmis ceremoniarum ratio; plus pietatis babens quam
apparatus. Osiand. Hist. Eccles. cent. 3. l. 3. cap. 11 Paulatim cerem niae
auctae sunt, hominum superstitiosorum ^pinionibua^.


In the three ages following, though the doctrine of salvation and substance of
Gods Worship, was maintained in all fundamental points, and the Omnipotency of
the Pope was not known, nor Images worshipped, the Scripture was read and
Prayers made in a known tongue; the Sacrament of the Supper was administered to
the People in both kinds; men women and Children had free liberty to read the
holy Scriptures, the Sacrament was not adored, nor the doctrine of
Transubstantiation heard of. Nevertheless manifest seeds of Antichristianisme
were sowed and began to appear in some strength. The state of the Church was
lamentable, the corruptions many and great, both in respect of doctrine,
worship, government, and holiness of conversation. Magdeburg cent. 4. cap. 6.
col. 440. Subi^de magis magisque traditiones humanae cumulatae sunt, Per. in
Romans sec. 106. Aug. Enchirid^a^ 110. Chrysostom. tom. 4. ad pop. 66. in 1 Cor. 16.
hom 43. Cham. panst^^. tom. 2 lib. 20. c. 5. sec. 19. Whitak. de Pontif. Rom
Praef. ad auditores sec. 5. Br^ghtm. a poc. c. 4. 7. and 12, 6, 13, 15. Socrat.
hist. 7. c. 11. About the year 430, the Roman and Alexandrian Bishops left the
sacred function, and degenerated into secular rule, Euscb. de vila Constant. l.
4. c. 40, 43. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8, 22, and l. 4. c. 18. Arnob. advers. Gent. l.
8. Origin. cont. Cet^^ l. 7. Conc. Elib. c. 36. Calfeh. against Mart. Pref. to
the reader. Chamier. pa^str. t. 2 l. ^6; c. 7, sic. 6. Bills. Christ. part. 14.
page, 351, etc. Gregor. l, 7. cp. 5 3, ad Secund. in and l. 9. cp. 9. Aug. epi.
118, 119, See Caranz. sum. Council. fol. 43. Justin Martyr, Tortullian, Clomens
Romanus, Eactantius and others, were of opinion, that no particular judgment
passed upon the Saints, until the laft day, Sixth. Sen. Biblioth. l. 6. an. 345.
The Pastors of this age spoke more unwarily of justification, and grace, than
was meet, prayer for the dead was ordinary, the foundation of prayer unto
Saints, was laid and defended by the teachers themselves, with overgreat zeal,
in the superstitious vigils, and frequenting the Sepulchers of Martyrs. The
former profanation of the Sacraments by superstitious rites much increased,
some whereof are abolished by the papists themselves. Liberty is taken from
the Ministers, the Bishops contend among themselves, with ambition, hatred,
affecting high titles and precedencie, more than the good of Gods Church, the
pleasure of peace and security took away all care of godliness. Now they
seek the relics of Saints, go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, consecrate
Temples to Martyrs, esteem it more religion to build certain places and to
pray in them, than in others, and to live by prescriptions and will worship of
Monks, etc. than to walk according to the rule of Gods Word. Now they give
themselves to corrupt religion, with idle and impure rites: Images that were
not mentioned in the first and second ages of the Church, in the fourth, fifth,
and sixth age, were brought into the Church in some parts, painted upon the
walls, retained for Historical and Rhetorical use, to inform the
understanding, and stir up devotion, and of some began to be worshipped, which
Gregory himself disliked. Monks kept the communion at home, and wanting a
priest, communicate themselves. No public assemblies could be found, in which
the ordinances of God did flourish entirely. Augustine complained of the
multitude of rites and ceremonies which were in his time, wherewith the Church
was grievously burdened, but in the ages following was much more intolerable.
Of the particular slips and errors of the ancients it is needless to say more.

Here I would demand, was this Church all this while thus corrupted, the true
church of Christ or a falls? was the true worship of God performed in these
assemblies the true worship, or was it pernicious Idolatry? If a true Church,
then a society, T. C. repl. 1. page 73
wherein corruption of Doctrine and of the Sacraments, hurtful Ceremonies,
dominion and pomp of the clergy, new orders and functions of the Ministry,
is to be found, may be the true Church of God. And what then can you object
against the Church of England, to prove it a false Church? If a false Church,
Fulk answer to the Rhem. in Ephesians 4.13 all the true Bishops of the primitive
Church for six hundred years and more, after Christ, in all necessary points
of doctrine agree with us, and therefore were ancestors of our Church. In the
later times also for every age we can name diverse pastors and teachers even
in the most dark times, etc. Calfeh. against Mar. preface to the reader: Greg.
epist. l. 7, indict. 2, c. 109. Council Nicen. a, but that Council was not
generally received. Sigth. in an. 755. Reger Howden continuat. Beda anno 792.
Field of the chuteh l. 3, cap. 8. See Calfehil against Mart. art. 3. p. 58, 69,
etc. Bilson Christian subject, part 4, page 316, 317. This was about the year
of our Lord 1160. See Vsser de suceess. Eccles. History of the Waldenses,
Daltha Lydia hist, Chaloner credo Eccles. part 2, sect. 2.
then either the faithful were bound to avoid all society and fellowship
with it in the ordinances, which a sober minded man will not affirm: or all
communicating with a false Church in the ordinances of God, is not pernicious
idolatry. The faithful which lay hid in this corrupted state of the Church,
and did partake in the ordinances of worship, were never held and reputed
Idolaters,

In the ages following the mystery of iniquity did grow amain, for the
worship of Images first began, and after was concluded, the Pope obtained to
be called head of the universal Church, Saints were invocated as Mediators,
the Communion was mangled and delivered in one kind, the merit and dignity of
works advanced to the prejudice of Gods grace; the doctrine of real presence,
and orall eating of Christ's flesh in the Sacramant by good and bad, and the
adoration of the Eucharist, was taught and received. These gross corruptions
prevailed for a time in the Church, before they were concluded upon in Synods
or Councels, opposed by some, condemned by others, and manfully withstood,
especially the worshipping of Images. During which time the faithful who
condemned these abominations did lie hid in the Church, keeping themselves
undefiled from these errors, but separated not themselves from the ordinances
of grace, nor gathered themselves into a distinct body.

After these abominations were concluded, the first that separated themselves
were the Waldenses, Albigenses, or poor men of Lions, who withdrew themselves
from the society of the Roman Synagogue, and worshipped God in distinct
companies according to his will. These are reported to be men of sound life and
god linesse, by the testimony of very enemies themselves, notwithstanding they
were most shamefully traduced, and grievously persecuted for Christ's sake.

But after this separation made by them, If sheep in a pasture, where
venomous herbs are mixed with wholsome, can by the instinct of nature make
choice of that which is proper for them, and abstain from the contrary; what
marvel is it if the flock of Christ, who know the voice of the true
Shepherd from the voice of strangers, should by the guidance of Gods assisting
spirit do the same, Chaloncredo, Cameron, dc Eccles. ca. de schism, See Field
of the church. l. 3 (...) 6, 8. Carleton descript. ca. 1, p. 8.
diverse other godly men did patiently endure the tyranny of Antichrist and
groaned under that heavy yoke, bewailing the misery, and reproving the sins
of the time, sought to reclaim others, and labor to keep their own selves
free, but did not actually separate from the society. And this (as the learned
judge) was done, if not by Gods commandment, at least by gracious indulgence.
Until the time of the Trent Council (says one) the Church although oppugned
with errors and deceits of diverse kinds, oppressed with tyranny, did not
patiently endure the tyranny of the Pope, and the impudency of the Fraterculi.
And though oftentimes before they had thought of separation, yet they could
never effect it, until that was fulfilled which the Scripture had foretold.

It is here to be further noted, that neither the Waldenses, who first
separated, nor the reformed Churches which in after times cast off the yoke of
Antichrist, and abolished his Idolatry, did make such a pure and perfect
reformation in all things as was to be desired. And therefore if they be
measured by your meat-wand, they must all lie under the censure of false and
idolatrous Churches, who worship God with a false and Idolatrous worship, or
else you must confess your great words of false Church and false constitution
to bear no weight, or to be a mere slander.

If you will tell us distinctly what you mean by false Churches you shall see
your whole building to fall of it self. For, if you understand thereby every
Church, that labors under some disorder, or corruption in gathering and
constitution, doctrine, or discipline it is apparently false. If you mean that
the better part may not often ly hid under the worser, the true Church in the
corrupt, which may join in the use of Gods holy worship by his approbation and
with promise of blessing, then the proposition is cross to the maine current
of Scripture. If by a false Church you understand that whose doctrine and
worship is corrupt in the very maine grounds and essentials of faith and
worship necessary to salvation, your assumption has no truth in it.

May you therefore be pleased here to take notice of that which you observe,
CAN Stay. ag.. 4. p. 33, 34.
as a clear difference between truth and falsehood, between Christ's
iustitutions and men's inventions. Whatsoever God will have us to do or not to
do, he lays down the same openly, Prove. 8.7 1 Timothy 4.1
precisely, manifestly. All the words of his mouth, are plain to him that
understands. The Spirit speaks expressly, etc. that the truth is simple and
plain. Ethnicks by the light of nature, could sufficiently see into such
things, one of them touching this matter says thus, The truth is simple and
plain, and needs not variety of windlaces. Another of them has these words,
That phrase or form of speaking has truth in it, Cyp. Epist. ad Pomcont.
Epist. Stepha. It comes of too much presumption and frowardness, that a man
had rather defend his own, though it be false and naught, than yield to
another deeds and words.

Resist not truth to maintain your credit, God will surely revenge it, Bilson
differing, part 1, page 69.

Contigit saepe ut idem pastor sit vero pastor, and non sit vere postor
secundum vocatione^ ligitimam; non vere pastor, scundum administrationem,
operationemque ipsius. Hieron. ad Heliodor.

Non omnes Episcopi sunt episcopi: attend Petrum, sed Iudam considera Great. 2.
q. 7. c. Non omnes. Ecclesia aliquandt visibiiis est, non tantum cum defectibus
multis in doctrina, disciplina, sacramentis, and administrandi ratione, sed
etiam cum variis impuris misturis: ita ut Ecclesia sit visibilis, cum tamen
ecclesia ralis, quaew in omnibus sequituto possimus sit invifibilis. Ames
Bellar, enerv. tom. 2, lib. de Eccles.


which is common and used of all, having in it nothing craftily devised,
neither cloaking some other thing than is professed. Contrariwise when Satan
speaks by his instruments, he speaks so ambignously, and cloakedly, that
one knows not how to take it, nor which way to apply it. And so you go on in
many words to the like purpose, which if you will apply to your own manner of
disputing and alleging testimonies, You shall discover your self to be the
deceiver, who affect ambiguous and equivocall speeches, and seek by mists, and
fogs of strange and unusual arguments and sentences wrested to a contrary
sense, to blind the eyes, and puzzell the understanding of the simple. For you
hide your self under the terms of, false ^^^ch, false ministry, false
Prophets, false worship, flying from (...) latry, taking heed of idols, etc.
which you have taken u^^n a peculiar sense; and running along in that strain,
you pervert the Scriptures, wrong Authors, consound things to be distinguished,
dispute sophistically: and whiles you boast of clear proof, divine precepts,
example and practice of forefathers, from the first age of the world hitherto,
positions holden in all Schools, written in all books, preached every day in
Sermons, taught in all Churches, you do only raise a dust to daisle the eye:
for let the matter be looked into, and you have neither precept divine, nor
example of godly forefather to justify your separation. What you teach has
been evermore condemned in Schools, cried down in Sermons, disallowed in all
Churches of the Saints, from the very beginning to this day.

CAN. Stay. Sec. 5. page 41, 42. and Sect. 6. page 86
To hear Antichr, stian Ministers in their unlawful assemblies, is
superstition and will worship. Therefore it is sin to do it. The first
proposition is grounded upon, Levit. 10.1, 2. and the same is without
exception. The second proposition is thus proved. 1. From the nature of
superstition which is as Zanchie describes it, a taking into the worship of God
more than he requires in his worship. 2 According to the Schoolmen, that is
superstition, when divine worship is not exhibited, either to the person it
should be, Li. 1 de cult. extern. oppos. col. 501, 502 Aq. 2. 2 ae q. 92, art. 1
or not in the way or manner it ought. And this is held to be a sound truth by
all Orthodox Divines. 3 This hearing cannot be free of superstition, in regard
men are present at false worship. Jdem sect. 5. page 75 Whosoever takes to
himself a practice, which is not grounded on Gods word, and is strict therein,
he is just overmuch, and presumes above that which is written: and this is
their ease who hear unlawful Ministers for edification.

And a little before i^ the same page. The hearing stood for, is a spiritual
eating with Idolaters, and men cannot receive the food without pollution. And
page 80, 81. Herein men worship God, b^y and in a way and means which
Idolaters will have instituted.


The which presence (as the learned write) is a certain communication
therewith. 4 It is a great superstition to approve, countenance; or give honor
to any of the ways of Antichrist. They that are sincere christians (says
Bucer) cannot abide any thing that is his, etc. 5 It is vicious and
superstitious to symbolize with idolaters. The Scriptures forbid^t, and the
Saints in all ages have carefully shunned it. 6 Superstition is committed, when
more estimation is had of a thing, more dignity and excellency placed in it;
and more regard had to it, than God allows, or can stand with his will.

ANSWER.
You roll the same stone up and down. Is there any thing here for substance,
but what has been repeated often, but not prooved once? You talk of
superstition, false worship, idolatry, giving honor to the ways of
Antichrist, and such like great abominations. But if we call for proof of these
accusations, you are glad to fly off, and to play least in sight. Superstition,
false worship, idolatry is unlawful, that you can say, and no man will deny
it. But that it is false worship, idolatry, or superstition to hold communion
in our assemblies in the ordinances of grace, in this if your bare word, will
not be received, here is nothing to bear you out.

This reason therefore, that is, for the substance thereof nothing but a new
furbishing over of the same broken staff, might well be passed over in
silence. But lest the credulous reader should conceit it is slighted, because
it contains some matter of importance, I will in few words lay open the
weakness and vanity thereof. First you translate the Schoolmans words ( vel
cui non debet, vel non eo modo quo debet) very improperly, when divine worship
is not exhibited, either to the person it should be, etc. and indeed make his
speech absurd or senseless. For it was never imagined to be superstition, not
to exhibit divine worship to God, but Atheism or profaneness rather. You say,
superstition is that which is done supra statutum, when more estimation is had
of a thing, more dignity placed in it than is meet; which is contrary to the
not exhibiting of divine honor to God: but this is your common practice. 2.
Your reasons to prove it superstition to hear Antichristian Ministers in their
false assemblies (as you style them) are none of the best, If there were no
more but giving obedience to such ^^dinance, as are imposed with a necessity
upon us, and that merely for conscience of the ordinance it is enough to
infect the actions with superstition. A dispute against Engl. popish. part 1.
ca. 3. p. 9. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 10.. 16, 27, 29. Aug. confess. ca. de
discyimin^ ciboru^.
though all should be granted which you desire, for though it be no particular
ordinance in respect of time or place, yet it follows not that it is
superstition: For if for substance the duty be of God, it may be done without
superstition, when it is not in particular commanded. May not the case fall
out, that it is free for a man whether he will hear the word at such a time,
or follow the duties of his calling? and if he do the one or the other, in so
doing he is not to be deemed superstitious? To place opinion of necessity,
holiness, or worship, in that which God has not instituted or sanctified, is
superstition. But to do this or that act which is commanded or allowed of God,
cannot be called superstition, though in some particular circumstance above
mentioned, it be no particular ordinance. You say, whosoever takes to himself
practice, Chemnit. Exam part. 2. in Sess. 13. can. 10. Calvin de neces. reform.
Eccles. Quum putarentur observatu necessariae esse hominum leges, corrigi
debuit perniciosus hic error, etc. Ch^mier. panstr. tom. 4. de Eus. l. 6, c. 4,
sect. 3, 4. Magdeb. praef. 7. cen. It is not lavvfull for civil Magistrates to
devise forms of Religion in destruction of the truth and so to reconcile truth
and error that they may both be lulled asleep. They may not prescribe
religion, alone, they must not engender new articles of faith, they must not
strangle the truth with error, nor shackle it when it is revealed that they
may let loose the bridle of corruption, etc. Matthew 4. 9 See Par. in loc.
Luke 4.7. 2 Chroni. 11.15 1 Cor. 10.20 Rev. 9.20 1 Timothy 4.1
which is not grounded upon Gods word, and is strict therein, he is just
overmuch, why do you add, (and is strict therein) if every act simply not
commanded be superstition?

And if by such hearing a man did approve, countenance, or give honor unto any
the ways of Antichrist, or did simbolize with Idolaters, yet could not this
hearing be condemned as will worship, or superstition, unless the breach of
every commandment be will worship, or superstition. Men may be superstitious,
in the use of Antichristian rites or devices, and so they may in the use of
their own devices, yea of the ordinances of God themselves. But whosoever does
countenance or approve any of the ways of Antichrist, he is not therein
(though he break the commandment some other way) superstitious or a
wil-worshipper.

3 If superstition be committed when more estimation or regard is had to a
thing, than God allows, or can stand with his will revealed in his word,
beware, lest you convince your self superstitious in an high degree. For when
you magnify your Church order and constitution as an ordinance of that
absolute necessity, as that God cannot lawfully be worshipped, in any other
society or assembly, and that none other Church is true. You place more
excellency and dignity in it, and give more estimation and regard unto it,
than God allows in his word. I might add, that in many particulars you
advance your own imaginations, as the necessary and holy ordinances of God,
which if it be not idolatry, at least is superstition in your language.
Observable it is (you say) whereas one Evangelist setting down the Tempters
words to Christ, says, worship me, another has it, worship before me, showing
it is all one to worship before the Devil or to worship him. Whereupon you
add, now he is worshipped when Idols are worshipped, or any false institution
is observed, or practice used; which if it was true, I should not fear to
charge you as a pernicious idolater, or worshipper of the Devil: But I will
not make use of such leaden weapons, CAN. Stay. Sect. 4. page 63.
For it is a most notorious and gross absurdity: For if every false
institution and practice be the worship of the Devil, it must necessarily
follow, that every error concerning the worship of God, concerning the
commandments of the first table, is the worship of the Devil, which a
Christian should blush to speak, and ab^^ere to hear.

4 In your esteem all Churches are false which are not constituted after your
manner, and all Ministers Antichristian, who are not called and ordained by
that particular congregation where they are to administer: and being so taken,
I answer. It is neither superstition nor will worship to hear Antichristian
Ministers (in your style, but indeed the true lawful approved Ministers of
Jesus Christ) in their Assemblies. To hear or to communicate with them, is not
to approve or honor any Antichristian way, or sembolize with idolaters: but to
approve maintain and exercise purely the ordinances of grace, to yield
obedience to Gods commandment, to regard, honor and esteem what be allows
and honors, and to worship him, both for matter (and manner according to his
will. The precepts, promises and institution of God, Ames. Bell. E^^^tem. 2.
l^^de ^cc^notis. (...) catus ille in quo christus adest, dum demonstratur ubi
sit Christus. Ille autem caetus est ecclesia, christus erim ambulat inter 7.
candelab^^, quae sunt 7. ec^lesie.
the approved practice of the Saints, from the beginning of the world unto this
day, does plentifully warrant this practice to be holy, profitable and
necessary, in respect of divine institution. This doctrine has evermore been
professed in all Churches, defended by Orthodox Divines, taught in Sermons,
received by the Faithful, and most plainly confirmed by the Scriptures. But
not to repeat so many things spoken already, I proceed to examine what you have
to say out of the Nonconformists against our Ministry, in respect of their
orders and degrees.

SECTION 6.
CAN. Necess. of Separation, Page 37.
IF the calling and office of their bishops be (as the Nonconformists say it
is) of the earth, false, divellish Antichristian, etc. than it follows, that
the calling and office of the whole Ministry must necessarily be of the same
nature, qualities and condition, to wit of the earth false, divellish, and
Antichristian, etc. which is wholly derived from it, which receives, J say, and
takes it life and being of it only, and no where else, For if their Bishops
have not a right power in themselves, then can they not transfer it to
another, As the law says, Nemo potest plus juris transfer in ahum, Regul.
juris. 79.
quam sibi competere dignoscatur, No man can give more to another, than he has
himself. If Corah, Dathan, and Abitam, when they usurped the priesthood and
government of the Church, should (by that false power which they assumed) have
ordained some of the people unto the Priests office, no doubt all the
Israelites which feared God, would have judged their place and standing
unlawful, because they which made them had no commission from God so to do.
The case of their Ministry is just so.

ANSWER.
IF some things of men be mixed with that which is of God, as the holy
Sacraments with humane rites, and humane pomp and glory, with the Ministry
that is from above, a prudent Christian must separate one from another, and not
cast away what is of God as a nullitie, fruitless, unprofitable, defiled,
because somewhat humane is annexed to them. Accidental defects or
superfluities, in, or about the Ministry, do not destroy the nature and
substance of the Ministry.

In the office and calling of Bishops, two things are to be considered.

1 The substance of their office and Ministry whereunto they are separated, to
wit, to preach the Gospel, dispense the Sacraments and administer the
discipline of Jesus Christ; Hieron. in epist. ad Tit. ca. 1. and ad Evag.
epist. 2. Bilson chr. part. 2. page 318, 319. Calv. tract. deneces. reform.
eccles. Calvin. instit. l. 4, c. 4. sect, 1.2, 4, 15. Zanch. in 4. praeteptum
to^, 732, 733. Forb. Irenic, l. 2, prop, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and this is of God.

2 The superiority they take or challenge over their brethren, which makes not
a difference or nullitie in the substance of their ministry; and this is of
men. All Ministers of the Gospel are stewards of Jesus Christ, set apart to
do his work, wherein if any one shall challenge more than of right
appertains unto him; or do ought out of pride, partiality, sinister
affection, tyranny or sedition: or receives such authority to himself
alone, as belongs not to his place and office, or is common to many; in that
he is blameworthy: but thereupon his Ministry or ministerial acts done by
him, are not made void and of none effect.

Thus the Church of England, The institution of a Christian man c. of the
Sacram. of Orders. Ievvel apol. def. par. 2. c. 3. div. 1, 5 etc. 9. div. 1. in
1 Timothy 3. in 1 Timothy hom. 11 Qu. ex utroque Testamento ca. 100.
at least the prime maintainers of Religion, against the Papists have taught,
That there is little or no difference betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter: to
which purpose Jewel cites many passages out of the Ancient Fathers; as of
Ambrose, there is one Ordination of a Bishop and a Presbyter: Chrysostom. betwixt a
Bishop and a Presbyter there is almost no difference. Aug. what is a Bishop,
but the first or chief Presbyter. And both Conformists and Non-confor^^ists
agree in this, that ministers rightly qualified with gifts, and preaching the
doctrine of salvation purely, be the Ministers of Jesus Christ, whether
ordained by Bishops or the Eldership. Forb. Iren. l. 2. c. 11 prop. Carleton de
Eccl. c. 11. p: 283.284. D. Field of the Church lib. 3. c. 39 T. C. repl. 1. p.
82. There being great resemblance between the Popedom and Archbishop, I mean
having regard to the bare functions, without respecting the Doctrine good or
bad, which they uphold, there is yet great difference between the persons
which execute them. P. Lombard l. 4. sen. did. 24. Capreol. in 4. sent. did.
2. qu. 1. Episcopatus non est alius distinctus ordo a sacerdotio, Bonavent. in
4 sent. did. 24. art. 2. qu. 3. Th. Aqui. 3. suppl qu. 40. art. 5.
They that hold Bishops by Divine right greater than Presbyters, and that the
power of Ordination belongs unto them, do yet acknowledge Ordination, given
by the Eldership to be true, by the judgment of the Catholic Church. And they
that maintain the equality of Bishops and Presbyters by the Word of God, deny
not those Ministers to be of God, who teach sound doctrine, and feed the flock
of God committed to their charge, though they received Ordination from Bishops.

The learned among the Papists themselves freely confess, that that wherein a
Bishop excels a Presbyter, is not a distinct and higher order or power of
order, but a kind of dignity or office and employment only. Episcopacy is not
another order distinct from the Priesthood, says Capreolus. No Prelate has
more concerning Sacramental power, or of order, than simple Priests. So
Armachanus. As concerning Sacerdotall order, Armach. l. 11. Dom. a Soto l. 10.
de just. and jure q. 1. art. 2. and de 4. did. 24, q. 2 art 3 Darand. in 4,
sent. did. 24, qu 5. Staple. relect. contr. 2 qu. 3, art. 3. Bellar. de Cler.
l. 1. c 11, s. 14. cusan. concord. l. 2. c. 13.
and things that pertain to order, they are equal. Thus Bellarmine himself.
Although a Bishop and Presbyter are distinguished, yet as concerning Sacrifice
they exercise the same ministry, and therefore they make one order and not
two. Cusanus goes further. All Bishops and happily also Presbyters are of equal
power in respect of jurisdiction, although not of execution: which executive
exercise is shut up and restrained by certain positive Laws. And Johannes de
Parisijs, de potost. Regal. and Papal. ca. 10. Some say a Presbyter has the
same power in his Parish, that a Bishop has in his Diocese. From which their
confession it will evidently follow that Ministers ordained by Presbyters, to
whom the care and government of the Church belongs are true Ministers. In
Alexandria and all Egypt, the Presbyters gave Ordination, when a Bishop was
not present, as Augustine and Ambrose both confess. Ambr: ad Ephesians. c, 4,
August. Quest, Nov, and vet. 4, 101, Council. Nicen, can. 4, Council. Arelatens.
2. c. 5. Con Affris. can, 16 Bellar. de Eccl. l, 4, c. 8, s. Ex quo. Gratian
Decr: did. 23 c. 8, Theodoret hist lib. 5, c. 23. Socrates hist. lib, 4, c.
35, Gr. Johan. Major, in 4 sent: did, 25, qu. 3 inter oper: Gerson: Paris:
1606 p. 681 Greg: 1, lib. 12, ep. 31. indict 7. Bedal, 1, c, 27. Gratian. 1,
par: did. 93, ca, 24, and did. 95, can: 5. Gratian: par. 2, c, 9 qu, 2, c.
Lugdunens: Calvin: Justit: l, 4 c, 2, s. 11. Chamier panstr: Tom, 2, l, 16 cap.
4, S. 9. Iun: animad: in Bell de cleric. c, 14, not. 2, etc, 3, not. 59,
Chamier: Ibid: c. 6, s. 11. Sed Catholici negaut consquentia^, and sciunt posse
illa omnia extare in media haeresi, and inter Apostatas: Quod si nostri negari
incipient Apostatae, cur Fararius, cur ejus Mecaenas, Jacobus Davius nunc
Cardinalis, non renunciarunt Baptismo apud nos (quos ille disputat apostasiam
fecisse) recepto: and non jusserunt se denuo ting?? Author. imperfect. oper. in
Mat. hom. 49. Omnia haes, quae sunt proprie Christi inberitate, habent and
haereses illae inschismate: similiter Ecclesias, similiter and ipsas Scripturas
Diviras: similiter Episcopos, caterosque ordines Clericorum: similiter
Eucharistiam, and caetera omnia, etc.


And hereof the grounds and reasons are evident. For on the one side it
appears, the Ancient Church did not hold her Constitutions to be absolutely
essential to the calling of a Minister or to the semper esse thereof, as if
the omission or nonobservation thereof did make them no Ministers. Bishops by
the Ancient Constitutions of the Church were to be ordained by three other
Bishops near adjoining: But instances there be manefest, that the Church has
dispensed with these Canons. Pelagius the first (as Anastasius writes in vita
Pelagij) was consecrated of two Bishops only. Johannes de Perusio, and Bomu de
Ferentino, and Anareas Presbyter de Ostio, Evagrius Bishop was consecrated of
Paulinus only. Moses refusing to be ordained of Lucius was created Bishop of
them who were banished into the mountains. The Bishops of France only
Dionysius ordained. It is an humane constitution, says Johannes Major, that a
Bishop should be ordained of three, invented for solemnity, not as absolutely
necessary. Presbyters or Elders were ordained by the Bishop. The rest of the
Presbyters then present laying on their hands. But seeing Bishops were greater
than Presbyters, rather by the Custom of the Church, than by divine
institution, this was not simply required to the essence of ordination; but
according to the Custom and Ecclesiastical Ordinances. The Chorepiscopi also
who were nothing but Presbyters, were allowed to ordain by the leave of the
Bishop.

And on the other side, if they be not lawful Ministers who receive their
Ordination from Bishops, the Churches of God throughout the world, have been
destitute of lawful Ministers for the space of this fourteen or fifteen
hundred years, which the Non-conformists will never affirm. As Rome it self
is a Church, as the Church is opposed to Turks, and Infidels, and as
Heretics, specially they whose opinions are not in specie (as they say)
pernicious, CAN Stay. 2. page 11.
are the Church: So in Rome and amongst Heretics, so much truth of Ministry
is found, as the acts they do are not void altogether and of none effect.

The doctrine of the Nicolaitaus (which was, that adultery and fornication were
no sins, and that men might communicate with the sacrifices of Idolaters in
their Idol Temples. Iren. l. 1. c. 27. Epiphan. 1. Tom. 1.) Was not (you say)
in the judgment of the Churches at Pergamus and Thyatira esteemed as a thing
that might not be born withal. If Pergamus and Thyatyra, so grievously
corrupted were true Churches, The receiving of Ordination from the hands of a
Bishop does not so leaven the Ministry as to make a nullity thereof, or make
it unlawful for others to join therewith in the worship of God.

A Bishop ordained per saltum, P. Aureolus in 4. Sent. did. 24, art. 2
Capreolus did: 25 art, 2. Cusan. concord: cathol. lib. 1. cap, 4. Membrum suo
officio non contentum, sed cupicus prae ripere alienum, conturbat corporis
ordinem totum, etc. sic singulorum ornamenta non sunt alijs congrua, sed
unumquodque requirit sua, and abijcit aliena. Gratian. did. 89, cap. 1. They
that hold the Office of Bishops to be of GOD, do hold, that the Church cease
not to be a Church, in which this degree is not to be found.
that never had the Ordination of a Presbyter, can neither consecrate and
administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, nor ordain a Presbyter, himself
being none, nor do any act peculiarly appertaining to Presbyters. Ordination
therefore is reserved to the Bishop, not in respect of superiority in degree of
ministry above his brethren, for if he be no Presbyter he cannot make
Presbyters, but for order sake and to prevent Schism and division, being for
substance of the same order and Consecration with them. If one member in the
body challenge to it self that office which belongs to many, it breeds some
disorder and confusion, but makes not a nullity of that which is done.

Succession in the Apostles Doctrine is an essential and unchangeable note of
the Church, which wheresoever it is found, does argue truth of ministry in
that society, for the Preaching of the Word and administration of the
Sacraments, to draw men to internal Communion. For that particular Church is
the true Church of Christ which retayneth unity with the Catholics, sc. the
unity of the head, the unity of the body, the unity of Doctrine, and unity of
the Spirit. Johan. Major l. 2. hist de gest: Scotor. cap. 2. scribit, Scotos
per sacerdotes and Monachos sine Episcopis in fide eruditos esse usque ad An.
Dom. 429. adeo ut Ecclesia scotitae plusquam: 230 annos floruerit absque
regimine Episcopali, Nam Religionem Christianam suscepit Scotiae An. Dom. 203.
ficu^ consentiunt Historic^ omnes Ames. Bell enerv. tom 2. de Eccles. Forb:
Iren. lib, 2. cap. 11, prop. 10. Bilson perpetual Church Government Epistle to
the Reader. I have always had before mine eyes, the most of them are Brethren
for the truths sake, etc A. W. Answer to late popish Articles page 73. Iun
animadv. in Bell cont. 5, l. 1. cap. 3. The right and power of giving
Ordination to the Ministers of the Church, belongs primarily and wholy to
Christ, who communicates the same with his Bride the Church. Both the
Bridegroom for his part, and the Bride for her part, have delivered this
power of Ordination to the Presbytery jure divino, afterward the Presbytery
conferred jure humano this power upon them, who were specially called Bishops,
etc.
Aerius was called an Heretic in the time of Epiphanius, not for his opinion,
but for his separation which he made together with it. For so the Fathers of
the first Constantinopolitane Council, Can. 6. which in the book of Canons is
169. Haereticos autem dicimus eos qui olim ab Ecclesia abdicati sunt, and qui
postea a nobis anathemati (...): praeter hos autem and qui se sanam quidem
fidem profiteri (...) subassumunt, segregaverunt autem sese and adversus
Canonicos nostros Episcopos congregationem faciunt.

Howsoever therefore the Non-conformists dissent from others touching the
Office and calling of Bishops: as it is esteemed a degree of ministry above
Pastors and Ministers of the whole Diocese, who leave the care of Preaching to
particular flocks, unto others, and challenge that as peculiar to themselves
which is common to others, or properly belongs to many: yet they never denied
the word Preached by them that profess the entire faith, and the Sacraments
administered by them, to be the true effectual Ordinances of Jesus Christ. And
most that approve the calling of Bishops, deny not that there may be a
Presbytery, but that a Presbytery is so fit for a Monarchy, being of opinion,
that the form of government is left to the discretion of every Church. And
both sides profess, that there is not any difference betwixt them, which may
either deprive them of salvation by the death of CHRIST, or bar them from
living brotherly and Christianly as members of one and the same Church.

It is a rule, you say. That no man can give more to another than he has
himself. But this rule of Law is unskilfully applied, or else while you
dispute against one false ministry you set up another, or destroy the
ministry altogether. For the community of the faithful have not power to
preach the Word, or administer the Sacraments, and he that derives his
authority from them, which they have not to give, is no true Minister. If they
be false Ministers, who derive their authority from them that have it not, then
they that derive it from the Church as the Primitive and immediate subject must
go in that number. For the Church has not that authority, and she cannot give
what she has not. Bellar. de Sacram. I. 1. ca. 26. Hussilae ordinationes
sacerdetum a Romano pontifice petere consueverant. Hier. in Dialog. advers.
Luciferian. Luciferiani admittebant baptisma collatum ab hereticis, sed non
ordinationem. Bell. ubi supra. Johan 12. a Leone 8. antipapa schismatico
ordinatos dicere compulit, pater meus nihil habuit sibi, nihil mihi dedit. Nic.
1. Ep. 1. Si execrabilis utique and non and bilis, sinon audibilis inefficax.
Eusebius. hist. l. 7. c. 2, 3, 4, 8, and H^rm. Conf. conf. Behem. art. 12. de
Bapt. Great. par. 2, c, 1. q. 1 c. 30.31, 32, 33 etc 40, 46, 47. Bell. de facr.
l. 1, c, 26, and de Eccl. l. 3. c, 9.. Resp. igitur. Iun. animadv. Contr. 4, l,
3, c, 9. not. 1.1. Greg. Naz. orat. 40 Sint duo annuli, alter aureus, alter
serreus Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 15 s. 16. and Antidot. council. Trid. ad can. 12.
The Classis or Presbytery (you will say) has no authority to ordain a
Minister, which is to administer in another congregation, and he that derives
his authority from them that have it not to give, is no true Minister. If the
people and guides of the Church both consent, they have no authority to call
or consecrate an unlearned, covetous, profane, heretical Minister, and he that
derives authority from them that have it not to give, is no Minister, and that
which is done by him is of no validity, his prayers are not heard, the
Sacraments administered by him are not seal of the covenants or internal
communion with Christ or his faithful people. A false Church or ministry has
no power to call and ordain a Minister or to give him power to preach the
pardon of sins, or dispense the seals of grace; and the authority granted by
them that have it not is a mere blanke. These and such like are the proper
consequences of this rule misapplyed; All which no fort of Christians ever
admitted as sound and true. The Papists are very forward to challenge the
reformed Churches as no true Churches, because they have no true Ministers, but
such as were ordained by Heretics or are fallen into heresy. And yet when
they have spent their breath they dare not deny, but baptism administered by
Heretics who hold intyre the form of Baptism, is true, and so the Lords
Supper and ordination likewise: For the impiety of the Minister cannot pollute
the purity of divine mysteries, neither shall they be ineffectuall to the
children of God, although dispensed by Judas the Traitor. Heretics have not
(says Bellarmine) the remission of sins formally; but they have it
ministerially, as a servant who has not one farthing of his own, may carry
many thousands of his Masters to some other man. In things natural and
artificial the effect is not like to the instrument, but to the principal
cause; as heat is the instrument of fire, though it have not the substantial
form of fire, and the baptism which is administered, and the word which is
preached of wicked men, is not the baptism or word of wicked men, but of
Christ. Anatolius was consecrated of Dioscorus, Felix of the Arians. See
Gratian: decret. cap. 1. qu. 1. cap. 32.33, 34, 35, 36. 37, 47.

Every Minister of the Gospel derives his authority, gifts and office
immediately from Jesus Christ; the Church, people, patron, Presbytery or Bishop
are only Stewards to set him in Office, whom the Lord has designed; Aug.
Consess. art. 8. Gratian. did. 19. can. 8. Cusan. concord. Cathol. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Ex quo nunc apparet ad salutem membrorum Ecclesiae, fictos in exercitu
existentes, effectualiter ministrare Bilson Christian sub j. part 3. p. 102.
AARON was called to that office not by Moses, but by God Himself, though he
were anointed by Moses hands, Heb. 5. Cath. Cons. p. 130. Yates model. of
Divinity, page 257. Mason: Success. of Bishops, published by authority a^. 1614.
wherein if any one or all of them shall challenge more than of right
appertains to them, or do ought out of partiality seditiously, tyrannically
or disorderly, in so doing they deserve blame, but that which is done is not in
every respect void, and of none effect, as it has been showed at large. The
power of ministration is received from Christ and not derived from men either
formally or vertually, for they have it not to give: but the designation of the
person, is by m^n ministerially or instrumentally.

Can. Neces. of Separat. Page 38.
The Conformists keep much better to their grounds than the other do. For
they profess down right that their ministry is from the Church of Rome, so
that if the Popish Bishops, Priests and Deacons be good, theirs be good also,
they being from them. Now no doubt these men do well perceive that their
ministry cannot possibly be justified unless it be by this way of dispute.
In this respect their judgment and practice is one, and so far they are to
be commended, and I verily think, that if they were sure that the ministry
brought into the Land by the Prelates from Rome is false and Antichristian, as
the Nonconformists affirm it to be, that many of them would not hereafter ever
have any spiritual communion with it. Truly it would make a man admire if he
should understandingly compare together the writings of these two companies,
touching a Church ministry. For in their opinious about it, they are as
contrary each to other, as light to darkness, Christ to Belial,
righteousness to unrighteousness, notwithstanding though so different in
judgment, yea they will communicate together in one ministry; but one of
these against knowledge offend surely, let them look well to it. For to him
that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin, that is, his
fault is so much the more, and propertionably his condemnation shall be without
repentance.

ANSWER.
Instead of sound arguments, we have here your rash and unadvised censure, the
one of these (you say) against knowledge offend surely.

But what evidence can you bring to justify this condemnatorie sentence? or
how can you reconcile your self unto your self herein? CAN Necess. of
separat. page 30. August. de civ. Dei lib. 5. c. 17. Nihil est loquacius
vanitate, quae non ideo potest quod van tas; quia si volue it, plus etiam
clamare potest quam veretas.
Here you tell us, the Conformists many of them at least offend not against
their Conscience, and formerlie you express your Charity to the
Non-conformists, that although their practice is not strictsie answerable to
their profession, and therefore do give just occasion to the Prelates to
insinnate against them hypocritical ends: yet you for your part are other wise
minded than the Bishops in this thing, and do think that they do of
Conscience condemn the state of that Church: but do not maturely consider the
responsive conclusions which follow upon their principles. These were your
thoughts then, and what should occasion this sudden change? And if you will
weigh what you have written, of necessity you must accuse your self of gross
inconsiderateness in saying you know not what, and perverting men's words of
all sorts, or of sin against Conscience if you write what you know to be
false. Considering how you deal in both your books throughout, I scarce know
an Author, who has more need to look home than your self.

It is true the Conformists and Non-conformists have written on both sides one
against the other in matters of Church Government and Ceremonies, (and perhaps
with bitterness more than beseems) wherein always the forwardest men have
not been of the greatest judgment or best moderation: And therefore every thing
that is written must not be interprered as the judgment of all, or most of
either side, but as the private opinion of the penman; which falls out in
all controversies amongst all sorts. But whatsoever outcry you make of
contrarieties, there is no point of that weight and moment, controverted
betwixt them, as might justly hinder communion together in the Ordinances of
Religion. If their contention had broken forth to such an head, they might have
been answered more justly, the one or both sides, to offend of fury, if not
against conscience.

The Conformists (you say) keep much better to their grounds than the other
do, Calfeh. against Mar. cap. 1. page 21. b. Somebuild timber, and hey, and
stubble, yet must we not take the hope of Gods mercy from such evil car
penters, as lay so rotten a covering upon so sure a building, whereas
otherwise, they offending in tristes, be sound enough in other matters, and
stick to Christ the only substantial and true foundation.
for they consesse down right that their Ministry is from the Church of Rome.
It seems, you did neither much care, nor enquire what they profess, else you
might have seen, they say and profess in this point as the others do. The
Conformists (I use that word because you are pleased so to speak) maintain
against the Papists, that the first Bishops who labored reformation in this
kingdom, did receive their ordination from Romish Bishops, and had such
calling as was to be found in that Church. But do they only acknowledge so
much? was not this evermore received for a truth in the ancient Church, that
ordination received from heretics, not erring in the maine fundamental truths
directly, was true and effectual? Do not all reformed Churches which have
separated from the abominations of Rome profess that the first reformers
amongst them received some ordinary calling in the Church of Rome, which
remained in that time of the visible Church corrupted? For some of them were
Bishops, some Priests and Doctors approved of the Universities, and ordinary
Churches: many of them preached, the Gospel and administered the Sacraments
before excommunication or persecution raised by the Adverfaries, in that they
were sent unto, or set over several Churches or congregations, in which they
ought to execute their office or ministration, therein they received
commandment to preach the Gospel. If men that sent them did mix anything else
to their calling, they must be obedient to divine institution, not to humane
addition. So being after an ordinary manner sent of God singularly, they were
extraordinarily stirred up of him to promote and set forward his kingdom.
Rivet. Cathol. Orthe. tract. 2. q 8. s. 3, Belthaz Lydias no. in disp. Tabari.
c. 11. Whit, de ecc. q. 5. c. 6. Bucer. Siquid boni fuit in successione,
vocatione ordinatione Ecclesia, jum cum primos nostros doctores. Deminus
excitavit, id totum in illis si fuisse dixerimus, quid cantra obycient
po^lificit? Number exim cedo vel. Judaei, vel Turcae, vel Barbari, ac prophans
homines de reformanda Ecclesia prim verba facere, ac non potius viri gravissimi
doctissimi que Ecclesia passoris?
Thus Luther, Hus Wickliffe and others were called both ordinarily and
extraordinarily: an ordinary calling they received in a corrupt Church, and
extraordinarily they were stirred up to fulfill the Ministry they had
received, according to the commandment of God, and not after the traditions of
men.

It is generally received for a truth at this day, that Baptism administered by
heretics, who err not in the maine fundamental truths of Baptism, In the
ordination of bishops it is said, Interrogamus te, si omnem prudentiam tuam
quantum tua capax est, natura divinae scripturae sensibus accommoder evolueris,
vis ea quae ex divinis scripturis intelligis, plebem cui ordinanduses and
verbis docere and exemplis Accipe Euangesi^? vade and praedica populo tibi
comm^sso
or deny not the essential form of Baptism, is true for substance. And if
Baptism be true and must be reverenced as Gods ordinance deserves, there is
some truth of Ministry amongst them. They that think the basest of Rome,
will acknowledge the Baptism administered by Priests and Jesuits to be true
for substance. And if the Baptism of God may be received or derived from
their Ministry, it is no absurdity to affirm, that the first seekers of
reformation derived authority from God to preach the Word and administer the
Sacraments by their Ministry, or by them, as Stewards used of God to set them
in office. The differences which they put between Baptism and the Ministry
are to no purpose at all to the point in hand. For let them disser in what they
will, herein they agree, that in what society soever, the truth of Baptism is
to be found, therein is some truth of Ministry to be found, though
mavelous corrupt and polluted.

The calling of the Pope and his adherents is earthly, false, and divellish, as
they stand in relation to him. But so is not the calling of every one that was
set in office by them in every respect. For some things might be of men, and
some things were of God. For they derived their authority from God, and not
from them, and therefore though the quality of the proper calling of Priests
and Jesuits be earthly and carnal, it is not necessary the calling that
others receive by them, but from God, should be of the same nature, quality or
condition. And though that calling amongst the Papists was whole corrupt, yet
not wholly, because that which is instituted by God, Calfeh. art. 4, page 105.
Chry. This is my sacrifice to preach the Gospel, my svvord is the Gospel. CAN
Neces. of Separ. p. 233.
is not made void by the corruptions of men, The Ministry of Priests
considered in the Mass (if I may so speak) is corrupt and rotten, as they are
ordained to offer sacrifices propitratorie for the quick and dead, it is the
ministry of the papal apostacy and not Christ's, but as they are ordained to
preach the Gospel and to baptize, so we cannot say their ministry is not of
Christ at all, or that it is a mere nullitie. If you had considered this
distinction advisedly you would have been more sparing in your censure, or at
least given some weighty reasons of your affirmation. But it is easier to blow
away an argument with big words, than to untie the knot in due order. Azor.
instit. Moral. l. 2. c. 19. Ames. Bell. enervat. tom. 2. ca. 2. de vocal
minist. p. 80. Sadeel. de^eg^^. vocat. Minist page 64. Extraordinaritie dicitur
duobus modis, aut enim de iis intelligetur qui ita ab ordine vero ac legitime
discedunt, ut ordinem ipsum violenr. etc. aut extraordinarium dicitur cum amore
solito eoque corrupto, ita receditur, ut ad verum ordinem qui interruptus
fuerat, redeatu: Quod quidem primis nestris docto thus usa venisse agnoscimus.
CAN Stay. sect. 2, p. 51.
The papists themselves teach, In Episcopo haeretico manner potestatem
conferendi ordines, quia id facit nomine, institutione and authoritate Christi,
ideoque ab haereticis Episcopis ordinatos, and ad Ecclesiam redeuntes, non
iterum ordinari. Aliqui etiam tenent hariticos Episcopos potestatem quoque
jurisdictionis non amittere.

If the Nonconformists hold any thing extraordinary in the calling of these
prime reformers and servants of God, it is not absolutely but in some respect
only. And the same is affirmed by Conformists also. Extraordinariam dicimur
quorundam ordinariorum Ministrorum vocationem, eo tantum sensu quo Sacerdotes
pontificii quaedam ab ipsis Jesuitis dicuntur legitimo jure extraordinario: And
a little after, Sic eo nomine tantum vocatur, quia recedit in aliqua part ab
ordine jam depravato, ut possit illum restaurare.

Compare therefore what they have written together, and you shall find nothing
which might hinder their communion in the worship of God. You say the
Scriptures approve not, of rending away from true Churches, for any corruption:
I use the word (any) because so long as we acknowledge the Church to be true
(whatsoever her sins are) a separation from all communion with it, is utterly
unlawful. But whatsoever the Conformists or Nonconformists have written one
against another in this point of the Ministry, they never denied the nature
and essence of a true church to be found among us, and therefore cannot be
thought to offend against conscience, in that they hold communion together, in
that which is good, and of God.

SECT. 7.
CAN Stay ag. Sect. 3. page 58.
THe sinful office of the Teacher becomes his sin who practices will worship
with him. For hereby he enwrappeth himself into the guilt of his office. To
hear such a Minicter is to honor, approve, and uphold his office of
Ministeris. To yield any approbation, liking, or reverence, unto men's
institutions in the exercise of religion, is sin. But in hearing Antichristian
Ministers, d.. 4. p. 61.
there is approbation, liking, and reverence, yielded unto men's institution in
the exercise of religion, Mat. 15.9. Ps. 6.4. Col. 2.20, 21. De. 5.9. 1 Cor.
6.17. Hos. 2.16. Exodus 23.13.
therefore it is sin. The Major cannot be denied, for the Scriptures teach us
the very thing. Besides the most judicious Writers affirm it too.

The Minor is as clear, For first, It is not possible that men can come to
Antichristian Churches to worship God, but they must by their precence there,
show reverence and honor to the public fall state and ministry.

ANSWER.
HEre you come over with the same text of Scripture and the same arguments,
whereunto answer has been given already. But I must follow you in that path,
wherein you are pleased to go before me. 1 Will Worship is unlawful, both in
the teacher, and them that communicate with him in that worship. But the
preaching of the word and administration of the Sacraments in our assemblies is
not will worship, but the ordinance of Christ. 2 To yield any approbation,
liking, or reverence unto men's institutions, devised, and to be exercised with
opinion of holiness, Babing in Lev. 10 Calv. in loc. Iun. anal. in loc.
Piscat. ibid.
necessity, and worship, is sin. And if this be the meaning of your
proposition, we confess the Scriptures teach this very thing, and judicious
learned Divines affirm it. And what use there is of heaping up Authors to
prove that which is most willingly assented unto, I cannot tell. The Lord has
laid down the way and manner of his worship, and has not left it to any
creature to meddle with, but according to his prescription and appointment. CAN
Stay, 5. p. 40.
The outward worship of God must be strictly done according to his
commandment. A good intention there has no place, works devised by man's
fancy, have not only no promise of reward for doing of them, but contrariwise
great threatenings and maledictions of God. Q. Eliz. Injunct. 3.
But all institutions of men in the exercise of religion, such, to wit, as be
simply matters of order, or appurtenances of worship, as time, place, method,
phrase of speech, stinted catechismes, forms of blessing and administration of
the Sacraments, etc. be not of that nature, neither does every thing
concerning the qualification and exercise of ministry belong to the second
Commandment. So that all institutions in general are not condemned in
Scripture, nor disliked by godly and learned men, so the general given for
direction in such cases be observed. 3 We hold it unlawful outwardly, and but
in appearance, to join with Idolaters in their Idolatry: Many words in this
matter might well be spared: But we desire to see your commandment, why for
every particular act, that in a large sense is Idolatrous, adjoined to the true
worship of God, Calfeb. against Mar. art. 10. p. 185, 186.
we should forbear our presence at the worship it self, or be said to
communicate in the sin there committed? For then no man might present
himself with good conscience, at any public worship of GOD, wherein any thing
is done amiss, for matter, or manner, which is in effect to say, he cannot
be present at any at all. 4 To communicate in the ordinances of God with the
Ministers of the Church of England, is not to like, approve or reverence the
institutions of men, in the exercises of religion, nor to communicate with the
Teacher in his sin, nor in ought else that is amiss. For the worship is of God
both for matter and manner. And put case, the Minister be disorderly chosen,
enter not as he ought, be Symoniacall, covetous, froward, corrupt, idle,
scandalous, do the people partake in his sin, in that they make use of his
Ministry? No Scripture teaches any such thing, no reason does confirm it, noe
approved authors ever said it. That which you allege for proof, falls
utterly short.

It appertains to the virtue of truth, Dav. determ. 7. p. 40.
that as a man shows himself by external signs, so he is indeed to be
esteemed. And such as frequent or repair unto unlawful assemblies, for the
public worship of God, by their being there, are to be reputed of the same
religion, or else dissemblers, as it were to have no care of religion, knowing
God, Doway annot in 4. King. 5.19. p. 778.
but not glorifying him as God. But herein you have misrelated the Doway
translators, for their words are, But in a Christian country, where all bear
the name of Christians, especially where men are at controversy about the true
Christian Religion, all that frequent or repair unto the same assemblies, for
public service of God, are to be reputed of the same religion, or else
dissemblers. Bodily presence at false worship, by which they show a liking unto
it is unlawful. To eat of meats sacrificed unto Idols in the Idol Temple,
Your condemning the worship of God performed in our assemblies as pernicious
idolatry wherein is it a lesser sin han the Popes prohibition of public
prayer, and restraint of the Word and Sacraments throughout the Realm? you can
neither show us warrant for it an the Scriptures, nor example of it in the
Church of God. You that so teach and censure stand guilty of great impiety
and they that hearken unto your persuasions, are partakers of your iniquity in
some sort, of the vvrong imaginations of Christians, Aug. in Tract. ^o 19.
says, Quae omnia idola cordis sunt. T. Caepl. 1. art. 3. page 4.
is to communicate with Idolaters. These things are evident and freely granted:
But the Assembly met to call upon God, in the mediation of Jesus Christ alone,
to hear the doctrine of salvation, soundly and purely preached, to receive the
Sacrament rightly administered, is not a false idolatrous assembly: they that
repair unto it, be not Idolatrous ^^false worshippers. If you esteem of them
as they show themselves by out ward signs, you must esteem them to be of the
true religion, and the true worshippers of God according to his will; The
ministry in that assembly to be true, sound and faithful and of God of
substance. In this lies the point of the controversy, which you are contented
to pass by in silence, without any proof at all.

But if any humane frailty or infirmity cleave to the ministry or
congregation, in respect of doctrine, manners, laws, government or order,
which concerns not the life and soul, but only the safety of the Church or
welfare of Religion. In these a Christian does not partake by his presence at
the ordinances, as the Scripture, reason, and the approved practice of the
Saints in all ages of the Church do plentifully witness. This is the judgment
and practice of the Nonconformists, and therefore they profess they praise God
for this reformation, so far forth, as it is agreeable to the Word of God,
they are glad the Word of God is preached, that the Sacraments are administered;
that which is wanting they desire to be added, that which is overmuch cut off.
But that a Christian must separate from the Word and Sacrament, by reason of
some superfluities or defects, is no responsive conclusion, that can be
gathered soundly from their writings.

CAN Stay. Sect. 5. page 66.
In preaching of the truths of the Gospel by a false Minister, an Idolatrous
act is performed. For Divine worship is not to be determined by a particular
thing (howbeit in it self good) but as the essential parts belonging thereto
(whether they are persons or things) are kept and observed. The Church of Rome
in Baptism uses water, and in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper gives bread
and wine otherwhile too: does this clear their administrations of Idolatry? I
think all men do think that Vzziah committed an Idolatrous act, 2 Chronicles.
26.16.
when he invaded the Priests office. But what made it so? took he unlawful
incense? no. Used he strange fire? no. Offered he prohibited Sacrifice, or
upon a wrong Altar, No: Where then lay the fault, the Scripture tells us,
Verse 18.
it pertained not to him to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the sons of
Aaron. To apply this, if his act were Idolatrous because he wanted a calling,
howbeit observed many truths of the law. By the same reason the Church acts of
Artichristian Ministers are Idolatrous, yea, and as for the truths which they
preach, this cleares their acts no more from Idolatry, than Vzziahs true
Incense and the Altar quitted him from transgression.

ANSWER.
Your great words are of small force, CAN. Stag.. 3. p. 56.
for should I speak my conscience, (it is your phrase,) They are words without
weight of reason. For still you presuppose the Ministry of the Church of
England to be false and idolatrous, which is to beg, not to conclude the
question. But that being presupposed, let us see how you go forward. In
preaching the truth of the Gospel by a false Minister, an Idolatrous act is
performed, you say. But does the Scripture say so? Do you read it in the Law,
or in the Prophets, in the Apostles or in the Evangelists? The Scribes and
Pharisees were false, Ministers, but it was not an Idolatrous work in them to
expound the Law of Moses, or dispense other Church ordinances, at that time
commanded. The popish Priests and Bishops are false Prophets, but the simple
administration of Baptism by them is not an idolatrous act. The Minister that
is profane, and hates to be reformed, is a false Minister, and has nothing
to do to take the covenant of God into his mouth, but the Word preached by a
treacherous Judas, proud Diotrephes, covetous Demas, or one that envieth the
prosperity of Saints, and peace of Jerusalem, is not an Idolatrous act. If it
be Idolatrous in him that performs it, yet it does not follow, that it is
idolatrous in them that join in the ordinance. Let it be idolatrous in the
priests, who despise knowledge, and live profanely, put case Elies sons, to
offer sacrifice, it is idolatrous likewise for the people to appear before God
in his holy Temple.

That Vzziah committed a grievous offense, when he invaded the Priests office,
all men think. In what respect all men conceive it to be an idolatrous act I
cannot say: but all false Ministers do not usurp the Priests office, as
Vzziah: nor all things done by false Prophets, Ex. 30.7, 8. Psalm. 141.2. Apoc.
8 3. Moller in Ps. 141.2 Heris. ibid. Deod. Bib^. Ital. annot in Psa. 141.2 and
Apoc. 8.3. Oriin Ios. hom 17. tom 1. Est in coelis all re. Paschal. Rhadbert.
in Lam. Ier. l. 2. Biblioth pat tom. 9. part 1. Christus altar ^^edi u^ esse,
hostia and sacrifi^ium, pont. fex and sacerdos. Ambr. Enar. in Ps. 118. Greg.
Magan Psa 7 paenit. Altar Domini Christus. An. Ex of D^^ censure art. 15 p. 19.
to be matched with Vzziahs offering incense. For the offering of Incense was
typical, and might be a shadow of Christ's intercession, and so the act of
Vzziah might be Idolatrous, and in that particular directly cross to the
institution of God. But many Church actions typifie no such thing. Vzziah had
no calling to offer incense, but some false Ministers may have some calling to
administer the things of God, though they be not approved of God. Vzziah could
not offer incense in any respect by authority from God, but a false Minister
in one respect may be called of God, in some other to do an act ministerial,
that is, by authority from God, he may do some acts for substance lawful
and effectual, though the Minister himself be not approved. Thus the
Nonconformists, upon whose grounds you pretend to build your conclusions, let
it be as the censure reports, that his words are of a Minister, which cannot
preach Does he doubt whether he be in any respect a a Minister or no, because
he says, if I may so call him? Indeed this manner of speaking declares that
he judges him that cannot preach a man unworthy to be a Minister, but he does
not deny him altogether.

But in your esteem, all Ministers not called and ordained of that particular
Church, whereunto they do administer, and performing their authority by
virtue and authority derived from them, are false Ministers, because all other
administer by power usurped and Antichristian, which is with one breath, to
blast all the worship and service, which has been done unto God in the
congregations of his Saints, for this fourteen or fifteen hundred years or
more.

CAN. Stay. Sec. 5. page 76.
It is very true said of one, Lavater. In Josh. 22, hom. 63.
we ought not to conclude of an action that it is good, because it has in it
something which in it self is so, and this is true, as in things divine, Omne
totum suis partibus ordinatur, mensuratur, and determinatur.
so in humane too. For it is a known tenent of Philosophers, The whole is
composed, measured and determined of all the parts.

ANSWER.
It is true, an action is not good, Aqu. 1.2. qu. 8. art. 3. Cameron pral^ct.
Tom. 2. p. 49. Amb Catharin in the Council of Trent. l. 2. p. 224. CAN. Stay.
Sect. 6 page 85. Rutgers. instit. Metaphys. l. 2. cap. de Bon. Quemadmodum
convenientia ad rationalem Naturam, ^^ve dictamen rectae rationis consurgit in
actu honesto ex bonitate objecti finis and aliarum circumstantiarum: ita
contraria disconvenientia seu defectus in malo culpae consurgit, ex defectu
illorum in action, ita ut si vel minimum contrariu^ desit, actus exeostatim
reddatur culpabilis five pectaminosus. Dionys. dixit. Bonum est ex integra
causa, malum autem ex quolibet defectu. Revet. in Hosea 4.14. p. 152. Job 14 4.
Hag. 2, 12, 13. See Iun. i^ lo.
unless all circumstances required to the doing of a good act be observed: but
the act good in it-selfe is evil in the doer, if one circumstance be evil.
For every thing that is morally good must be conformable to the rule, which,
that which is defective in any part required, cannot be. But how shall this be
applied to the purpose? Is every deficient act forthwith Idolatrous? Or that
which is by circumstance unlawful in the doer, because of his failing,
unlawful to every one that does communicate with him in the Ordinance, but not
in the defect? If a Minister preach Christ of envy, do they sin that hear
sincerely and receive the truth in love? If a man give alms in vaineglory,
does the poor man sin, who receives it in humility and thanksgiving? An
action done in one form and manner may be sin, which in another form and
manner is the true worship of God, which may be observed of him that is present
in our Assemblies.

CAN. Ibid.
As Job says, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. But
the false office is unclean, as is acknowledged. And this further may be
amplified by that passage of the Prophet, where it is showed, That holy things
are polluted by touching things which are unclean.

ANSWER.
That which is unclean cannot causally, univocallie, and properly bring forth
that which is clean, but instrumentally it may. A profane Minister may be the
instrument of God to convert a sinner from the error of his way, and
indispensation of the Sacrament, seal to the worthy receiver the pardon of his
sin, though he himself reap no profit or benefit thereby. For herein the
good that is wrought is not effected by any virtue or power in the Minister,
who is the Lords Officer or instrument, but by the power of Gods Spirit, and
his free grace, who knows how to use and bless evil instruments for his
own purpose. An unclean Officer or person pollutes the holy things of God to
himself, but not to others, who use them in faith according to the Lords
appointment. Why you should refer us to Iunius annotations I see not, unless
it be to show us your forwardness to quote Authors, which make nothing to your
purpose. For all that Iunius observes is this, That the Jews being impure and
polluted in heart, did receive no sanctity from the touch of Temple or Altar.

CAN. IBID.
If in preaching the truth no Idolatrous act is performed then it will follow,
Ibid. Sect. 11. p. 116 They need not by his vvriting leave their unblessed
standing; For so they preach the truths of the Gospel, they sin not. And
then what need is there to lay down their false office? I cannot say of this
man's Logic as Aristotle did of Theodorus his making Epithites, It is his
whole art. CAN. Stay. p. 27.
that a man may remain a Minister of a false Church all his life time,
provided he only teach the truths of the Gospel. Our reason is, for in this,
if he do no idolatrous act, then he sins not, and so consequently no just
cause of his coming out from among them.

ANSWER.
Ill might you twit your adversary with his little skill in Logic, unless
it was done in policy to hide your own loosenes in this and the like
arguments. For though it be not an Idolatrous act to preach the truth of the
Gospel in a false Church, in other respects it may be sin to continue a
member in that society, and so also to teach the Gospels Truths, As it may be
scandalous and offencive, an appearance of evil. A man may do that whereunto
he is not called, from an evil mind. Also it may be sin to continue in a
false Church, though a man teach nothing but the truth of the Gospel, because
he cannot profess all maine and fundamental truths, or that border thereupon,
nor testify against all corruptions, gross, haereticall, reallie Idolatrous,
which in Conscience cannot be tolerated or borne withal without gross
hypocrisy or dissimulation; or he cannot keep himself from the tincture of
Idolatry in practic^. As for example, though it be not an Idolatrous act for a
Popish Priest to preach the Gospel, or administer the Sacraments of Baptism,
yet it is not lawful for a Christian to remain as a member in that society,
because he cannot partake with them in the Ordinances, but he shall commit
real Idolatry, or must dissemble many grievous and hateful abominations,
which cannot be dissembled, and shall be thought to be of the same Religion
with them, or of no Religion, etc.

The multitude of Authors which you quote against hearing false Prophets, or
continuing in false Churches, do they not give other reasons why we ought to
separate from them? or does any one ever lay this down, as a truth or
foundation of separation?

In the page following you allege six reasons, which you say may be applied
against the going with others to an Idol ministry, Church or worship, etc.
But if they be of any strength, this reason whereof now we speak, is naught
worth, for they are directly cross. Here you say, If in preaching the truth of
the Gospel he do no Idolatrous act he sins not, but there, you say, he
sins many other ways.

But in all this you take that for granted, which we confidently deny, sc.
That our Churches, worship, or Ministry is false and Idolatrous. And
therefore taking the proposition in your sense, we say, It is not only lawful,
but necessary to remain Ministers or members of some Churches, which lie under
your censure as false and Idolatrous, but indeed are the true Ministers and
Churches of Jesus Christ, graced with his presence, covered with his banner,
and beautified with his Ordinances and tokens of love. And that which you call
an unblessed standing, we make no question but it is approved and blessed of
Christ, and therefore regard your reviling the less.

Can. Stay. Sect. 5. Page 73.
If a man perform an action in a state, and of public nature he is to be
considered (in respect of himself) as is that state and according to the
public Ordinances: For if the state be false and the officer unlawful, it is
familisme for him to say, I know this state is set up against the Lord Jesus
Christ, and every commer here to worship, according to the constitution, is an
Idolater, but I will have in my self a secret meaning from the rest. Id. page
77. Seeing false Churches and false Ministers are real Idols, set up by
earthly Princes, etc. Whosoever comes and bovves before those Idols cannot
escape the just blame of Idolatry, Id. page 73.
This is a sure thing, (and let it be noted) No administration performed in a
state, and by a power and constituted office, can be sought, desired and
received, but in so doing, the doer (ipso facto) really approves of that state,
power and office, be the same lawful or unlawful. And as for any man's saying
to the contrary, it is sine capite fabula, a vision of his own Head, and will
prove as good as the miracles which Iannes and Iambres wrought, even means to
harden his own heart, and some others, as they did Pharaohs, by doing them.

ANSWER.
You say it is an easy thing to Conquer, CAN. Stay. Sect. 5. page 66. We are
no such Children as to give the cause so away. CAN. Necess. of sep. p. 226.
But this we cannot give him, though he beg it shamefully, because the
thing is otherwise, as their own vvritings manifest. CAN. Stay. Sect. 5.
page 74. Calfeh. against Mart art. 3. page 86.
if begging might procure it, and if confident assertions will carry a matter,
you will not go without it. But we must not be driven from the Church, the
Ordinances and worship of God, communion with Christ and society of Saints, by
an empty blast of words: No, though you shamefully boast you have proved it by
our own writings. Do you think your bold impudent asseveration, that any
man's saying to the contrary is sine capite fabula, a vision of his own head,
will make us by and by yield to your definitive sentence, for which you can
produce neither Scripture, nor reason, nor authority but your own, as if your
ipse dixit. Pope-like were to be rested in? We are no such Children, We are
not to be feared with rattles. You must bring better matter than your vain
fictions, and sounder proof than vain repetitions of the same things over and
over, or else you must expect small credit to be given unto your words.

They that join together in the worship of God, Ambr. in Luke 6. c. 9. Fides
Ecclesiae imprimis quaerenda, in qua si Christus habitator sit, haud dubie
legenda, etc. sed siqua est Ecclesia quae fidem respuat, nec Apostolicae
praedicationis fundamenta possideat, ne quam labem perfidiae pos^it aspergere,
deserenda est. Sadeel. de legit. Minist. vocat. p. 6. Aug. Ex. 166. Our
heavenly Master gave us warning before hand to make the people secure touching
evil overseers, lest for their sakes the chair of wholesome doctrine should
be forsaken And Tract. in Ioh. 46. The Lords fold has some overseers, that be
Children, and some that be hirelings.
and ordinances of Religion, they approve the faith protessed in points
fundamental, the worship performed for the substance, Ordinances administered
and the truth of Ministry for substance, whereby these things are dispensed.
For of necessity, if the doctrine of salvation be restored, the lawful use of
the ministry is restored also. Where God is truly called upon in the
Congregation, and the Sacraments rightly dispensed, there is a true
ministry, whereby these offices are rightly exercised. But the particular
Laws, manner of Government and orders in the Church, the qualifications or
qualities of the Minister or Communicants, their disorders, carelessness, or
other miscarriage in the administration, he does not approve reallie or
interpretatively by his presence at the Ordinances. If the Ministers be
careless, proud, covetous, superstitious, enemies to true godliness, friends
to profaneness; if they aspire after dignity, love pre-eminence, prate
against the brethren, they that communicate with them in the Ordinances of
Religion, do neither in so doing countenance them in sin, nor approve their
doi^gs. If the Communicants be ignorant, earthly minded, disobedient,
profane, scandalous, they that communicate with them in the true worship of
God, and therein hold external society, because they have not liberty to
depart themselves, nor power to cast the others out, they are not defiled with
their sin, nor partakers in their transgression. And the same may be said of
orders and rites established by the constitution of men presence at the
ordinance does not enwrape a Christian within the guilt thereof, nor was it
ever the pub^lke intention of the state, that all present should approve every
particular institution or order. It suffices if they approve the faith
professed, and worship performed, which are of God.

It is true, that by words, works, example, silence, men may become guilty of
others sins, and that some kind of dissimulation is a denying of Christ. But it
is true withal, that presence at Gods Ordinances is no dissimulation, nor
participation in the sins of others, by word, example, silence or other
ways. If a man do one thing and pretend another, and hope to save himself,
by his secret meaning, you may rebuke his hypocrisy as the cause requires:
But we say, in reparing to the Ordinances of God, our heart and actions go
together, and both are allowed and approved of God.

And here consider, whether you do not directly confute your self by the
Engine of your own acknowledgment, as you phrase it.

For here you say, CAN. Stay. Sect. 6. p. 78.
no administration performed in a state and by power and constituted office can
be sought, desired and received. And in your Margin, There is a maine
difference between a man's bare presence in a constituted state, as being there
unawares, unwillinglie or by compulsion, and presence there, Jd. page 75.
of purpose to partake of the administrations. And a little before you argue
thus, whosoever takes to himself a practice, which is not grounded on Gods
Word, and therein is strict, he is just overmuch. Id. page 74. and 122
And many times you inculcate, that you are to be understood of hearing in a
Church way, and of Church officers. Now if you deal plainly herein, let the
indifferent judge whether you do not more than insinuate, that all hearing in
our assemblies is not absolutely to be condemned, but that wherein a man is
strict, that which is sought and desired. And how then can it be esteemed an
act of Idolatry, or compared to bowing down before an Image? For the worship
of an Image, though occasionally done, and that but once, with what intent or
purpose soever, you will acknowledge to be sin: and if hearing the Word
preached in our assemblies occasionallie be not a sin, you have sinned
grievously in matching it with Idolatry of the most heinous kind, and abused
both Scripture and learned Authors to countenance your impiety.

SECTION 8.
CAN. STAY against. Sect. 5. Page 74. 75.
If to hear in a false Church, be any lawful ordinary means of edification,
which Christ the only Teacher of his Church has appointed, then it is set
down by the Apostle in Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13. The reason is, because Paul there
mentions all ministerial means for the perfect and complete building of the
Church, from the first to the last. And if Christ, who in those last days
speaks evidently by his Gospel and Spirit, Id. Sect. 12. p. 117
had judged it fit, that his children should go unto false Churches, he would
certainly have made known the same unto them.

ANSWER.
The Apostle in the place alleged describes what officers Christ has given
to; and does approve in his Church, for the ministry of the word and
dispensation of the heavenly mysteries, The Papists alledg this Text of the
Apostle to prove that in the Church there has ever bin a visible succession of
Pastors or Teachers. See Rhem: annot. in Ephesians. 4 13 And the Answer which is
returned to them by our Divines will serve in this case. See Fulk answer to
the Rhem Ibid. Car^w. Ibid. Cameron Myroth. in Ephesians. 4.11. Non sequitur tamen
inde Pastores istos fuisse ejusmodi qui oves conduxerint in ea pas cua quibus
cicuta and aconitum nascatur, satis est ut duxerint in ea pascua, quibus etsi
insit virus, tamen in est unde oves pascantur.
and intimates also how they should be qualified and behave themselves in the
execution of their Office. But the Apostle says not, that the Church has, or
shall evermore enjoy such officers, both for substance of their office,
qualification of gifts and manner of dispensation, as are there commended: Nor
yet that the Church is only to hear such as be rightly qualified, and do
faithfully execute their office.

It derogates nothing from the glory of Christ's wisdom and faithfulness in
providing for the full and perfect instruction of the Church, that such Pastors
be sometimes wanting and cannot be had: for he never promised to provide
otherwise for them in all ages of the Church, but told them of the scarcity
which might come before, and in wisdom saw i^to be most for his own glory.
Christ never laid this charge upon the faithful to separate from those
teachers, which preached truly the doctrine of salvation, if any exception
could be taken against their calling qualification, manner of life or
execution of their office. The Pastors of the Church should be wise, vigilant,
holy, examples to the flock both in doctrine and conversation, not seeking
their own but, that which is Jesus Christ's; And after they be chosen, they
should execute their office with all diligence: But if they be careless,
covetous, pompous, intangling themselves in things of this world, scandalous,
yet if they preach Christ, and be not, or cannot be removed, the faithful are
bound to hear them. The Primitive Bishops and Martyrs, were neither Pastors
nor Doctors according to every circumstance, which your will require in a
Pastor or Teacher, but the faithful in those times held communion with, and
heard them as they preached Christ and him crucified, and that by the
commandment and approbation of Christ Himself, what was of God, they were
obliged to submit unto, wisely distinguishing it from that which is annexed of
man.

In the Officers of the Church, two things are to be considered.

1. The substance of their calling, which is to seed the flock of God.

2. Their qualification for this office, their care in execution, and other
accessories which may be added of man. If for substance of office their calling
be of God, we are bound to hold communion with them, though in the
qualification, execution and other adhering circumstances, some things be
amiss, which it is not in our power to redress. This our Savior Christ has
expressly taught and made known unto u^, both by his Doctrine and example, as
has been showed already.

Hereunto this one thing may be added, that many Pastors and teachers in the
Church of England be called, qualified and do carry themselves in their
charges and places according to the direction of JESUS CHRIST the chief
shepherd of his sheep, and other for substance of Ministry are Pastors and
Teachers.

CAN Stay Sect. 6. page 79.
If to hear Antichristian Ministers be to serve God in and by an Ordinance;
If in preaching the truths of the Gospel in a false Church no Idolatry be
done, then may a man worship God in a way of his own devising blameless.
Id.. 5. page 77.
way or institution devised by Idolaters and with Idolaters, then it is
unlawful. But the first is true, Therefore the second. The proposition is
undeniable by the Treatisers own confession (you should have said the
assumption, for if the Treatisers words prove ought, they must be applied
thereunto. As for the proposition they speak not to it at all. But
forwardness here and in many other places has made you forget your terms of
Art) He that hears the Ministers of the Bishops sending, and of the Parishes
sent to, he hears (in the sense of the Scripturs) false Prophets. Id page 81.
Such as hearken to Antichrists Ministers do therein approve of Antichrists
unlawful power over the false Church and the Devils donation, or his putting
of that power into his eldest son^ h^nd, Id.. 6. p. 84.
But it is not lawful to hear false Prophets. The Major is proved clearly in
defenc^ of our twelfth objection. The Minor is certain by these reasons. 1.
The hearing of false Prophets is forbidden in the word of God, etc.

ANSWER.
You busy your self to weave the Spiders web, which is good for little, long
in weaving, but soon swept down. Our Ministers be not Antichristian
Ministers, nor false Prophets, (in the Scriptures sense) because they preach
the whole counsel of God in all points necessary to salvation, and rightly
dispense the seals of the Covenant, by authority derived from Jesus Christ,
the Lord and King o^ his Church, the great Shepherd of his Sheep. At least
they are set apart to this office, which was never deemed Antichristian in the
Church of Christ.

But if we take these words (Antichristian Ministers, and false Prophets, in
your sense, for you use them in a peculiar dialect) then it is not only lawful
but necessary to hear such as you call Antichristian Ministers. For it is
commanded in the word, and acceptable service unto God, the means to build up
the Church: It is to hold communion with God, to reverence his name, to lay
hold upon Christ and lodge him in our bosom: It shows that a man is one of
Christ's sheep, because he hears his voice, and a member of his sheepfold,
the servant of the most high God: it manifests love and zeal to God, and is
ordinarily blessed to the soul and conscience of the dutiful hearer. And in
that which you allege to the contrary, you misalledge Scripture, speak evil
of the truth, revile the heritage of the Lord, and grievously wound your own
conscience.

The religion professed, and worship performed in our assemblies is true, not
only in respect of the object, but of nature, use and end, and whatsoever
circumstances are necessarily required to lawful worship. And the false
Prophets mentioned in Scripture are of one sort, yours of an other, even the
true Ministers of Jesus Christ.

But let us turn over to the twelvth objection, to hear the clear proof of
that which here you affirm, for thither you send us. CAN Stay. 12. p. 116, 117.


The Treatiser (as you call him) propounding this objection of yours, that the
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, warn Gods people of false prophets,
which the Ministers of that Church are, having an unlawful calling, makes
answer, 1 By denying that the Scriptures warn men simply not to hear false
Prophets, i.e. any false prophet whatsoever. And then propounds a distinction
of falls Prophets; that some falls Prophets were in the Church of God, and these
might be heard, as they had place in the Church, till they were orderly
repressed, or at least discovered; others were not in the Church, but simply
without, and these were not to be heard. This is the plain and direct answer
of the Treatiser, as every man may perceive, that is not grossly ignorant, or
wilfully blind. But see how you jest and dally with it unconscionably when you
had nothing to answer. 1. You say he peremptorily denies the whole objection,
and so consequently affirms, that all false Prophets may be heard. But what
new Logic is this, whereby we may learn to draw such consequences. In former
times it has been thought reasonable to deny an universal negative or
affirmative proposition, when they hold not true in all Individuals. No false
prophet is to be heard. This proposition may justly be benyed, if any false
Prophet may be heard, though all might not. 2 You add presently and with the
same breath, He unsaith what he said before. But this is a palpable and gross
calumny: For he said not, that all false Prophets might be heard by all, nor
denies what he granted at the first, that some may be heard: but plainly
implies a distinction of false Prophets, which I can hardly think you did not
perceive, though you be pleased so to pervert his words.

If there appear any deep and inextricable riddle in the words, you may fitly
apply to your self, what in this very place you report of Marcus Antonius's
soldiers, who unawares fell upon an herb that greatly distempered their
heads. You tell us, Id page 116.
The Treatiser since he lighted upon his Gourd, he is not like himself in his
other writings: and I can easily believe it, for in his other writings for
separation he is insolent, censorious, scornful and slighty: In this mild,
Christian, and for the most part more substantial.

As you deal, with your Treatiser, to scorn what you cannot answer, so you
do with others in this very argument, and that much more absurdlie, Master Br.
in maintenance of the Ministry of the Church of England, The unreasonab. of
separation, p. 2, 3, 4, 7.
as it is established by Law, distinguishes between the substance of the
Ministry, and the execution thereof, the essential parts of the Ministry,
and some accidental circumstances adhering unto them by man. For substance
(says he) the present Ministry of our Church assemblies, is the very
Ministry which Christ has set in his Church, howsoever it may in some
particular parts of the execution happily be defective in some places. The
ordinary ministry of our Church, is the ordinary and perpetual Ministry
given by Christ to his Church, Id page 10.
and such as the Princes of the earth are bound by Gods law to protect and
maintain. And if there be any corruption in and about the same which they
ought to abolish, it is accidental or personal, Page 8.
and not essential to destroy the true nature of the ministry of God. And
though it should be granted that our people stand under some kind of
observances and offices, which in their own nature and first original are in
some kind Antichristian, yet such a manner of standing cannot be said to
overthrow, though it somewhat stain the Ministry of Christ. Thus is the
substance of the answer throughout the book. CAN Neces. of Separ. p. 216, 217.
But how do you confute or take away this distinction, or weaken the force of
this answer? That you do not once assay by Scripture or sound reason, but you
cry out of shifts and trifling, and contradictions, beggarly I say^s, or ifs,
base maintenance of the vilest abominations, and justification of corruptions
generally condemned, by the same carnal and corrupt reasons which the Prelates
use to do: That it serves to strengthen the hands of the wicked, Id. page 220.
grieve the hearts of the righteous, and to discover his own vile halting, and
double dealing. The dumb dogs, caterpillars and idle bellies, never had a
better proctor than this man to plead for their unlawful standing, For he
says, The Magistrate is bound to protect their Ministry. But how can we
believe him, seeing the Nonconformists teach otherwise? The rest of your answer
is of the same mark, which for shame I will not stand to confute. You say, any
one may see by his work, Page 22^.
that he meant not to tie his conscience short, but would make a little bold
with it or the present, and so he might fetch over a sure blow upon us, He
cared not though with every stroke he made wounds through the sides of his
brethren. But if you be able, bring forth one sentence, wherein the indifferent
may see, that he has made bold with his conscience, or made the least wound
in the side of any brother, wherein he has contradicted himself or the
nonconformists, justified any abomination, pleaded for any corruption, or
spoken one word in defense of dumb dogs, caterpillars or idle bellies. And if
you cannot do this, let the indifferent judge, whether you have not offered
violence to your conscience, and made bold to wound your soul, that you might
defame the Ministry of the Gospel, and slander the gifts of God in his
servants. This practice is Antichristian, borrowed from the vilest bondslaves
of that man of sin, if not from Satan himself. But I will not defend the
Treatisers opinion, nor trouble my self further to examine your answer to
Master Br. That which I am to enquire into is, How you prove all the Ministers
of the Church of England, in respect of their office and standing, to be false
Prophets, or Antichristian, If ought can be found to this purpose, bare words
excepted.

CAN Stay sect. 12 page 119, 120.
If an unlawful outward calling make an unlawful Minister, then it makes a
false Prophet. For according to the Scriptures, it is all one thing, only
expressed in diverse terms, etc. We know no mean between true Prophets and
false, for whosoever is not a true Prophet is a false Prophet, Id. p. 121.
and whosoever is a false Prophet, cannot be a true Prophet of God. He that is
of God is a true Prophet, he that is of the Devil is a false Prophet; neither
does the deliverie and utterance of some truths, make him a true Prophet, for
then the Devil should be a true Prophet, who sometimes speaks the truth,
albeit to a sinister end. Balaam was a very witch, a wizard, a false Prophet, a
true sorcerer, famous, or rather infamous for his Divellish magic, which he
practiced among the wicked idolatrous nation. So Attersol and many others so
too, as Junius, Simpson, Ferus, Canutus, and before them Origin, Greg.
Nazianzene, Basil.

ANSWER.
As for Balaam, whether he were a Witch, Wizard or Magician, it is not
material to the point in hand. If the Treatiser did put that instance amiss,
it will not follow, that you have truly proved the Ministers of the Church of
England to be false Prophets, or soundly confuted what he answered for
himself. And if the Treatisers friends be of your disposition, you may soon
hear from them that you have answered nothing, for you have brought the
sayings and opinions of men, but reason out of the Scripture you have alleged
none to prove him simply a Witch and a false Prophet. And if the opinions and
sayings of men will serve the turn, there be some that have thought Balaam to
be a Prophet of God, Tertul. cont. Marc. lib. 4. Numb 22.19. and 2^.7. Josh.
13.22. Sept. (...), Trem. and Iun, Divinum, id est qui divinat.
and that for reasons not to be disregarded. Tertullian amongst others, thought
Balaam to be a true Prophet, and such a Prophet, as should be numbered among the
servants of God, because he professes that he would ask counsel of God, and
that he would speak nothing but what God should say unto him. And he does not
only say so, but indeed he propounds those things which he had received of
God, and which consent with truth and piety. In Scripture he is called a
Diviner, which word is sometimes used in a good sense, to note one that does
prophecy true things, or wisely and truly divine things to come. Prove. 16.10.
Sept. (...) In. Sagac. Pisc. Divinatio, i.e. quasi divina^io, hoc est
sogatitas, qualis est divinantium. Mercer. in Prove. 16.10. Isaia. 3.3. Iun.
Sagacem Pisc. Heb. Divinatorem, sed hic accipitur in bonam par^em. Sept. (...)
Conjectorem. Hieron, ariolum. Doway. Southsayer, Moller. (...) est, qu^d hoc
loco in bonampartem accipitur. Car. in Prove. 16.10. and quidem frequentissime
in Scriptura usu patur in malam partem, pro his qui artibus Diabo^i^is abdita
rimantur: sed aliquando etiam, ut Isa 13. and Ezekiel. 13.6. usurpatur in bonam
partem, pro his qui aliquid a^cani proponunt, quod legitime, vel revelatione
divina, vel solerti mvestigatione assequuti sunt.
Divination or a wise sentence is in the lips of Kings. The Judge and the
Prophet, the Diviner, and the old Man.

The Prophets divine for silver: Mic. 3.11. Sept. (...). Number. 27.7. Sept.
(...). Vulg. precium divinationis. 2 Per. 2.15. Numb 23.27. See Rainold.
censur. praelect. 201 B. Hieron. alibi nullam illustriorem de advent^^ Domini
extare prophetiam dicit sci. quam Bileami. Qui and inter quaestiones
Christianorum hanc fuisse docet, cur Balaam tam manifesta de Christo
praedixisset. Quem and ipse ad Job 32. de cognitione Abrahan ifu^sse docet. D.
Heins. ex^rcit. sacr. in Mat. 2.
which is spoken of the Prophets in Judah. Nevertheless, seeing he is called a
Diviner, as they are said to take divinations in their hands, scil. the wages
of iniquity, and as there is no divination against Israel, that is, magical
incantations cannot avail against Jsrael, whom God does protect with his
presence, I do rather subscribe to them, who conceive that he was a Witch or
Wizard, than the prophet of God.

Neither does the deliverie and utterance of some truth make a true prophet,
for the Heathen Witches and Wizards, nay the Devil himself has spoken some
truth, that he might the better deceive. But as the possession of all
supernatural truth necessary to salvation is proper to the Church: so to
preach the whole counsel of God unto his people, is the special badge of a
true Prophet, and the fruit whereby he is known. Mark this well, for (to use
your own phrase) it shows all your answer to be coecum insomnium, a vain
dream and nothing else. It is the note of a false Prophet to run when God does
not send him. But can it be showed, that ever Minister did teach the whole
counsel of God unto his flock, ^er. 14.14. and 23.21 and 27.15. Vnreasonabl.
of separation. p. 6. Though it be no new thing that the Ministers of Antichrist
should in diverse things bring the truth with them; yet this is a new thing and
never heard of before, That the Ministers of Antichrist should teach the whole
truth of Jesus Christ for the substance thereof, That they should oppose
directly and zealously against the maine and fundamental doctrines of
Antichrist, etc. (...) 42.19.
who was not sent of God? The places cited make it evident, that they whom God
did not send, they taught false things in his name: as they run when he sent
them not, so they prophesied when he spoke not unto them. In some cases it is
true the Church for a time may be without Ministers, as when the pastor is
taken away by death, or the Church dispersed by persecution, or the people
negligent to procure teachers, and the like. But ordinarily the Church is not
destitute of true Ministers, nor is there a true ministry to be found but in
the Church. And therefore seeing the society professing the true faith
entirely, and holding the communion of Saints, is the true Church: the
Ministers teaching sound doctrine in those societies, and maintaining the
unity of the Spirit, must of necessity be true Ministers.

But every unlawful Minister (say you) is a false Prophet, for these two are
all one. This is spoken ambiguously and must be distinguished before any direct
judgment can be passed upon it? What then do you understand by unlawful
Minister? Is he an unlawful Minister who is not approved of God, designed by
Christ, qualified as he ought, chosen orderly, but out of favor, partiality,
faction or schism? Or is he an unlawful Minister, who teaches corruptly,
seeks not that which was lost, binds not up that which was broken, puts not
the weak into his bosom, grieveth the godly, strengthens the hands of the
wicked and walks profanely? Is he an unlawful Minister who being a secret
heretic, CAN Necess. of Separation, page. 237. If one be ordained a Pastor,
according to Christ's institution, he has certainly lawful ministry,
howsoever things shall afterward fall out, ye^ though he should sing Mass and
Mattens as he speaks. But he asks, if any, that is in his wits will say
so? yes, and prove it also: and if he himself had not wanted some wit in this
point, he would not thus have confounded one thing so absur^ly with another,
for as a person may be a servant or subject truly and fully, and yet do
afterward the actions of thieves, rebels, traitors: so a man may take a true
Ministry by ordination, and yet in his life and doctrine do wickedly, and
^^serve justly to be deposed.
is chosen and ordained by the community where he is to administer, without
due trial and examination, or being rashly and unadvisedly elected, does after
neglect his duty altogether, teach perverse things, administer coruptly, sing
Mass and Mattens? If none of these be unlawful Ministers in your esteem, it
will be no loss to us, if we grant the proposition: for we may boldly affirm,
if you search our Ministry with a candle and lanthorn, it will be found true
and of God. If you take a false prophet and unlawful Minister in that strict
sense as to exclude all the former, there is not one Minister a member of our
Church, that can be a false Prophet. If you take all these for unlawful
ministers, then all unlawful Ministers are not false prophets in your account.
Or else, it is lawful to hold communion with some false prophets, which you
peremptorily would seem to deny.

The want of an outward calling, you say, makes a man an unlawful minister:
and so you might say, Ier. 2.8. Ter. de praescript. advers. Haeret. c. 36. Vnde
autem extran^i and inimici Aposto^i^ haeretici, nisi^ex diversitate doctrinae,
quam unusquisque de suo arbitrio, adversus Apostolos, aut protulit aut recepit.
does the want of right qualification and conscionable discharge of his duty,
for God has threatened both the one and the other, that they shall be no
priests unto him; both the one and the other are idols in phrase of Scripture.
But he can not be a minister in a society of Christians, professing the true
and entire faith, and enjoying the blessing of the Sacraments, who is utterly
destitute of an outward calling. In some Churches the calling is more complete
and exact than in others, and at some times things have been more orderly
handled than at others: but in all Churches there is an outward calling, and
effectual to the truth of the ministry.

Long since it was objected against the Nonconformists, that they say, the
Gospel is not truly preached in England, because there is no lawful calling
to the ministry, whereunto they have returned this answer: We do not say,
that there is no lawful, or no ordinary calling in England: for we do not
deny, but that he may be lawfully called, which is not ordinarily, as Luther,
Melancthon, Zuinglius: and there be places in England, where the Ministers are
called by their parishes, in such sort as the examples of Scripture do show to
have been done before the Eldership and government of the Church was
established. T.C. repl. 1. answ. to the exhor. p. 3.
I know not any that says, the Gospel is not truly preached in England, and
by those that are not of the same judgment, that the admonition to the
Parliament is of.

CAN. Necess. of Separ. page 55.
The Ministry of England, as it is established by law, does certainly depend
upon the Bishops calling wholly, and no man^ else: and if any in the Land stand
otherwise he cannot properly be said to be a Minister of that Church, but
rather is a schismatike from it, Id. p. 57.
according to the formal constitution of it, etc. The most free Parish has
but only a liberty to admit of a Minister, before made by the Bishops, so that
the people give him not any part, much less the substance of his calling, Id.
p. 61.
but a bare permission only to exercise by virtue of that calling. But none may
hear or have spiritual communion with such a Ministry, Id. p. 213.
whose calling does essentially depend upon the Bishops calling. If the
ministry of the Prelates belong not to any ordinary assemblies, then is the
same Antichristian, and so consequently is that which is derived from it. And
so much from their own principles we have formerly proved. Id. p. 213.
The Ministry begotten by the Prelatesis illegitimate and false. I say those,
which take their offices and callings from them, are bastardly Ministers. The
Ordination of Priests and Deacons by the Prelates is unlawful and
Antichristian, and the Ministry is false, so long as they do retain that
false calling, which they took first of the Bishops, Id. p. 45.
they of the Pope, and he from the Devil Whosoever he be that deals with the
holy things of God, and works upon the consciences of men, See CAN Stay.. 6.
p. 78.79.
by virtue of an Antichristian power, office and calling, him the people of God
ought not to receive, or join themselves unto. But all the Parsons, Vicars,
Parish Priests, stipendaries, etc. that stand over the Church Assemblies in
England, deal with the holy things of God, and work upon men's consciences by
virtue of an Antichristian power, office and calling.

ANSWER.
Upon this one prop lies all the weight of your building, whe^em you strangely
triumph, as if you had stopped the mouth of the Non-conformists for ever, that
either they must go back from what they have written against the abuses of the
ministry, or confess they have said and unsaid as occasions have changed, now
maintaining that as right, which even now they condemned as false and
Antichristian. And this you press over and over with great confidence and
insolency. But this stay I have plucked out of your hands already, and showed
that this exception has no weight or soundness, either from truth or
Non-conformists principles.

In answer to this renewed blast of words, I will briefly repeat what has
been proved more at large. Bilson Christian subject part 2. page 296. Bishops
have their Authority to preach and administer the Sacraments, not from the
Prince, but from Christ Himself, Go teach all Nations, etc. only the Prince
gives him publiked liberty, without let o^ disturbance to do that which
Christ commands. Id. p. 309. The charge which the Preachers and Bishops of
England have over their flocks proceeds neither from Prince nor Pope, ner
depends on the will or word of any earthly creature. Chaloner Credo, second
part. 2. He which conferres Baptism and Orders as the principal Donor is
Christ: the Bishop or Pastor confers them only as his instrument. August.
contr. Crescon. l. 4. c 6. per ministros d^spares Dei mi^us aequ^^ est, quit^n
^^illorum sed ejus est. CAN. Stay.. 3. p. 60. August. in Psalm 10. Christ sent
him that betrayed him: Bilson Christ: subject: part. 2. p. 860. The ghostly
work is Gods, the bodily service is the Priests, wherein Judas the thief,
Simon the Sorcerer, etc. may challenge as James, etc.


First, the Ministers of the Gospel, derive not their authority or office from
the Bishop, Patron, Presbytery or people, but immediately from Jesus Christ,
whose servants they are, whose words they preach, whose Sacraments they
administer, whose flock they feed, by whom they are protected, and to whom
they must give account. If he be an Antichristian Minister who derives his
authority from the Classis or Bishop, he is Antichristian likewise who derives
it from the community of the faithful: for neither the one; nor the other can
justly challenge that authority to themselves.

The Bishop, College Ecclesiastical or Church, cannot make a Minister
formally or vertually, but only as Stewards they put him in office whom Christ
the King of Saints and head of the Church has designed. Wherein, if Pastors or
people shall walk disorderly, challenging more than of right belongs unto
them, or giving up their right through sloth, negligence, ignorance or
security: or not attending unto the direction of the great Shepherd of the
flock, shall choose a man unfit or not well qualified, or shall proceed rashly,
tumultuously upon misguided affection, in that weighty business; though they
incur just blame and reprehension, yet that makes not a nullitie of the
Ministry, or of the Ordinances dispensed upon that Election and Ordination.
Your self tells us, and that from the example of the Scribes and Pharisees,
That men being lawfully called to the Ministry are to be heard, howsoever in
some qualifications defective. And if disorderly proceeding in election, or
want of just and fit qualification in the person elected, do not make the
election void: how shall the mere want of consent in the people cause a
nullity in the ministration? If the careless or wilful neglect of
administration and execution of his office cause not a nullitie of the choice,
Unreasonableness of Separ. p. 56. They may acknowledge a further calling than
that of the Prelates and yet not therein renounce the calling received from
them, for the Prelates being learned Divines and having approved their gifts,
and by words and Letter te stimoniall giving liberty to execute the Ministry
of the Gospel, they do not thereby thrust them into a Ministry, but leave
them, etc An Examine. of D. ^. Cen. p. 33.
why shall the lack of the peoples suffrage, which they voluntarily have given
away, or otherwise lost, make the ordinances dispensed by him that is chosen to
be of none effect?

2. The consent of the people is not required to make a man simply a Minister,
neither does Episcopal Ordination make a man the Minister of this or that
people. Therefore it does not hinder, but a man may be made Minister by the
Bishops according to the constitutions of the Church, and a Minister of this or
that people, by the free choice, approbation and consent of the faithful. So
in the fourth age of the Church, sometimes the people would choose a Minister,
whom they thought meet, and afterward bring him to the Bishop to be admitted
by him, as appears in the work of Chrysostom de Sacer: of the choosing of
Basil, when John Chrysostom himself gave him the slip. Sometimes the Bishop
would epsy a meet man himself, and require the consent of the people to
choose, ^s it appears by Augustine in the election of Eradius to be his
successor.

3. The Papists themselves who stand so much upon the necessity of succession,
and ordination by three Bishops, according to the constitutions of the Church,
Bellar. de Eccl. l. 3. c. 10. S. Ad Secundum.
are yet forced to acknowledge, That to know that Pastors are true, there is
required neither faith, not lawful Election, but this only that they be
acknowledged such of the Church, and that they hold the place of Christ de
facto, though not de jure. And seeing you pretend to build upon the
Non-conformists principles, you may take notice of their profession, which is
this. Baptism administered by Popish Priests is good and sufficient, and they
are to be accounted for Ministers, though they be not good and lawful
Ministers, but usurpers and intruders; The like may be said of such as without
ordinary calling, An Examine. of D. W. Cen. art. 11 page 14.
counterfeite themselves to be Ministers, and so deceive the Church. In these
the secret consent of the Church receiving them for Ministers, until their
wicked usurpation be espied, may be sufficient to authorize their ministry
toward others.

CAN. Necess. of Separ. Page. 234.
If I were not unwilling to give occasion unto the Bishops to insult over these
men, I could hence manifest much bad dealing in them; but I will forbear for
the present, and do refer the Reader to their own principles, which is, Jd.
page 239. CAN. Necess. of Separ. p. 221. Are the Princes of the earth bound by
Gods Laws to maintain the ordinary ministry of your Assemblies? then have
you from time to time shamfully mocked and abused them, in craving so earnestly
for their aid, to have and place thereof. CAN. Stay. Sect. 1. page 50.
that all Ecclesiastical officers ought necessarily to be made by the free
choice of the Congregation, wherein they are to administer. And, if they can
prove all this, I do not see, but the Controversy may easily be taken up,
between them and the Bishops, only then they have just cause to beg pardon
of them, for their pleas against their Prelacy, and the maine heavy
accusations, which they have put up both to Princes and Parliaments against
them.

ANSWER.
Here you play the Rhetorician, and make show what you could do, but that you
will for the present take some compassion upon the Non-conformists. Whereunto I
will return no other answer, than what you have made to my hand. As for your
minsing figure of extenuation, (I could hence manifest) I like it not. For you
do here none otherwise than if a Thief, when he has stripped a man out of all
that he has, would feign yet be counted merciful, in that he does not
murder him or bind him, as some others have done. Let any indifferent man read
your writings, and he will say, you have not spared your opposites, but shot at
them Arrows of bitter words, and made them as odious and vile as man can do.
But blessed is he that is not offended at the truth for such things. Look
upon your self in that which you say against your opposites. You refer your
self to their Principles, and they make nothing for you, as it has been
alreadly showed, and you might see your self, if you did not shut your eyes.

The reason which here you bring, is but your own saying, said over many
times, and indeed bewrays more cunning, CAN. Stay.. 2. page 55.
than reason, truth or Consciene, and (to speak in your phrase) sophistry than
sincerity.

For in plain terms this is your form of arguing; If the Episcopal
ordination be not a mere nullitie: Vnreasonabl. of Separ. page 54. I know none
having received Ordination from the Prelates, that need deny that they preach
partly by virtue of the Ministry which they have taken from them.

T. C. repl. 1. Ep. By exercising unlawful authority, and by taking unto them
partly such things, as belong by no means unto the Church, and partly which
are common unto them, with the whole Church, or else with others the Ministers
and Governors of the same.


if the ministry of the idle, careless, profane, yea of the learned, godly
and painful, be not a mere Idol, then have the Non-conformists just cause to
beg pardon of the Prelates: which hangs together as a rope of sand. The
ministry of the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees was true in time of the Old
Testament, and in the days of our Savior Christ: had the Prophets then and
our Savior just cause to beg pardon, because they accused them of ignorance,
pride, tyranny, contempt of the truth, oppressions, hypocrisy, as blind
guides and ravening Wolves, who spoiled and made havocke of the flocks.

The Non-conformists never deemed the ministry of the Church of England for
the substance and essential parts thereof to be false and Idolatrous, nor
craved the aid of the Prince and Parliament, to have it quite, or in part,
abolished (you have just cause to beg pardon that slander them in this
manner) But they complain of abuses in the ministry, and these they desire
might be reformed; That the ministry might be more pure and incorrupt. They
complain of the usurpation of some, who challenge that as peculiar to
themselves, which belongs to their brethren in common; who admit the basest
of the people, into the office of the ministry; do that by their sole
pleasure, which should be done by common Counsel, King Canutus made a Law by
the Counsel of his sages at Winchester. That Bishops be Preachers and Teachers
of Gods Law, and careful followers of good, works. Leg. 26. And that every
Christian learn so much, that he can the true faith and the true understanding
thereof, namely, the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, or else not to have Christian
burial, neither to be admitted whiles he lives to the Lords Table, etc. Amb.
de dignit, sacerdot. ca. 3. Quanto prae caeteris gradus Episcopalis altior est,
tanto si per negligenti^m dilabadur ruina gravior est Magna sublimitas magnam
debet habere cautelam; CAN. Stay. S. 12. p. 120: Honor grandis, grandiori debet
solici^udine circumvallors.
and disregard the consent and approbation of the Church, both in Ordinations
and excommunications: and if the ministry of the Church of England be true for
substance might they not without blame desire and crave the reformation of this
abuse? they complain of the pompous Non-residents who feed themselves and
regard not the flock, strive after preferment and heap up livings, but labor
not in the word and doctrine, nor look after the welfare of men's souls: they
accuse these as the poison and bane of the Church, or unfaithful shepherds,
who leave the flock to be dispersed and scattered, and yet they will not say,
their ministry is false or Idolatrous or a mere nullitie; do they then
shamefullly mock or abuse the Prince or Parliament, in petitioning, that this
gross corruption might be reformed! They accuse the ignorant, careless,
profane Ministers of neglect of their office, and unworthy any place or
standing of honor in the house of GOD: have they cause to ask pardon of this
also, if they shall, think their ministry may be effectual to the faithful?

A Minister lawfully called (say you) according to Christ's institution, is
incontinently upon his outward lawful calling a true Minister, let his
practices afterward be good or bad. Put case then the Church should accuse such
a Minister, utterly neglecting his charge, or inclining to say Mass and
Mattens, or loose and scandalous in behavior, as unworthie his place and
office, have they just cause to crave pardon of him, because they acknowledged
him to be a Minister, but unworthily? Many abuses not to be tolerated may
cleave to the Ministry, when the ministry it self, is not to be cast off,
as altogether ineffectuall.

SECTION 9. CAN Necess. of Separ. page 27.28.
The Learned generally affirm, Rhem. anno^. in I^. 10. anno. 1. and in 1. Cor.
10. Sect. 22.
that it is unlawful to communicate in a false ministry. Par. Com. in Matthew.
7.15 All those without doubt are to be taken for deceivers, who take upon them
the office of teaching, without a true calling and a little after he says.
That so much being discovered (...) Christian must (...) hid ^are against them,
Dow. in a Reg. 5. v. 19. and Psalm. 15. p. 56. Admon. 1. to the Parliament p.
27. T. C. reply, 1. page 83.155. CAN. Stay. p. 5.62, 63, 71, 113, 118, 119, etc.
and fly from them as from Wolves. Muscul^^ in Matthew. 7.15. says the like
Cope in Prove. 10.20. speaks as much, and gives this reason for it, because
they destroy both bodies and souls of a^ many as e^t her be^eeve or reverence
them. Zanch in Phil. 3.2. Ralloc. com. in 1 These. 5.11. page 228. Riv. in Psalm.
16. page 52.53. Oecolamp. in Isa ^^2. fol. 20. Call. in Psalm. 16. Fen. in Song,
1.6.7. Cornel. a Lapid: Com. in John Ep. 2. page 505. says, False Ministers
are favored and approved in their unlawful way, when they are bound^ Par. in
Hosea 13.2. Sedul. in 2 Reg. 5. M^^ty loc. com^p. 119 Virels Grounds, in lib.
2. p. 103. Zanch in ^rac. 3. p. 534.

ANSWER.
Blaming your Treatiser that he comes so naked into the field, CAN Stay. Sect.
12. p. 119.
you say, I never saw in my life an error held by a man of Learning, that has
less brought to countenance it than this. For whereas others do commonly
quote Scriptures (albeit mis-applyed) and allege for themselves the judgments
of other men, Hieron. in Psalm 5. Omn^ qui ma^e intillig it. Scripturas, in via
Dei corruit.
He goes not this way to work. And better it is to go plainly and simply to
work in the defense of his cause, than to wrest Scripture, mis-alledge
Authors, and abuse a show of Learning to seduce and beguile the simple. But you
have made choice of the more common, though the most sinful course. You
pretend Scriptures, but handle them amiss: Quote Authors, but chop and change
their words, force them to speak, what they never meant; and when all is done,
they will be found to make nothing for, but direct against you. Ambr. Intus in
animo perdant, modo victores abscedant. CAN. Necess. of Separ. p. 227. Tertul.
de Virgi. veland: If Christ were ever and before all, the truth is as ancie^^
and everlsting.
You make use of Logical Maxims and Theological Principles, but your
mistakes are gross and palpable in the application of them. Some men (you say)
in matters of controversy care not though they lose the peace of Conscience,
so they may gain their supposed victory. And if you have not offered violence
to your Conscience in those writings, you have not advisedly considered what
you have done.

To make this manifest in some particulars not formerly mentioned; It is an
infallible Ma^ime you say, (as Doctor Usher and others observe out of
Tertulli^n.) Whatsoever is first, that is truest, and what comes after, is
adulterate. CAN. Stay. sect. 2. p. 14. Usher. de Christ. Eceles. success. and
stat. c. 1. p. 19 Field of the Chapter lib. 2. c. 5. page 49. CAN. Stay. sect. 2.
p. 11. For with reverence to the phrase; From the beginning it was not so.

Basil. ep. 79. Non est aequum ut quae apud ipsos obtinuit consuetudo, pro lege
and canone habeatur rectae doct. inae, Henry Answ. first ans. p. 31. I grant
your Church is ancient, but I deny it to be most ancient: seeing then the most
ancient (by your own grant) is most true, etc.

CAN. Stay. sect. 4. p. 27. T. C. repl. 1. p. 79. D. T. W. The Doctors of the
Synod. 5.6. Wars are judged by their causes and not by their consequences
Bilson Christian subject part. 3. page 201.


The first in any kind or sort of things, is truest and best, so Field. This is
spoken of the prime, first, original being of each thing, which is a sure
proof of goodness and perfection. For all defects found in things are
swarvings, declinings, and departures, from their original and first estate.
For truth is before false-hood, and good before evil, and habit before
privation. But you miserably apply that Rule to the first judgment of the
separated Church in London, concerning the hearing of the Word preached, in our
English Assemblies, as if it must be truest, because it was first, and their
after judgment adulterate, because it followed.

You distinguish not betwixt the effect and the event; which I will not say was
done ignorantly or unadvisedly. To reason from the effect of things (you say)
is unsound, and unconcludable by the Scriptures. This is, as if a man would
say, the Midwives which lied to Pharaoh, did much good to the Israelites, etc.
And then you go forward to produce testimonies, that things are to be esteemed
by their causes, and not by the event, and that things are not true, because
useful.

But your Pistoler argues from the effect, not from the event, from the proper
effect, not the effect by accident, as you might easily perceive, but that you
took liberty to deride what you could not answer. Thus he argues, The
Doctrine taught in the Church of England is the sound and true doctrine of
salvation, profitable to beget faith, and to build men forward unto life
eternal (not by accident, but of it self) and is ordinarily blessed of God to
that end and purpose: Therefore it is not unlawful to hear the word preached
in their assemblies. What you talk of Caines murder, Judas his Treachery, the
good that comes by Schisms and Heresies, is only to please your self with
by-matters: for the argument is drawn from the proper effect, in respect of
means instituted, appointed and blessed of God.

This Canon is true, if truly applied, and rightly limited, CAN. Stay. sect. 4.
p. 20. and sect. 10. p. 111.
parium par ratio est, and contrariorum eadem est ratio. But as you apply it,
no good Logician would acknowledge it. For though the word which does
ordinarily beget men unto God, ought to be heard, yet we cannot conclude on
the contrary. the word which does not ordinarily beget is not to be heard. For
the word is but a moral cause or instrument of faith and repentance, whereby
the Spirit works not necessarily, but at pleasure. If therefore the Spirit
work by the word as his instrument, it is of God and we are bound to hear
it: But if God work not by it, effectually to saving conversion, it is of him
notwithstanding: So this affirmative is true, sin deser^eth death: but this
negative will not follow on the contrary, good works deserve life. For of
justice death is due to the sinner as his wages, but eternal life is the gift
of grace. The Papists argue thus. Disgrace done to an Image tends to
dishonor God; and therefore by the Rule of Contraries; Honor done to an
Image, tends to the honor of GOD. Their inference and yours turn both upon
the same hinges.

And I might truly say unto you in your own words. Ibid.
Have you not here showed your self an acute disputer, for to pull down
Bethel you build Babell; to condemn the true hearing of Gods Word, you commend
Idolatry. Consider therefore your own reasons, and be not so rash and hasty to
disgrace your brethren.

Your obscure translating of Philosophical Canons, CAN. Stay. Sect. 2. page 54.

CAN. Stay. Sect. 9. page 100.


I will pass over, as Relata sunt simul natura, which you English thus;
Relations in nature are alike: and apply it as strangely. Qualis causa, tale
causatum, you translate thus; As is the cause, so that which is caused, of the
doing of the thing: Idem qua idem semper facit idem; which you render. As is
the same so always follows the same effect: whereby you turn principles or
Canons at least into riddles, and it is hard to say, whether your
interpretation be more obscure, or misapplication unreasonable (to speak in
your language) as vain as ever man made.

For that which is spoken of causes univocall, necessary and proper at least,
that you refer to moral instruments; as if the word preached by wicked
instruments might not be effectual, or a man could not hear an ungodly
Minister preach the Gospel, but he must partake in his sin. CAN. Stay. Sect.
page Sect. 3.16.17. Id. Sect. 4. page 28. and sect. 5. p. 40. sect 1. p. 49.
sect. 4. p. 62.63, 67, 72, 73 74, 75.


You are large in proving what is not questioned; as that God must be served
as he has appointed: That it suffices not to intend a good end, but the
means must be lawful: That men must not bow their knees to an Idol, under
pretense that they reserve their hearts unto God: That we must be earnest and
zealous against Idolatry: That the matter of worship must be grounded on the
word, Consciences shall never find any sure port to run unto, but only God
Calf. p. 22.
and that it must be done in a right and lawful manner, order, form or way:
That the law of God is the rule of conscience; That custom must not prescribe
against truth; That we must not do evil that good may come thereof, with
other the like, which you know well, your Opposites do believe and maintain.
But that God is not worshipped in our assemblies as he has appointed: That to
hear the word preached in our congregations is pernicious Idolatry: that the
means therein be unlawful, that the ministry is Idolatrous; or the worship
vain; that you prove not, either by Scripture or any learned and approved
Author, whatsoever you bring in both your books to this purpose, besides your
own peremptory actions may be shut up in few words.

The Authors which you quote, are oftimes abused, you mangle their words and
make them seem to speak what they never meant or intended. CAN Stay sect. 3.
p. 57.
The truths they teach (you say) speaking of the Ministers of the English
Church) are from God, but the office which gives them power and charge to
speak them is from Antichrist, and a special character or mark (as the
learned write of the beast). Simon on Rev. page 120. Acts and Mon. edit. 5.
page 588. On Rev. ca. 14.9. Though Priests and Deacons for preaching Gods word,
ministering the sacramets, with provision for the poor be grounded on Gods law,
yet have these sects no manner of ground thereof, L. Cobh, Act. and Mon. p. 514
5^5.
Thus said John Chaydon a Martyr of Christ: The Bishops license to preach the
Word of God, is the true character of the beast, that is, of Antichrist, The
like M. Bale and others: But no word sounding that way, is to be found in M.
Simons, Since their law of Confirmation was made (says he) the Bishop with
the Chrisme does sign the party in the forehead with the character of the
cross, And since they made their new office or sacerdotall, thus they make
their cate chumine. The child or party is brought to the Church doors, where
the Priest makes a cross with his thumb on the forehead of the child, and at
the font, the priest makes a cross in the right hand of the child, etc. Thus
this Author, but to your purpose not one word. M. Bale was so far from
condemning the office of Bishops simply as Antichristian, that he himself was
Bishop of Osyris in Ireland: And how likely it is then, that he should
absolutely condemn a Bishops license to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ in
the Churches of Christ, as the mark and Character of the beast, let any man
judge? What he might condemn, in some respect and consideration in popish
bishops, as they stand sworn slaves, to that Antichrist of Rome; that cannot
be drawn to the testimony of Bishops CAN Neces. of separ. p. 25^.
who have cast off the authority, and renounced the doctrine of Antichrist:
And the same may be answered to the testimony of John Ch^ydon.

You many times repeat, that upon the Nonconformists grounds to return unto
the service in the Church of England, is to join with Idolaters in Idolatry.
This no doubt is a vehement accusation, if it can be proved: if it be rashly
surmised, then it is as pestilent a slander: But ground out of the
Nonconformists for such conclusions you have showed none nor once take notice
of that which is alleged to the contrary, which you could not but see, if you
could have found any exception against it. They do not deny, but there is a
visible Church of God in England, and therefore your saying of them, that they
do almost in plain and flat terms, say that we have not so much as any
outward face, and show of the true Church, argues that you have almost no love
in you, which upon one word once uttered, contrary to the tenor of their
book, T.C. repl. 1. p. 8. Vnreasonab. of separation p. 81.
and course of their whole life, surmise this of them. Thus a chief
Nonconformist long ago. Another in the book, which you pretend to answer, and
in these very pages, He most shamefully and lewdly, as a man void of all common
honesty and grace, makes the Ministers of Lincoln to affirm, that the
Prelates are reviled to be great Antichrists and their Ministry and
constitution, to be great troublers of the Church at this day, and that it
cannot but be very sinful and hurtful to retain or communicate with them.
CAN Stay. 3. p. 59.69. Rai^old. de idelo^l. 2. c. 1.. 2. Bilson. Christ. subj.
part. 3. page 269. The Devil himself can show no greater malice, than to
pervert that which is well spoken: and to force a lewd senes of his own or
another man's words
The Devil himself would have been ashamed in this open manner to have told
such a lie, and therefore he is to be trusted no further, than he is seen. This
you pass over in silence; and if the substance of the accusation be applied
unto your self, I know not what apology you can make.

Christ (says Rainolds as you quote him) the Pastor of his Church, does tell
us, that he feeds not in Antichristian assemblies, in the den of thieves;
neither is it his will, that his flock should there rest at noone: But in the
pleasant pasture, by the still waters, that is, in the shadows of the true
Christian Churches detesting Idolatry. But D. Rainolds words are, not in
caetibus papisticis, speluncis idol^latrarum, etc. but in untbraculis
orthodoxorumcatuum. Whether this change of Antichristian Assemblies, for popish
Assemblies, and true Christian Churches for Orthodox Assemblies, CAN Stay 3. p
22. D. (...) by words and Letters testimonial 2^4.
w^ made in simplicity, be judge your self. You might easily conjecture, your
credulous reader might conceit, our assemblies to be Antichristian, and not
true Churches, but popish Assemblies, and not Orthodox he could not imagine
them to be.

You allege D. Amos saying, It cannot be a true Church that wants order; For
by this the parts and members thereof are knit together. But this is not to be
found in the place mentioned: But D. Aines moving the question, whether it be
lawful to stick to that Church, from whom power of removing scandals, and
purging out the ungodly, is taken away? He answers. That power, ^jure and
quoad actum primum, cannot be separated from the true Church, because
immediately and necessarily it flows from the essence it self, for it is
contained in that covenant, whereby the faithful are gathered into a Church.
The use of this power cannot be taken away, without the great sin of them that
take it away, and the heinous injury of them from whom it is taken. Neither
ought the Church to rest in this, that, she sees her self unjustly oppressed
of others. For it belongs to the office of the Church to defend that
liberty, where with she is endowed of Christ. But yet if the faithful
contending for their liberty, cannot obtain their right in that part, nor
without grievous inconveniences come to a more free Church, and can keep
themselves from the approbation of evil, and do also study as much as in
them lies to supply that want, they sin not, if they join themselves to
such a Church, or continue in it; Thus D. Ames, clean contrary to that which
you make him affirm.

Master Baines, as you allege him, writes. CAN Stay sect. 2. p. 55. Bain.
diocesan.
That no people can worship God in repairing to any Church or ministry without
warrant of the Word. Let the Reader note it, say you. And if it be wisely
noted, it makes nothing against partaking in our assemblies in the ordinances
of Grace, because that is warranted, approved; commanded of God in his holy
Word. But Master Baines words, are, No people can worship God in repairing to
this place and ministry, without warrant of his Word. And he speaks of a
Diocesan worship, and ministry peculiarly appropriated to that place, as it
was at Jerusalem: which is nothing to your purpose.

You pretend that you have taken your principles, out of the Nonconformists,
ever the chiefest of them, which for learning, CAN Neces. of separ. To the Read.
zeal, judgment, holiness of life, etc. have ever held that cause. But some
things brought in their names, is neither the opinion of all, nor of the most,
nor of the best learned, nor of many, but either the private opinion of some
one, or the conceit of such indeed, as were separated from the communion of the
Church of England, and not from the abuses only which were in the Church.

You cite Master Penry saying, CAN stay sect. 3. p. 57. M. Penry of the
Ministry of the Church of Engl. p. 37.38. CAN Neces. of separ. p. 16 28.43.
Exhortation to the government of Wales. 42, 46, 26 CAN Neces. of separation,
Epist. to the Reader. CAN Neces. of separ. p. 252.
It is most certain, Satan rules in the consciences of men, not only by false
doctrine, but also by his false power and ordinances; his kingdom of darkness
not only consists in the lies, false doctrine and worship, which he has
coined, but also in the false and Antichristian ordinances, which he has
invented for the ruling of his idolatrous den. And therefore the children and
Saints of God, ought to avoid both the one and the other. But whatsoever his
meaning be, in that or other passages cited, Master Penry was not a
Nonconformist but a Separatist, by your own confession, and therefore his
sayings are not to be received for the Nonconformists principles.

Master Br. says, It is lawful to communicate in that worship where the
ceremonies are used: but we cannot believe him, (say you) for his brethren
both affirm and prove the contrary. And here now is a fit place, to write down
the words, whereof mention was made in p. 99. partly because the author is a
principle Nonconformist, and partly to discover the rashness and folly of this
inconsiderate man, which durst without any reason (more than boldness) still
justify the very thing, which his brethren by many sound arguments, have
manifested to be evil and unlawful: and then you go on to rehearse the words
of the author, of a dispute upon communicating at confused communions, page
68.69.

Who that Author is I know not, the book I have not seen, but by the words
which you relate, it appears he was no English Nonconformist, neither does he
speak of communicating in our English societies. And if he did, he speaks but
his private opinion, and not what is the judgment of Nonconformists. It may be
questioned, whether Master Br. book was not penned and published, before he
could either see or think of the other. But whatsoever is to be thought in
that particular, M. Br. knew it to be the common practice and uniforme
judgment of all Nonconformists in England, both heretofore, and at that present
when he wrote, that it is lawful, A dispute against Engl. part 1. ca. 9. sect.
3. p, 32. The practice of the greatest part of the reformed Churches in
observing holy days, cannot commend them in the Church of Scotland. 1 Because
she did spue them out wi^h so great detestation, that she is more bound to
abhor them, than other Churches, which did not the like: and I may well apply
that to them which Caivin says of the ceremonies of some to Valentinus
Pacaeus. Vt concedam faetidas illas sordes quibus purgatae fuerunt Ecclesiae
vestrae, in rebus med is posse censeri, carum tamen restitutio erit res media.
CAN Stay sect. 5. p 75.76.
and in some cases necessary, to receive the Sacrament with them that kneel in
our assemblies. And now consider to whom the imputation of folly, boldness,
inconsiderateness, and (if you will) falsehood, is justly to be attributed.

To these particulars I will add one more, whereby we may learn what we are
to expect and look for at your hands. I think to make known unto thee (thus
you write) what happened about seven years past in England. There was a Gentleman
of Warwickshire, by name M. Edward Greswold a man very religious, as many
besides my self can testify: He and I being bosom friends (or to use his
own common saying, our hearts being as David's and Ionathans knit together,)
upon just cause we both left the parish assemblies. He afterward by the means
of some crafty men, was persuaded unto hearing again: upon this he fell into
great trouble of Spirit, and could have no feeling assurance of any peace with
God: remaining thus a while, at length he sent a letter by his servant unto me
(the which I have kept a long time by me) in this letter he largely
acknowledges his offense, and among other passages writes thus: Ah you are
happy but I by my fall am miserable and wretched, and for the present time, I
feel my soul to be no otherwise, than if I were in Hell, etc. ever since I
went to their assemblies, I have observed the Lords hand against me. etc.
Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God, set a day apart for me, and
seek the Lord by fasting and praying, that the water-flood overflow me not,
etc. what his refreshings were after this I cannot say, the report is, that to
his changing he had sad and sorrowful days: notwithstanding I am confident,
that his soul is with Christ in paradise. As I am writing this, I think of
the words of the Prophet, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid
of thy judgments. He that is wise will consider of these things: For as one
says, providing before, is better than repenting afterward. Psalm. 119, 120.
Hal. Antiq. Romans lib. 11
It is no marvel that false Churches, by some are called officina scelerum,
and carnificina sanctorum, shops of wickedness, and shambles of the Saints:
for what can a tender conscience expect in frequenting them, but indeed pricks,
racks and tortures? This is your Relation and the use you make thereof.

But if you know not how it fared with this distressed Gentleman, thus it was:
He shut up himself and his children in his house, and would come at no man,
nor suffer any man to come at him, lest he should communicate with them in
their sin. Sustenance for himself and his Children was brought unto them, and
put in at some hole or window, but he suffered no man to come in to minister
unto them, no not when his children and he himself lay sick in great misery.
When by order his house was broken open (for the Justices of peace in
consideration of his case were constrained thereunto) two of his children were
found dead in the house, and one had lain so long unburied, that the body was
corrupted and did annoy the room. The Gentleman himself sick on his bed, in
woeful plight. His Bible he had gone thorough, and cut out the contents, titles
and every thing, but the very Text it self. This I have received from credible
hands, and it is a matter known through that country where he lived. And if
you mark it wisely, you may see the original of his sorrow and heaviness,
was not from the hearing of the Word in our assemblies, but from your
principles, which he had too deeply drunk in, and out of a desire to keep and
observe, made himself desolate. It is very likely he thought with himself,
that if by hearing the doctring of grace he did communicate with men in their
sins, much more was guilt contracted by civil conversings. And if you will try
it in right reason, I cannot see how that consequence from your principles can
be avoided. Now he desirous to stick to what he had learned, and not to delude
himself with vain distinctions, as too many of the separation do, fell first
into deep perplexity, and then at last came unto that desperate conclusion,
to shut up himself and his children. It is one of your principles, That all
humane devices whatsoever in the worship of God are idolatrous: and therefore
conceiving the contents of the Chapters, and titles of the books to be of men,
he cut them out. And further it is likely he would have gone, if his thoughts
had reached further in this matter. It was your great sin to persuade him to
separation; and it is your great sin now to impute the cause of his sorrow,
distress, and anguish, to his hearing the Word in our societies, when as it
was the natural fruit of his rash and sinful separation, or of those
positions, whereupon his separation was builded, wherein if he was not first
instructed, he had been built up by you. Let false Churches be shops of
wickedness, and the shambles of the Saints: In our societies the doctrine of
faith and piety is soundly and purely taught, our adversaries being judges: a
thousand thousands can testify by experience what oule-ravishing comforts, and
sweet communion with God may be had therein. When you wrote these things, you
had just cause, to take shame and sorrow, that you had brought a poor soul
thus into the snare of your seducements: but to take occasion thereby to
encourage others, harden your self in an evil way, and to revile and slander
the heritage of the Lord, is an argument of how great perverseness? You are
confident he is with Christ in paradise, and I will not go about to lessen
your confidence therein. But if you may be confident of him, may not we be
confident of the Martyrs, who dyed cheerfully for the testimony of the Lord
Jesus, being professed members of our societies? Infallible knowledge of
another salvation we challenge not, but what you can pronounce confidently of
one, we may with equal or greater confidence pronounce of many, who laid down
their lives for the truth of God. And therefore the reason drawn from the
practice of the Martyrs, professing against Antichrist, who lived and dyed
members of our Societies, and are received into glory, to prove that our
societies are not Antichristian, idolatrous, false worship, is neither absurd
nor childish, howsoever you are pleased to spurn and kick at it. Peruse your
own manner of arguing employed here, CAN Neces. of separat. p. 190: 191.
and then speak of your answer to the other: be not rash and partial.

As for the particular point in hand, the authors alleged by you, speak
nothing to your purpose. For men may run when they be not sent two ways.
First, when they are outwardly called, but not inwardly qualified, as with
knowledge, truth, holiness, or care to do the duties of their place, and
these are lawful and unlawful Ministers both: lawful as Ministers of Gods
providence, for the punishment of some, and the good of others, unlawful as
not approved of God in their place and standing. Secondly, when they have no
manner of calling, neither set apart by men in authority, nor received by the
Church, nor qualified as they ought, and these are every way unlawful. Again
false Prophets are of two sorts. I Such as spring up in the Church, teaching
corrupt or perverse things, but either not discovered, or not convicted, or not
cast out. These the faithful must not believe, though they may not forsake or
cast off the Societies where such are tolerated. 2. Such as teach damnable
doctrines, are not set apart to offices false and idolatrous, and either never
were in the society of the true Church, or be lawfully convicted, and justly
cast out, and with these the faithful must hold no communion,

This is that which the learned teach, as it has been showed, but it makes
nothing at all to your purpose. For you can never prove from Scripture, reason
or Nonconformists principles, either that the ministry of the Church of
England is absolutely false, or that any Ministers in the Church be false in
the second acceptance of the word.

It is needless to proceed further in the examination of particular Authors,
CAN Stay sect. 12. p. 118:
because you your self do affirm as much. The godly (say you) are admonished
to examine doctrines delivered to them in a right way and order. And if they
find any by teaching to be a false Prophet, Id. sect. 11. p. 115.
they are to depose him, and afterward not to hear him again. Again, it is
a question whether the godly in the Jewish Church, having by hearing discovered
the Scribes and Pharisees to be strangers, that is, false Prophets, might
afterward hear them again. Robins. Iustif of separa. p. 434.
The Treatiser was once of mind, that they might not, and gave some reasons
for it. But howsoever the case is not easily to be determined, considering the
state of that Church and time: yet this is clear to all men of sound
judgment, that in the Churches now under the Gospel, false Prophets may not
be suffered: But after due and orderly conviction (being found so, and
obstinate) they are to be rejected, and so no outward hearing of them any
more. Whence briefly let these things be noted. First, that the effects may be
right and lawful, when the instruments are wrong and unlawful in themselves,
and that a man may lawfully communicate, in the effects of such actions, whose
instruments are unlawful. For the Scribes and Pharisees were unlawful
instruments, by your own confession, T.C. to his sister Anne Stubs. You have
indeed enough that bitterly speak against us: but having no reproves in their
mouths, nor arguments to confute their thunderbolts of judgment and
condemnation, are like headless arrows, not taken out of the Lords quiver,
but from their own sides, etc.
but the effects of their ministry, in which the faithful might and did
lawfully communicate. A false Prophet not discovered, not convicted orderly,
before he can be deemed obstinate and cast forth, is an unlawful instrument,
but you will not say, the effects of his Ministry are unlawful, and not to
be communicated in. I might here add, that is unskillfull to confound
instruments and working causes, or link them together, as if there were the
same reason of both, seeing all instruments are not working causes. Secondly
the Ministers of the Church of England, have not duly and orderly been
convinced of corruption in doctrine, especially in points fundamental, or that
their place and standing is unlawful: much less can they be esteemed
obstinate. They were never cast out by the faithful, and true members of the
Church, but approved, maintained and reverenced by them: All reformed Churches,
all the faithful in the reformed Churches do acknowledge them the servants of
Jesus Christ, approve their standing, reverence their gifts, hold communion
with them, profess the same doctrine which they maintain, and praise God for
his blessing upon their labors. And now consider with what uprightness and
integrity you have alleged these Authors, against the hearing of the word in
our English Assemblies, as if all the Ministers of the Church were false
Prophets, convicted, obstinate, and outed the Church.

You tell us peremptorily, CAN. Necess. of Separ. p. 188.
If the reformed Churches do justify the English, therein they condemn
greatly their own practice: for in their constitution, ministry, worship and
Government they are as opposite as light and darkness one to the other. Bilson
Christ, subject part 4 p. 542. We would have you regard, if not your
consciences before God yet your credits before men.
Can you find nothing to object, that the Sun does not shine at Nooneday? Is it
not apparent to all the Christian world, that the reformed Churches do give
unto us the right hand of fellowship, and esteem as us the true Churches of
Jesus Christ? In manner of government they differ from us, and they have
abolished some rites and Ceremonies, which we retain as matters indifferent,
not as matters of holiness, necessity, or worship (this is the profession of our
Church) but in doctrine, worship and ministry for the substance thereof, there
is a sweet agreement. And the differences, that are betwixt them and us in
other matters, Calv. instit. l. 4. c. 18 Sect. 32. Confess. Helv. c. 27 Angl.
Conf. art. 34 Aug. Conf. art. 7. Bohem. Conf. art. 15. Calv Ep. col. 170. ^p.
col. 478.
they have so learned to tolerate, as neither to condemn their own practice,
nor to dis-church us: and the like Christian moderation, they receive from us
back again. The Churches of Christ have not learned to cure every scratch of
a pin, with a knife or lance: This art of curing they leave to you, who was
never admitted into the society of discreet Physicians among them or us.
Thirdly consider how uncertain their ways are who walk in darkness.
Sometimes the Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, because they were
lawfully called: Sometimes they might not be heard: sometime it is a case not
easily determined: and sometimes in the Churches now under the New Testament
false Prophets are not to be suffered; as if the passages of Scripture
forbidding to hear false Prophets, must be restrained to the times of the
Golpell. Such staggerings and gross delusions in others, CAN. Necess. of
Separ. p. 39. 48. etc. Bilson Christ. Subject. part. ^. page 406.
would have occasioned outcries to raise the Country.

As for that which you allege against ignorant, idle, profane Ministers, it is
not to the purpose, for that respects not the office it self, but the men in
the office, who may enter unlawfully, and continue in the execution of their
office, The Church of Corinth had then, as al other Churches now have (or
should have) both praying and preaching annexed and adjoined to the
ministration of the Lords Supper. Both these yet are and ever were the means
which God ordained to prepare us to be fit guests for that Table. Bishop Jewel
his Sermon on Josh. 6.1, 2, 3. This care must show it self in removing blind
watchmen, which have no knowledge, who are but dumb dogs, that cannot bark,
etc. Nonresidence and absence from their cure is a fault that would be amended.
CAN. Necess. of Separ. page 44. 45. Admonit. 1. page 15. 16. Sold. Barw. in the
shep-heards of the Lords flock. Though they be never so able to instruct, and
therefore worthy to have rooms in the Church, yet if they have not a desire
to do good, etc. CAN. Necess. of Separ. page 216. Another fault no less
hurtful to the Church of God is the suffering of pluralities, when one takes
the profit of two or more Benefices, etc.
when the Ministry it self for substance, and that which is done by Ministers
unlawfully executing their place, is not to be condemned as a nullitie. It is
one thing to justify an ignorant or idle ministry, another to make use of
that which he does to our edification according to the Ordinance of God. They
are not approved of God in their ministration, but what they do administer is
effectual, and God approves that his people, when they cannot remove them,
should make use of their Ministry. This the Non-conformists hold agreeable to
their own principles, as has been showed at large.

Parsons, Vicars, Stipendaries, Parish Priests, Chapleines are but various
Titles given to the same kind of Ministry in diverse persons, which is
Evangelicall, instituted of Christ, and to be exercised and maintained in the
Church, until the coming of Christ to judgment. You affirm with great
confidence, that the Non-conformists condemn both their names and offices as
wholly from that Roman Antichrist. These be your words. If you will know (say
the Non-conformists) whence all these came, we can easily answer you, that
they came from the Pope, as out of the Trojan horses belly, to the destruction
of Gods kingdom. It is certain that their name and office is wholly from that
Roman Antichrist, never instituted either by Christ or his Apostles. For the
Church of God never knew them, neither does any reformed Church in the world
know them. These are clouds without rain, trees without fruit, painted
Sepulchers full of dead bones, fatted in all abundance of iniquity, such as
seek not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. Again touching their
Parsons. Vicars, Stipendaries Chapleines, etc. we have proved from their
writings, that these names and offices came wholly from the Devil and
Antichrist: and therefore his pleading for Baal is altogether here unusefull,
as to say, All is one kind of Ministry, and in this respect they are
Parsons, and in that respect Vicars, etc. For as much may a Papist say, of
their Parsons, Vicars, etc. We strive not with you for names and words, but
about the substance of the Office and Ministry. Non enim in nominibus, sed in
rebus, sita est nostra religio, ut recte monet Gregorius Theologus in Orat.
quam habuit coram 150. Episcopis, in Council. secundo Constantino. anno. 382.
Nihil apud me distat in verbo, quod non distat in sensu. Ambr. com. in Luc.
lib. 2. Every godly and learned Minister and Pastor of the Church, has more
interest and right in respect of his office etc. for as much as he has an
ordinary calling of God and function appointed in Scriptures which he
exercises T. C. rep. 1. page 21. It is observed by the Learned that this has
been not the least of Satan's sleights in conveying Popery from step to step and
point to point, to keep the speech, and change the sense of the Learned and
Ancient Fathers: As the Papists deal with the Fathers, so do you with the
Nonconformists.
and as true too, If therefore he would have justified those men, he should
first have manifested that his Brethren have notoriously s^andred their
ministry, and so have quite taken away their reasons better, by showing
better, etc. But we have learned to try before we trust. To contend about the
bare names and Titles of Parson, is vain and frivolous; but if we speak of
their office and ministry as it is exercised by the godly, learned and
painful Ministers in the Church of England, for the substance thereof, it is
instituted of Christ, acknowledged by all true Churches in the world, ever
since the first plantation of the Christian Church, known by all reformed
Churches, at this day blessed of God abundantly, and so maintained by the
Non-conformists. Against the Name (it may be) some have taken exception, and
against the pride, idleness, covetousness, etc. of some much has bin
written, but that the office it self of Parson or Vicar, as they preach the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, or administer the Sacraments according to the
Institution, and watch over the flock of Christ committed to their charge, that
this office (I say) for substance should be condemned, as Antic^ristian by the
Non-conformists, is notoriously false, and the contrary is apparently known
unto your self. For many of them have publicly maintained the truth of their
ministry in writing, others have publicly professed, they acknowledge the
Church and ministry to be true and of God, and diverse have exercised the
functions, of Vicars and Parsons in our Assemblies. And whether it be probable
that so many seeking for reformation would publicly condemn that office, as
altogether Antichristian, which they exercised in the Church, let your
Conscience judge. In that which you allege out of the admonition to this
purpose, you grossly play the juggler. For it speaks not of the office of
Parsons and Vicars at all, much less of them all. Their words (let them be
compared with that which you write in their name) are these; we should be too
long to tell your honors of Cathed. Churches, the Dens aforesaid of all
lovtering l^bbe^s, where, M. Deane, M Vice-Deane, M. Canons or Prebendaries the
greater, Mr. Petty Canons, or Canons the lesser, Mr. Chancellor of the
Church, M. Treasurer otherwise called Judas the Pursebearer, the chief
Chaunter, Singing men, special favorers of Religion, Squealing Choristers,
Organ-Players, Gospellers, Pistelers, Pensioners, Readers, Vergerers, etc. live
in great, idleness, and have their abiding. If you would know whence all these
came, we can easily answer you, that they came from the Pope, as out of the
Trojan horses belly, to the destruction of Gods kingdom. The Church of God
never knew them, neither does any reformed Church in the world, know them. And
birds of the same feather are covetous Patrons of Benefices, Parsons, Vicars,
Readers, Parish Priests, Stipendaries, and riding Chapleins, that under the
authority of their Masters, spoil their flock, of the food of their souls:
such seek not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, clouds they are without
rain, trees without fruit, painted Sepulchers full of dead bones, fatted in
all abundance of iniquity, and lean Locusts in all feeling, knowledge, and
sincerity. Hier. in Sy^^. Ruffin, Perversi homines ad assenti^nem dogmatum
suorum, sub virorum Sanctorum nomine interseruerunt ea, quae illi nunquam
scripserunt. Virg. An. l. 2. Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine ab uno
disce omnes. CAN. Necess. of repar. p. 48. 49. (...)
Can any Legerdemaine be more palpable, than to apply these words to the office
of Parsons, and Vicars, and their Ministry; who painefully, diligently and
profitably, spend and have spent their time and strength, in the service of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Church? If you will so grossly mistake or
pervert their writings, how shall we believe you upon your word, when you
report that this or that you have heard or seen?

That a man from those principles may infer a lawful separation from all
spiritual communion, in the ministry of our English Churches, you think
every one (if he understand what a principle is) will freely grant. And for my
part I think, every man that understands what the Non-conformists principles
are, or what a true conclusion rightly deduced from sound or true principles
is, will freely grant, that your separation from the ministry of the Church of
England in the Ordinances, of worship, is rash, groundless, and sinful,
contrary to right reason, the Non conformists principles, and the holy
Scriptures. And so I commend the worth or weakness of what I have written to
your consideration, entreating if you can, to bring gentle words and weight of
matter, as best beseems a good cause.

CHAP. II.
THat God must be worshipped according to his own will and commandment,
Bilson Christ. subject. part. 3. p. 302. It is only Gods office to appoint,
how he will be served.

Tertul. de praescrip. advers. haeret. Nobis nihil licet de nostro arbitrio
indulgere, sed nec eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos
Domini habemus Authors, qui nec ipsi quidqua^ de suo arbitrio quod inducerunt,
elegerunt, sed acceptum a Christo, etc. Can. stay. sec. 3 p. 16 Can. Neces: of
Separat. p. 72, 73, 74; 75, 76, 77.


and that nothing must go under the name of worship, which he has not
commanded, or instituted in his Word, is a truth confessed and maintained by
the Church of England, Conformists and Non-conformists. So that it is
altogether needless to spend many words and quote many Authors to prove that
which is commonly received, if it be not a wrong to mention that as a principle
of the Non-conformists, which is the doctrine of the Church, with one consent
professed of all the members of the society: Else where you write (but your
speech is over-lavish as most commonly it is) that all sorts and sects of
Writers acknowledge this for a truth, that to worship God in any other way or
manner, than he has in his Word prescribed, is unlawful: And therefore this
pains here taken might well have been spared; but the plenty herein may serve
to hide your poverty in that which is to be proved.

Your Reason to prove the necessity of separation from the Non-conformists
Principles, is thus laid down.

The Lord in Scripture has laid it as a straight charge upon all the
faithful, to separate themselves from Idolaters, Can. Neces. of Separat. cap.
2. sec. 3. page 83, 84.
and to be as unlike to them as may be, specially in their religious
observations and ceremonies. The second Commandment proves this effectually,
for there is absolutely forbidden all participation in any feigned service,
whether it be to the true God or any other. When Jeroboam had set up a false
worship, we read, Hosea 4.14, 15. Amos 5.5.
that the good Prophets of that time and after, called the godly Israelites
away from it, and bid them in plain terms not to join therewith, but on the
contrary to keep Gods Commandentents, and statutes appointed for his service,
without adding any thing to them, or taking any thing from them. And this they
must do, although the King had confirmed his new Religion, by Act of
Parliament, or Council, and therefore no doubt would persecute most gr^evously
all the refusers thereof, etc.

Thus you go on in four leaves or thereabouts to confirm your proposition,
Ibid. page 84. to 92.
and yet it may be questioned, whether you do confirm or explain every
particular contained therein. For if it be demanded what it is to be as unlike
to Idolaters as much as may be, and how that is proved to be necessary, either
by the commandment of God, or practice of the godly, without some fit or due
limitation, which is not added, I suppose you will be to seek, much less can
it be concluded out of this discourse. But let us hear your Assumption.

But the worship of the English-Church-Service-Booke has no warrant by Gods
word, Can. Neces. p. 85. bid. page 91.
but it is a devised, false, and idolatrous worship. If we take a strict view
of that ministry, worship, and government, which they left at Dan and Bethel,
it will appear evidently, that the same was not more false idolatrous and
unlawful, Id. page 85.
than the present ministry, worship and government of the English Assemblyes,
is by the Non-conformists affirmed to be. And because none may think, that I
speak more than can be proved, I will therefore here lay down an apology or
pretext, which an idolatrous Israelite might frame in the defense of the Kings
Religion, Freshsute. lib. 2. page 80.
taken out of their own writings: And if Dr Ames phrase be tolerable, I will
pawn my head, that there is never a Nonconformist this day in the world (let
him keep to their grounds) that is able to give more pretty reasons, Course of
conform. page 161.
and colorable shows, to justify the Religion of the Church of England.

That all worship, Socrates was wont to say, Every God was to be honored as he
himself had given in commandment, August. de Conf. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Wherefore as Michah and Jeroboam grievously offended; so whosoever brings into
Gods service any thing of his own device, he sins deadly. But Images,
Crosses, and Crucifixes are men's devices, whereby they flatter themselves in
pleasing God: therefore they ought to be abhorred. Calfe. against Martial.
Preface to the reader. Bellarm. lib. 3. de justifi c. 8. Non potest aliquid
certu^ esse certitudine fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in verbo Dei, aut
ex verbo Dei per evidentem consequentia^ deducatur. Park. de pol. Eccl. l. 1.
c. 1.4. Separabant se sacerdotes et Levitae, qui Deum timebant. 2 Chro. 11.14.
Atqui haec separa^^o ab Israelitis idolatris erar, qu^ legemcult umque Dei per
idola Jeroboam fundamentaliter sustulerunt. Aug. de unit. eccl. c. 16. Let the
Donatists, if they can show their Church, not in rumors, and speeches of the
men of Africa, nor in the councils of their Bishops, nor in the discourses of
any writer whatsoever, nor in the signs and miracles that may be forged; but
in the prescript of the Law, in the predictions of the Prophets, in the verses
of the Psalms, in the voices of the Shepherd himself, etc.
that all devised, false, and idolatrous worship is to be abhorred, is
confessed and professed by Conformists and Nonconformists. It is a constant
received position, That nothing ought to be tolerated in the Church as
necessary unto salvation, or as an article of faith, except it be expressly
contained in the word of God, or manifestly to be gathered therefrom: and that
all ceremonies are to be rejected, wherein there is placed opinion of merit,
worship, or necessity to salvation. But that the worship tendered to God in the
English Congregations, is devised, false, idolatrous, that the Nonconformists
never said, nor thought; and whosoever shall rashly affirm it, he shall never
be able to make proof thereof, by the word of God. If any rite prescribed in
the book of Common Prayer be worship, in the use thereof, the word being taken
in a large signification, that is not so in the intention and profession of the
Church, nor apprehended to be so in them that conform unto it, neither does it
defile the worship of God, to them that join in the ordinances of grace,
notwithstanding the corruption which in their judgment is annexed to it, and
practiced by some. For notwithstanding such corruption, or abuse, the worship
it self is that which God has prescribed, approved, blessed to them that
seek his face aright, and serve him unfeignedly; whereat he requires our
presence, and wherein he has promised to sup with us, and we with him.

That the Non-conformists should affirm the worship of God, or ministry in
the English Assemblies, to be as false, idolatrous, and unlawful, as was the
worship of Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel, is a most lewd and impudent slander;
which the sworn shaveling^ of Antichrist, whose profession is to lie and
slander for the catholic cause, would blush to vent. You know it is contrary
to their judgment, practice, prosession, and protestations many times renewed.
Whether the phrase be tolerable or no, if you will be prodigal to pawn your
head in this case, take heed lest you loose it, not in Gods cause, but in your
own. And if you shall be desperate herein, your forwardness will move no wise
man; for Religion is to be learned from the truth of God, and not from the high
adventures of inconsiderate men. The Non-conformists can prove the Religion and
worship of the Church of England to be of God, not by petty reasons and
colorable shows (which they leave to them that maintain a bad cause) but by
pregnant evidence from the word of truth; not by similitudes, allegories, and
forced interpretations of Scripture (as you dispute against it) but by plain
texts of Scripture, and sound reason deduced therefrom, against which the gates
of hell shall never prevail.

The Author of that Book, Bilson Christ. subject. part. 4. p. 349. This is the
doubt betwixt us, whether we should content our selves with such means as he
has devised for us, and commended unto us; thereby daily to renew the memory
of our Redemption; or else inve^t others of our own heads, fit perhaps to
provoke us to a natural and humane affection, but not fit to instruct
ourfaith, etc. He knowing that images though they did intertaine the eyes with
some delight, yet might they snare the souls of many simple and silly persons,
and preferring the least seed of sound faith, beholding and adoring him in
spirit and truth, before all the dumb shows and Imagerie that ma^s wit could
furnish to win the eye. Can. Neces. of Separat. c. 2. p. 78, 79. and 254.
according to a prescript form culled out of the blasphemous Mass Book. and 238.
That which was taken out of the vile Masse-booke, etc. Sold. ^a^w. T. C. repl.
1. page 130. Abridg. p. 89. Adm. 1. p. 9. and 2. Adm. p. 41. Fall of Babyl. ^9.
Altar Damasc. page 612, 613. Syons plea. 29. Perth Assemb. 64. Syons plea. 30.
page 40. (...)
entitled, The course of Conformity, shows that the Israelites might in
general pretend for Jeroboams calves the same excuses that were made in
defense of some corruptions thrust upon the Church of Scotland; but the
corruptions he does not make to be like, nor the pretenses to be of equal
validity, nor the state of the Church where such corruptions are tolerated,
to be the same with the state of the Israelites who worshipped the Calves.
Abuses that agree in the general nature of abuse may be colored, with the
same pretenses, when they be not of the same weight, quality, or degree; the
one may be small, the other heinous. The same distinction may be brought to
countenance the vilest heresy, and a petty error, if I may so speak. Heresy
and Idolatry are both talkative, and who doubts but corrupt wits can say much
in defense of both; shall we thence conclude, that error or heresy are both
one; every abuse is gross idolatry. The Author, you quote, was not so
unadvised: His drift was only to show the vanity of such excuses, and not to
match the things pleaded for with Jeroboams Idolatry, as has been showed
before. But let us see whether you can allege any colorable show, or petty
reason, to prove our worship to be false and idolatrous.

The whole form of the Church Service is borrowed from the Papists, peiced and
patched together without reason or order of edification: yea not only is the
form of it, taken from the Church of Antichrist, but surely the matter also:
For none can deny but it was culled and picked out of that popish dunghill, the
portius and vile Masse-booke, full of all abominations. From three Romish
Channels, I say, was it raked together, namely, the Breviarie, out of which the
common prayers are taken; out of the Rituall or book of Rites, the
administration of the Sacraments, Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the sick
are taken; and out of the Masse-booke, are the Consecration of the Lords
Supper, Collects, Gospels, and Epistles. And for this cause it is, that the
Papists like so well of the English Mass, (for so King James used to call it)
and makes them say, Surely the Romish is the true and right Religion. Else the
Heretics in England would never have received so much of it. For some have
avouched it to my face (says the Author of the Curtain of Church Power) that
the service there is nothing to the Mass in the English; others that it wants
nothing but the Popes consecration. These things thus retrived, it was also
thought that popish Kings and Princes would be the less offended; what
marvel, seeing the Jesuits themselves are so well pleased with the
ceremonies and service, that I heard one of them (God is my witness herein)
make it his hope, that the maintenance of them against the Puritans, would make
England the sooner return to Rome in the rest. Qu^vadis. sec. 4.
Mine eyes and ears (says Bishop Hall) can witness with what approofe and
applause diverse of the catholic royal (as they are termed) entertained the
new translated Liturgies of our Church. Which is the less wonder, seeing Pope
Pius the fourth sending Vicentio Parpatia, Cambd. An. 1560.
Abbot of Saint Saviors to Queen Elizabeth, offered to confirm the English
Liturgy by his Authority, if she would yield to him in some other things.
Indeed it pleased them so well, Fresh. suit. l. 1, 203.
that for the first eleven years of Queen Elizabeth, Papists came to the
English Church and service, as the Lord Cook shows. L. Cook de jure Regis
Eccles. f. 34. Syons plea. 49.91.
Others of them affirm the same, namely, their Church Service pleases
marveilous well the Romish Beast, and his ungodly followers. Witness the
Pacification of the Devonshire-Papists in the time of King Edward the sixth,
when as they understood it was no other but the very Masse-booke put into
English. Witness also the assertion of Dr Carrier, a dangerous seducing
Papist; The common-prayer-booke (says he) and the Catechism contained in it,
hold no point of doctrine expressly contrary to Antiquity (that is, Consider.
page 45. sect. 8, 9.
as he explaineth himself) the Romish-service, only has not enough in it:
And for the doctrine of predestination, Sacraments, grace, freewill, and sin,
etc. The new Catechismes and Sermons of the Puritan-preachers, run wholly
against the common prayer, and Catechism therein contained, etc. Motiv.
Preface to the Answ.
And thereupon he comfort himself upon the hope of the supply of the rest.
To this effect speaks Bristow and Harding. If these things be right, why not
the rest? It shall not be amiss to mark one occurrence in Queen Elizabeth's
time, who being interdicted by the Popes Bull, Secretary Walsingham tried a
trick of State Policy, to reverse the same. He caused two of the Popes
Intelligencers, at the Popes appointment, to be brought (as it were) in secret
into England, to whom he appointed a guide (being a State Intelligencer) who
should show them in Canterbury and London service solemnly sung and said, with
all their pomp and procession. Which order the popish Intelligencers seeing,
and so much admiring, they wondered that their Master would be so unadvised, as
to interdict a Prince or State, whose service and ceremonies so symbolized with
his own: So returning it the Pope, they showed him his oversight, affirming
that they saw no service, ceremonies, or Church-order's in England, but they
might have very well been performed in Rome: whereupon the Bull was presently
called in.

That which you allege against the English-Service-booke in particular,
Johnson, Ainsworth, Robinson, Greenewood, etc.
as humane inventions, forbidden in the second Commandment, Images,
Will Worship, Idol-prayers, False-worship Lip-labor, etc. And you your self
insist upon this principle of the Nonconformists, as the cause of Separation
from the Church of England, that all forms of worship not prescribed of God,
are will worship; which if it makes against one, holds against all
prescribed Liturgies. Can. Neces. of Separat. page 114. Id. page 115.
Again, you confess that every Church is not to be forsaken or left, which
has something in it, by participation, idolatrous: And therefore our Service
is not devised worship, because it is taken out of the Masse-booke, as you
allege; but simply, because it is devised; whencesoever it had its original,
if it be devised worship. First therefore we must consider the matter in
general, Oyls^hil. speaking of Images brought into the Church, says, We
might justly condemn the whole faithless, and fond invention. For it was but a
will worship, a naughty service, having no ground of the Word of God, and
only spring of error. Calf. Preface to the Reader testifies. Bilson Christ,
subject. part. 2. p. 297. That Princes may prescribe what faith they list, what
service of God they please, what form of administration of the Sacraments they
think best, is no part of our thought, or point of our doctrine: and yet that
Princes may by their laws prescribe the right faith to be preached, the right
service of God in spirit and truth to be used, etc. T. C. repl. 1. page 8.
Park. of the Cross. par. 1. ca. 4. sect. 7. page 177. A. W. ans. to late
popish Artic. p. 73.
and then try what is alleged against our book of Common Prayer.

These words, Forms of worship, may be taken two ways. First, to note the
substantial parts, or means of worship; and in this sense it is most true,
That all forms of worship not prescribed of God, are unlawful and false
worship, because devised by men.

Secondly, To note a bare order, method, or phrase, wherein divine Service is
performed: And in this sense, the Nonconformists never said, That all forms of
worship not prescribed are false, or devised worship. For they know, that no
form is determined and prescribed of God precisely in all parts of his
worship, and where none is set apart by his Majesty, it is a breach of his
Commandment, and devised worship, to place an opinion of worship in the simple
order or phrase of speech used in prayer, or administration of holy things.

The Nonconformists condemn not a Liturgy, or stinted form of prayer, but
desire that all things therein might be ordered as does tend most to
edification. Whatsoever exceptions they have taken against our Book of
Common Prayer, they never disliked the use of it, so far as they judged it
sound and good. They do not condemn it wholly, but find fault with it, as in
some points disagreeing with the word of God. What has been their seeking
from time to time? a razing of the Communion Book! No; but a purging and
filing of it, after the pattern of that care, which former examples set us.
The Book of Common Prayer, they condemn not as a wicked and ungodly Book,
much less the Service as false, devised, and idolatrous; but they have and do
use the book, and profess their readiness so to do, only they desire to be
excused in some things, which they judge to be amiss.

In the admonition presented to the Parliament An. 1570. thus they profess. We
have at all ^imes born with that which we have could not amend in this Book,
and have used the same in our Ministry so far forth as we might, reverencing
those times, and those persons, in which, and by whom, it was first authorized.

Though therefore they write, Admonit. 1. page 9. Park. of the Cross. part. 1.
ca. 3. sect. 6. page 135.
that it was taken out of that Popish dunghill, the portius, and vile
Masse-booke, that the Papists suck no little advantage out of our
Commumon-Booke, which they term an English translation out of the Masse-booke,
and out of the difficulty, whereby it came in, Parsons of the 3. conversions of
England. page 2.
many Protestants themselves, adjudging that the stable of popish superstition
was not thoroughly purged out of it; that Bristow draws the likeness of our
Service-booke to the countenancing of their Masse-booke; Brist. motiv. 34.
Rhem. in John 20. sect. 5.
And the Rhemists the absolution of the sick prescribed in our
Communion-booke, to an approbation of their absolution, Auricular confession,
and Sacrament of penance: Howsoever they disallow the service, as it is
practiced in visitations, and enjoined in the late Canons, which denies
liberty not only to omit a ceremony, but also to add, alter, Park. of the
Cross. par. 2. ca. 5. sect. 11. page 19.
or omit any one word of the whole Liturgy, when we affirm the words of the
Lords prayer, and the form in Baptism and the Supper may be altered, without
fault. Though in these things they take exception against the Book, and the
manner of urging it, yet they never disliked the use of it altogether, much
less condemned it as a false, devised, and idolatrous worship. Their
profession and practice from time to time, both before and since the
Controversies were moved about the Book, speak plainly in this matter. Can.
Neces. of Separat. page 125.
Judge then your self, whether it be not a notorious calumny in you to write,
That our stinted service, devised by the Bishop, and translated from the Mass,
is affirmed by our own Writers, to be a false and forged worship, and that it
is even so, I appeal to many of your consciences: For why do you loath to use
the same in your Families, but because you know it is not the incense made by
fire from the Altar of the Lord. Is it a small thing thus to slander and
reproach the servants of Christ, contrary to their writings, professions, and
practices, and your own Conscience? And what a vain surmise is this, that
because they forbear to use it in their houses, therefore in conscience they
know it to be strange incense? As if many things might not be forborne, which
in themselves are lawful? In reading the Scriptures a Christian may use one
translation, when he does not condemn others as abomination. I may presume,
in private you make not use of the Lords prayer, and so of some others; and yet
you would not, that another should fit in your conscience and judge, that you
know it is not the incense made by fire from the Altar of the Lord? Or if you
be so presumptuous, sober and well advised men will admit no such conclusions.
But here you must remember again, that no method, order, or phrase of speech
in prayer, left undetermined of God, can truly be called or esteemed the
incense made by fire. Prayer it self, and not the phrase of speech, whether
devised by another or by our selves, is resembled thereby.

But the whole form (you say) of the English-Church-service-Book, is borrowed
out of the Masse-Book, picked and culled out of the Dunghill, as the
Nonconformists write. You add, That not only the form, but the matter also
was taken out of the Masse-Booke.

It is true, the Nonconformists say, it was in great part picked and culled out
of the Masse-booke; but it follows not thence, that either it is, or was
esteemed by them a devised or false worship; for many things contained in the
Masse-booke it self, are good and holy. A Pearl may be found upon a Dunghill;
we cannot more credit the man of sin, than to say, that every thing in the
Masse-booke is devilish and Antichristian. For then it should be Antichristian
to pray unto God, in the mediation of Jesus Christ, to read the Scriptures, to
profess many fundamental divine truths necessary to salvation: If any have
misliked the Book, because it has too much likelihood to the Masse-booke;
that has not been the judgment of the Nonconformists alone, others have said
and written as much, who never yet condemned the use of the Book, or all
things therein contained. Popery is a scab or leprosy which cleaves unto the
Church: It stands mostly, in erroneous, faulty, gross and abominable
superstructions upon the true foundation, whereby they poison or overthrow the
foundation it self. But take away the superstructions, and the foundation
remains: remove the leprosy, and the man is sound. Many supernatural divine
truths of God are mixed in the Popish Synagogue; as pure gold with much dross
or earth, which the refiner is to purge and separate, but not to cast away. Our
service was picked and culled out of the Masse-booke, you say; and so it might,
and yet be free from (...) and tincture, from all show and appearance of evil;
though the Masse-booke it self was fraught with all manner of abominations.
For if Antichrist fit in the Temple of God, and profess himself the servant
of Jesus Christ, of necessity, some treasures, riches and jewels of the Church
must be gathered into his den, which being collected, purged, and refined,
might serve to adorn the chaste spouse of Christ. Neither in so doing does the
Church honor Antichrist, but challenge her own right. If she retain ought
that belongs to Antichrist, that is her stain and blemish: but the recovery
of that, which Christ, the King and Bridegroom of his Church has given, as
her wealth or ornament, must not be imputed a fault. Christ's Religion is not so
needy or unperfect of it self, so needy and beggarly, that it must borrow
Embring days of the Heathen, Altars of the Pope, William Salisbur. in his
Battery of the Popes Batter. An. 1550.
or Vestments of the Jews: But as the Church is plentifully furnished by
Christ, and needs supply from none other; so it is her part to retain what
is freely and graciously vouchsafed of him.

If it be wholly taken out of the Masse-booke, Bilson. Christ. Subject. part.
4. p. 490. Eating and drinking are not essential parts of the Sacrament, but
of the Supper they are, or of the Lords institution. For Christ's institution
contains as well the use as the matter or form that must be used. A Supper
is not only the meat provided, but also the act of eating that which is
provided: And so the Lords institution implies the use and action, as well as
the word and elements.

Bilson. Christ. subject. part. 4. p. 356. To the Papists objecting that as
Magistrates and Parents have part of Gods external honor, because they
present his person in judging and blessing; so many Images have part of his
external, though not of his internal honor: Answer is truly returned, It is
not in your hands to make allowance of Gods honor to whom you list: and
again, God himself has made a plain prohibition in this case, that Images
shall have no part of his external honor. The words are as clear as day
light; Thou shall no bow down to them.

Tho: Beacon, Catech, in his works in fol. printed at London, Ann. 1562. f.
484. Fox in Osor. lib. 3. page 27. The Book of Common Prayer, before the
Communion. Cypr. Ep. 63. ad Caecisi^m. Justin. Martyr. in Apol. 2 Iren. lib. 4.
cap. 34 and lib. 5. cap. 4. Gratian. Decret. part. 3. de Conse^r. did. 2. cap.
10.12, 18.36. Durand, rational, divin. offic. lib. 4. cap. 5^.


how comes it to have those things, which are so directly contrary to the
Mass, that both cannot possibly stand together. In our book of Common Prayer,
we pray to God only in the mediation of Jesus Christ, and in a known
language: We profess that Christ by one oblation of himself once for all,
has made a full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the
whole world: that he has commanded a perpetual remembrance of his death and
passion in that his ordinance of the Supper: and that the Sacrament is to be
administered in both kinds; the Minister and the people communicating together:
were these things taken out of the Masse-booke? The Church of Rome joyneth the
two first Commandments in one, or takes away the second, thereby to cloak
their Idolatry in the worshipping of Images: But the common-prayer-booke of the
Church of England divides them into two, therein following (two of the Fathers
at most excepted) all Antiquity, and fetteth down the words of the second
Commandment at large. The Church of Rome teaches, that in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, the body and blood of Christ is received and eaten carnally;
that as much is received in one kind, as in both, and that in the Mass Christ
is offered (...) a propitiatory unblouddy Sacrifice, for the sins of (...)
and dead: But the common-prayer-booke of the Church of England, in the form of
administering that Sacrament, teaches expressly; That spiritually by faith we
feed on him in our. hearts, eating and drinking in remembrance that Christ dyed
and shed his blood for us. In the Mass the Priest receives alone, the people
standing by, gazing on: but the Minister and people are appointed with us to
communicate together; according to the institution of Christ, and practice of
the primitive Church. We make the communion of the Eucharist properly a
Sacrament: They, a Sacrament and a Sacrifice propitiatory: They celebrate at an
Altar: we at a Table; according to the example of our Savior Christ, his
Apostles, and the primitive Church in the purest times. We pray for the
living; They for the living and dead. And if these be not points directly and
expressly contrary to the Roman service, Rome is much departed from her self.

Carriers pretense in that particular is a mere juggling trick, that he might
insinuate, a change of Religion, might be made among us without any great
alteration, which is as likely as the light should be turned into darkness and
not espied. If many points of Popery be not condemned expressly in the
Catechism, or Service-booke (which are for the instruction of the simple in
the grounds of Religion, and the administration of the holy things of God, and
not to show what is condemned in Religion) yet so many points are there taught
directly contrary to the foundation of Popery that it is not possible Popery
should stand, if they take place. And whereas Antichristianisme stands in
ungodly superstructions and additions to the truth and worship of God; both
matter and object, if the Catechism and Service-booke have not enough in them
in his sense, of necessity they contradict the whole bulk of Popery, which
confisteth in abominable superfluities, or impious inventions of their own.

It is moan proper to say, the Mass was added to our common prayer, than that
our common prayer was taken out of the Masse-booke: For most things in our
common prayer, were to be found in the Liturgies of the Church, long before the
Mass, whereof we speak, was heard of in the world. And the Mass was patched
up by degrees, and added to the Liturgy of the Church, now one piece, then
another; so that the ancient truths and holy Liturgies were at last stained
with the Idol of the Mass, Bishop Jewel. Ser. on Josh. 6.1, 2, 3. The things
that may be reserved ( viz. in the destruction of Hiericho) must not be dust,
or chasse, or hay, or stubble: But gold, silver, iron and brass: I mean, they
may not be things meet to furnish and maintain superstition, but such things
as be strong, and may serve either directly to serve God, or else for
comeliness and good order.
which was sacrilegiously thrust into them. But the prayers and truths of God
taught in that Book, pertained to the Church, as her prerogative: the Mass
and the abominations thereof belonged into the man of sin. And if a true man
may challenge his goods, which the these has drawn into his den; the
Church of God may lawfully make claim unto those holy things, which Antichrist
has unjustly usurped: That answer which is returned to the accusation, makes
against them that sue for discipline, viz. That a great part of their
discipline is borrowed from the Anabaptists, will serve as a buckler in this
case: And it is this; which (I doubt not) you will approve: Whatsoever is
proper either to the heresy of Papists and Anabaptists, Donatists, or
Puritanes, that we utterly condemn to the pit of hell: But if amongst the
filth of their heresies, there may be found any good thing (as it were a grain
of good corn in a great deal of Darnell) that we willingly receive, not as
theirs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the Philistines, T. C. repl. 2.
par. 1. Epistle to the Chh of England.
whereof they were unjust owners. For herein that is true, that is said; The
sheep must not lay down her fell, because she sees the Wolf sometimes
clothed with it. August. lib. 2. Sermon. de Monte: yea, it may come to pass,
that the Synagogue of Satan may have some one thing at one time with more
convenience, than the true and catholic Church of Christ: Bishop Jewel. Ser.
in Josh. 6.1.2.3. In religion no part is to be called little. A hair is but
little, yet it has a shadow.
If our Book please the Papists, it is but in some things, wherein in
reverence to Antiquity, we come too nigh them in some rites and ceremonies;
but with the substance of the ministration it self they cannot be pleased,
unless they be displeased with their own service, and will renounce their
own Religion.

If Pope Pius the fourth, promised to Queen Elizabeth, that if she would
reconcile her self to the Church of Rome, Pius the fourth in his Bull sent
forth against Queen Elizabeth, says, Impioru^ numerus tantum potentia
invaluit, and nullus jam in orb locus relictus fit, quem illi pessimis
doctrinis corru^pere non tentarint.

And then speaking of Q. Elizabeth. Missae sacrificium, preces, jejunia,
cihorum delectum. caelibatu^ abolevit.


and acknowledge the supremacy of that Sea; he for his part would bind
himself to declare the sentence pronounced against her Mothers marriage, to be
unjust; to confirm by his authority the English Liturgy; and to permit the
administration of the Sacrament here in England under both kinds. It is no new
thing for the Pope to permit, and confirm both, for his own sinister end,
what he does not like or approve. It is no strange matter that the Pope should
prefer his supremacy, before the purity of Religion. And by the words of the
offer, the promise of the Pope seems not to be extended to the whole
Liturgy, and service of the Church, as it is established by Law, but to some
part alone; perhaps as it was practiced before the sacrifice of the Mass was
abolished. For why should it be added, that he would permit the administration
of the Sacraments in both kinds, if he would confirm the whole English
Liturgy, as it is now set forth. After Queen Elizabeth was proclaimed, a
Proclamation came forth, that the Letany, the Epistles and Gospels, the
Decalogue, the Creed, and the Lords-prayer should be read in all Churches in
the English tongue: but it was the fourteenth of May after, being Whitsunday,
before the sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and the book of the
uniformitie of common prayer, and the administration of the Sacraments
publicly received, but whether the whole Service be meant or no, it is not
much material; for he could not confirm it, but he must condemn himself.

If the Papists for the first ten years, The seditious Bull of Pius Quintus,
was set up and published by Felton, a rebellious traitor, in the twelfth year
of Q. Elizabeth, which bare date the fifth of the Calends of March, Anno 1569.

An. 13. The statute for subscription to the Doctrine of faith and Sacraments.
An. 17. of Q. Elizabeth, there was great stir about Ceremonies and
Discipline. Scripsit haec ille (says Mr. Parker speaking of Dr. Whiteg.) ante
natam separatione^ nostram (quae utinam, O utinam^nata nunqua^ fuisset!) Park.
de polit. Eccl. l. 1. ca. 14. sect. 1. Ann. 20. Began a flourishing time.

An. 26. Universal subscription offered to the Ministers. After which followed
grievous troubles, and then separation and falling from the Chh. August. lib.
1. contr. ep. Parm. c. 7. Nec quae dicebant probare potuerunt, et adhuc in
sanctae Ecclesiae praecisione. Sacrilego furore ferebantur.

Acts and Mon. vol. 3. title, The Cannon of the Mass.


resorted to our public Congregations and service, what can we think but
that the hand of the Lord was with us for good, whiles we sought him
unfaignedly, who caused our enemies at least lyingly to submit themselves. For
in the first ten years of Queen Elizabeth there was sweet consent amongst
brethren. The Pope durst not curse, the Gospel flourished and was glorified:
the Papists durst not oppose themselves, and I think there was not a man that
thought of separation. The pressing of subscription and conformity in the
tenth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, was that which brought in all the
troubles and contentions following. For after that Brethren wrote one against
another, the Papists they fell back to their vomit, and in process of time,
and not long after, some of fiery spirits advanced the Controversies to such an
height, as they forsook their brethren, renounced their Mother, and drew
themselves into voluntary separation, or schism. Which rents have been
increased unto this day by the violent urging of subscription and conformity
on the one fide, and the maintenance of that rash and sinful departure on the
other. But these things convince not our service to be idolatrous.

In few words, if our public worship be false and devised, it must be, either
because it is a stinted or set Liturgy, devised by man, or for some special
reason in respect of the former matter. If because it is a stinted or set
Liturgy devised by man, then it is in vain to say, it is picked out of the
Massebooke, or it pleases the Papists, or the Pope would have confirmed it:
For this does not make it devised worship, but it is devised worship, because
it is a set or stinted form: And then the same sentence must pass against all
set forms of Psalms, Blessings, Confessions, and Catechismes. Then the
public worship of all the Churches of God throughout the whole world, for the
space of this fourteen hundred years, if not more, was false, devised and
idolatrous. If in respect of the peculiar matter or form, then either the bare
form of words, order, and method, must be a part of worship, or the matter
and substance of prayers and administration of the Sacraments, be forged and
devised worship, neither of which was ever said by any Nonconformists, nor can
be avouched with color of truth. The form may be too like the Masse-booke in
some things, and the matter in every point not so pure as is to be desired; but
the form is not worship, nor prayers and substance of administration devised
worship.

Such is the unholinesse of this Idol-booke, Sect. 2. Neces. Can. of Separat.
p. 81, 82. 2 Admon. page 56. Def. Admo. page 4. 1 Admonit. page 3. Syons plea.
342. 318, 314. Mr. Gilby. page 29. 2 Admon. 57. 1 Admon. 3.
as the Nonconformists generally have refused to subscribe unto it; affirming
it to be such a piece of work at it is strange any will use it, there being in
it most vile and unallowable things. And for this cause, they have besought the
Peers of the Read^ie, that it might be utterly removed, and many reasons they
have given in several Treatises, to prove their condemnation of it, just and
lawful. First, because it is an infections Liturgy, Romish-stuffe, a divised
service, and in it are many, Religions ^ixed together, of Christ and
Antichrist, of God and the Devil: besides, a book full of fancies, and a
great many things contrary to Gods Word; and prayers which are false, foolish,
superstitious, and stark naught. Secondly, They cannot account it praying, as
they use it commonly, but only reading or saying of prayers: 2 Admon. 56.
even as a child that learneth to reads, if his lesson be a prayer he reads
a prayer, and does not pray: even so it is commonly a saying, and reading
prayers; and not praying. Thirdly, In all the order there is no edification,
but confusion. Fourthly, We read not of any such Liturgy in the Christian
Church in the days of the Apostles, 1 Admon. page 14. Altar Dam. 178.
nor in many ages following, till blindness, ignorance and laziness
occasioned a prescript form to be made for idle and dumb Priests. Fifthly, If
this were not, many would make more profession of Love to preaching, and
hearing Gods Word, but by this means it is neglected and despised: for
worldlings, usurers, drunkards, whore-mongers, and other earthly and profane
people, away with nothing so well as English Mass; Against Br. 43. Curt. Chapter
power. 42.45.
and why? but because it does not sharply reprove them of their sins, nor
disclose the secret of their hearts, but that they may continue in all kind of
voluptuousness, and all other kind of wickedness; Learn. Discour. of Eccl.
Govern. 68. Mart. Senior. p. 2. Pract. of Prin. addi.
and therefore rightly it is called their sterve-us-booke. Sixthly, God has no
where appointed that the Church should be tied to read the Book of
Common Prayer for his worship: and therefore to do it is an high transgression
before him, as great as the sin of Nadab and Abihu, and such are liable unto
the like or greater punishment. Seventhly, If this were praying, and there were
never an ill word nor sentence in all the prayers, yet to appoint it to be
used, or to use it as Papists did their Mattens and Evening-song, for a
se^-service to God, though the words be good, the use is naught. The words of
the first Chapter in John be good, but to be put into a Tablet of gold, 2
Admon. page 55.
for a sovereign thing to be worn, the use is superstitious and naught; and
so is the use of this Service.

The Nonconformists never passed any condemnatorie sentence against the Book
of Common Prayer, Course of Confor. page 58.
The famous confession of faith well known and commended at home and abroad,
the forms of prayer publicly used in the Congregations and families of
Scotland, must be cast in a new mould.

It is true, Beza Epist. 2. Gravissime nimirum and in semetipsos and in fratres
reliquos peccare qui naevis istis, aut etiam si mavis, corrupt^lis, et suas ex
aliorum cos^entias non leviter perturbant, perinde ac si de Christianismo semel
ablato ageretur, etc. Sed vitia a vitiis and quae condonanda sunt Christianae
chari^ati ab iis quae prorsus sunt execranda, pradenter distinguenda esset
censeo, idque tamen non ex carnis sed spiritus prudenti^^.
the Nonconformists judge it unlawful to subscribe to that Book, that every
thing contained therein is agreeable to the Scripture, but they condemn not
the Book as an Idol or profane, nor the use of the Book in those things
which are consonant to the truth. And of this their judgment there is evident
ground: for we must not approve the least error (though in it self never so
harmless) for truth, because that were to lie against the truth, and the God
of truth needs not my lie: But many things must be tolerated, when it is not
in our power to amend them, which we cannot approve, otherwise we must hold
communion with no Church or society in the world. And of this mark are the
corruptions noted in the Communion-Booke, as has been showed, and is evident
by the particulars mentioned in passages which you allege.

It is true likewise, they judge the Book in the form thereof to come too
nigh the Papists (and so have others as well as they) and therefore have
petitioned that it might be reformed, that we might depart further from them,
and come nearer to the reformed Churches. But herein they show what they judge
most convenient, not condemning the Book for the substance thereof, as a
forged worship: How much more convenient were it (says T. C. T.C. repl. 2. p.
109.
) that according to the manner of the reformed Churches: first the Minister
with an humble and general confession of faults, should desire the assistance
of the Lord for the fruitful handling and receiving of the Word of God; and
then after we have heard the Lord speak unto us in his Word by his Minister,
the Church should likewise speak unto the Lord, and present petitions and
suits at once, etc. But how careful he was to prevent such ways and speeches
as some professors of the Gospel being private men, might be emboldned to
break forth upon such like exceptions, T.C. repl. 1. p. 106.
is evident by that solemn request he makes unto them that profess the
Gospel, in the name of God, that they abuse not his labor to other ends, than
he bestowed it, and that they keep themselves in their callings, commit the
matter by prayer unto the Lord, leaving to the Ministers of the word of God,
and to the Magistrate that which pertains to them. The Protestants in France
for substance of matter agree with the Nonconformists herein.

The use of the whole Book for matter and manner in every thing without
addition or alteration they do not approve, because they conceive some things
faulty, others inconvenient, and some things defective: and strictly to be tied
to words and syllables, is more than the Lord has bound us unto in the
administration of his holy Sacraments: But the substance of prayers in the
Book they never disallowed, nor the use of the book, 2 Admonit. page 56. ^
Admonit. page 3.
as of a vile and filthy thing. Thus the Authors of the Admonition must be
understood, when they say, The Book is such a piece of work, as it is strange
we will use it. And now they are bound of necessity to a prescript order of
service, and book of common prayer, in which a great number of things contrary
to Gods Word are contained, etc. For they profess they have tolerated what
they could not amend, 1 Admonit. page 9. Park. of the Cross, part. 2. ca. 9.
sect. 4. We receive the Communion-book in what we may; and in omitting of the
ceremonies, we do in equity keep the Law, because of the end which is to
edify.
and used the Book in their Ministry, so far as they might, even where they
object as great corruptions against it, as in any other place.

To read or repeat a prayer by heart, as if the bare rehearsal thereof in so
many words and syllables, and none other, was a part of Gods worship, is a
transgression of his commandment, whether it be prescribed by others or
devised of our selves, or set down in Scripture. And the same may be said of
the preaching of the Word, to place opinion of worship in the mere act done in
such words or method, is will worship or superstition. And we may say of both
these exercises so used, 2 Admonit. page 56.
as the Admonition does, we cannot account them praying or preaching, but
only reading or rehearsing or saying of a Sermon or prayer; even as a child
that learneth a prayer or Sermon without book; if he rehearse what he has
learned, he rehearses a prayer or Sermon, but he does not pray or preach. But
this is only the sin of him that uses not these prayers as he ought, it
argues not the prayers themselves to be evil, nor the use of a stinted form
public or private in them that use it, or them that join to be disallowed.
If it be not praying as it is used ignorantly for custom, without affection,
it is praying when used aright with understanding, faith, feeling, and such
like affections required in holy prayer.

We read not of any such Liturgy in the Church of Christ in the days of the
Bilson Christ. subsect. part. 4. p. 407, 408.

You may well perceive by the Apostles words, that they had neither Sermons nor
Service prefixed, nor limited in his time: but when the chh. came together, the
Elders and Ministers instructed the people and made their prayers by miraculous
instinct or inspiratio^. This was all the church service they had: to which
they added the celebration of the Lords Supper, but without any settled or
prefixed order of prayer, except it were the LORDS prayer, which they observed
in all places, etc.


Apostles, and therefore no such Liturgy is any part of Gods worship or
substantial means thereof, to be used without addition or alteration of all
or any Church, with opinion of necessity, holiness, or merit. But a set
Liturgy might be in use in their times, though we read not of it, for the
Apostles set not down a Catalogue of all and every particular order that was
in the Church, but give us a perfect rule or canon of faith and manners in all
things necessary to salvation, and all things unchangeably concerning the
government of the Church unto the end of the world. And if there was no stinted
Liturgy in their days, yet for order a set form of prayer to be used in
public meeting is not unlawful, because it is of the number of things which
God has not determined in his Word, and In the additions to the Admonition it
is read thus; Remove Homilies, Articles, Injunctions, and that prescript order:
wherein they declare that their meaning is not to disallow of prescript service
of prayer, but of this form that we have, T. C. repl. 1. page 105. Dr. Whiteg.
answer to the Admonition, page 143.
where God has not prescribed any form, there no form must be esteemed any
part of worship, or condemned as simply unlawful. For as to call that holy
which God has not sanctified is superstition; so it is erroneous to condemn
that as unholy or profane, which God allows or is consonant to his Word,
though it be not precisely commanded. But that there was no such Bilson ibid.
page 409. Had they set an order for the service of the church, durst any man
after have broken it? or any church refused it?
Liturgy in many ages following, till blindness, ignorance and laziness
occasioned a prescript form to be made for idle and dumb Priests, is your
addition to the Nonconformists reasons, and not their saying; and more then can
be proved by good Authority. Of the precise antiquity of stinted Liturgies,
it is hard to determine, but that they have been in use in the Christian
Church for the space of this fourteen hundred years, if not above, no man can
deny. It is more than probable that stinted forms were in use in the Greek
Churches, before they came to the The Bishops of Rome were 600. years and
upward, patching and peicing the Mass, before they brought it to any settled
form. Polydor. De Invent. rer. l. 5. c. 10.
Latin, at least many things were translated out of the Greek Liturgies into
the Latin. But in the Latin Church we find a stinted form was in use in
Cyprians time, in the administration of the Supper; not to insist upon that
which some mention of the Lords prayer used in the celebration, from the very
times of the Apostles. And some the chief promoters of a stinted Liturgy are
renowned for their constant and unwearied pains, in preaching every day in the
week, and sometimes twice. So that there is no probability; that the first
occasion of a stinted Rome had one form of service: Millain, another: France,
a third; Greg. respon. ad 3. interrogat. Aug.
Liturgy was to help the ignorant, idle or dumb Priest, as you are pleased
to phrase it. Where you borrowed this clause I know not, but I cannot find
that ever the Sea T. C. repl. 1. page 106.
Nonconformists have thus written.

In all the order there is (you say) no edification, but confusion; but the 2
Admon. page 14.
Author of the Admonition says, In all their order of service there is no
edification, according to the Rule of the Apostle, but confusion: which seems
to be referred rather to the In the Church of Corinth, some of their Elders,
strangers or inahbitants, to venditate themselves and the gifts they had of
God, might sometimes bless or make their prayers at the Lords Table in a
tongue not understood of the whole multitude. But this abuse does not condemn
the exercise it self.
abuse in too many places, than to the order it self prescribed in the book,
as the instances following, of tossing the Psalms like tennise-balls in many
places, and the peoples standing, walking, talking, reading by themselves, do
evidence. But the Book is not to be burdened with the faults of men, though
too ordinary and common.

The Nonconformists dislike that nothing else should be required of Ministers,
but barely to read service: and the ordaining of ignorant Ministers they
condemn, as contrary to the Word of God, and the means to nuzzle people in
ignorance, security, lukewarmnesse and sin. But the use of a stinted
Liturgy, or the reading of prayers in the public assembly, they never
gainesaid as unlawful or inexpedient. We agree (says T.C. repl. 1. p. 106.
T. C.) of a prescript form of prayer to be used in the Church. And in the
other, no question many Conformists do consent with them. A prescript service
therefore and an Rutges. Metaph. institut. lib. 1. ca. de Bono. Effectus per
accidens secutus ex action vel omissione alicujus, non imputatur ei; nisi
intercedat obligatio, cavendi unum ne aliud sequatur. Hoc pacto unus bomo
nonpotest just and recte intendere permissionem lapsus alterius.
ignorant or careless Ministry, have no necessary coherence; the one is
lawful, the other unlawful, the one may be retained, the other ought to be
taken away. It is no consequence to reason thus; The Nonconformists disallow a
Ministry that can do nothing but read, as that which makes men neglect the
preaching of the Word, therefore a prescript Liturgy is disliked.

To appoint or use a prayer conceived or stinted as the Papists do their
Mattens and Evensong, for a set service to God, howsoever it be uttered
ignorantly, for custom with lips only, alone or with others in public or
private, as if the rehearsal of such words, though neither understood
nonheard, were an acceptable service, from Bills. Christ. subject. part. 4. p.
416. Your maine foundation is a dream of your own, that the Church of Corinth
had a prescribed number of prayers pronounced by some one Chapsaine, that said
his lesson within book, and might not go one line besides his Missale for any
good. This you imagine was their Church Service; all other prayers, Psalms,
blessings, and thankesgivings, though they were used openly in the
Congregation, and the whole people bound to say, Amen; you will not have to be
called Church Service.
which he must not depart one word for any good, is a superstition justly to be
condemned. Thus to repeat the words of a prayer, though never so good and
holy, is not to pray. But, this makes nothing against the lawful, holy,
religions use of a stinted form of prayer public or private, which is that
we plead for. And this is all that can be gathered from the Author of the
Admonition. There needs no great skill to discern the inconsequence of this
manner of arguing which here you use; To use a stinted form as the Papists do
for a set-service is naught, though the words be good; therefore a stinted or
prescribed form is altogether unlawful.

And put case some private or singular person has spoken roughly in heat and
passion of the Book of Common Prayer, or seemed to disallow the stinted use of
a public found of prayer or Liturgy, his speech or position, delivered as his
private conceit, (and perhaps not rightly apprehended) must not be interpreted
the principle of the Nonconformists, contrary to the tenor of their writing,
profession, and practice, much less must his words be racked contrary to his
meaning, as if he condemned all stinted Liturgies as falso, de^ised and
idolatrous worship, or did lean unto, favor, or uphold the practice of
separation from the assemblies, because such Liturgies are in use among them.

Howsoever by the grounds of the Nonconformists laid down in the second
section, Can. Neces. of Separat. page 92, 93, 94, etc. to 98.
separation must necessarily follow from all communion with them in the worship
of their Church-service-booke, yet to have the point more fully proved, I will
here show that every particular thereof, is affirmed of themselves to be
idolatrous, false, Antichristian. Touching the Book we may consider two
things: First, The distinct services thereof: Secondly, The Ceremonies used in
and about the same. We will speak first of their Ceremonies, that is, of the
Cross, Surplice, and Kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper:
Against these many Treatises have been purposely written; I will here only
observe some of their speeches, referring the Reader to their Books, if he
desire more satisfaction, etc.

Voluntary separation from the ordinances of Religion in our assemblies, A
disputation against the English-popish, etc. Epistle to the Reformed Churches:
In England and Ireland, every noysom weed which Gods hand never had planted,
was not pulled up, etc. Sprint repl. to the answ page 269. acknowledges the
reformation of England to have been defective.
abuses and corruptions in the Book, the Nonconformists do not deny; and
therefore in all humility they have sought to have them reformed; but that
they affirm the whole service thereof to be idolatrous, false, Antichristian,
that is your impudent slander. That many Treatises have been written against
the Ceremonies imposed upon the Ministers and people, is very true. But in the
relation which you make out of them, these few things must be observed. First,
what is spoken of one Ceremony, you apply to all, when there is not the same
reason of all, in the judgment of them that wrote. Secondly, what they write
of the Ceremonies as they are used amongst the Papists, that you report as if
they understood it of the use of the Ceremonies as they are imposed and
enjoined amongst us. Thirdly, The private opinion of one, you allege, as if it
was the common principle of the Nonconformists, though you do, or might know,
that generally they are of another mind. Fourthly, Amongst your chiefest
Nonconformists you allege, such as be not English-Nonconformists, nor speak
of English-Conformitie, but that which was lately brought in among themselves;
whose case does much differ from ours in their judgment. But the further
examination of these things is needless; let us hear how from these
principles of the Nonconformists, you can conclude the necessity of Separation.

From all which, Can. Neces. of Sep^rat. page 98.
this argument may be framed: That worship in which a man cannot possibly
communicate without sin, he is bound necessarily to separate from. But that
worship in which these Idols are made and used, viz. the Cross, Surplice, and
Kneeling, a man cannot possibly communicate without sin. Therefore from that
worship, wherein these Idols are made and used, a man is bound necessarily to
separate. The proposition is certain, and by Doctor Ames in his cases of
Conscience acknowledged. Although (says Lib. 4. cap. 24.
he) we may join to that Church, in which many defects are to be tolerated,
yet not to that in which we cannot but necessarily partake in sin. The
Assumption is assented unto by as Parker. Cross. lib. 1. page 20. 21.
judicious and zealous Nonconformists as ever held that cause, and they have
brought good proofs, for it. First, because men must fly from Idols and
Idolothites: But when they come to worship God after the order of the
Congregation where these things are practiced, they do not fly from them, but
draw near unto them. Secondly, Their bare presence argues their approbation,
and yielding in show to Ceremonies. Thirdly, Mr. Bates. p. 258.
Though the personal sins of the Minister do not hurt the people, yet his
ministerial and public sins do hurt, which he performs for the people to
God, and so their joining with him is unlawful. Fourthly, What example can be
brought where the holy men of God have communicated with such things. The
Author of the dispute upon communicating at their confused Communions, affirms
confidently, that the sitter is accessory to the sin of the keeler, and he
gives many reasons for it, whereof we shall have a fit occasion hereafter to
speak.

Can any man believe, viz. That a man is bound to separate from that society,
wherewith he is not permitted to hold communion in the worship of God without
sin; and that a man cannot hold communion with the Church of England in the
worship of God without sin.

The first of these propositions is most true taught in Scripture, which
forbids. Romans 3.7, 8.
to do evil that good may come thereof, or Job 13.9.
tell a lie for the glory of God, and acknowledged by the learned of all sorts
and professions whatsoever. If the Church shall deny communion to any member,
because he will not approve the least sin, or acknowledge the least known
error for truth, in that case the Church is schismatic, which does cast out
such a member, and not the member which does suffer himself injuriously to be
cast out. For God needs not my lie, and by divine precept I am obliged not to
allow against conscience what the Lord condemns. You need not therefore take
such pains as you do, to prove the corruptions in our Book of public
service to be so many in number, or heinous in quality, as you would make the
world believe; much less to strain your conscience in misreporting as you
have done: For if you can show, that by communicating in the ordinances of
worship, in that or any other society or Church under Heaven, we necessarily
partake in sin, of what sort soever, great or small, either approving what is
unlawful, or subscribing to an error known so to be, it will easily be
granted that it is unlawful to join in that community. Be the The good Kings
of Judah were favored and blessed of God, for walking in the ways of David
their Father, and purging the Land from all sacrifices and ceremonies not
prescribed by Moses Law. Bills. Christ. subject. part. 1. p. 32. But if the
Princes were remiss, the people were not commanded to separate from the
ordinances of worship.
corruptions few or many, great or small; if by communicating in the ordinances
of grace in that society, I must necessarily partake in sin; small or great,
one or many, my communicating is unwarrantable: And let the abuses be many and
great, yet if I may be present at the true worship of God without sin,
consent unto, or approbation of such abuses or corruptions, in voluntary
separation I sin against God, his Church, and mine own soul, withdrawing my
self from the ordinances of grace, the comfortable presence of Christ, and the
society of his Saints, without allowance or approbation from God, to whom I
owe my self wholly.

Your long Catalogue of corruptions to be found in our Liturgy, is to small
purpose, unless you could prove some of them to be fundamental, heretical,
and really idolatrous, which you can never do, or that by communicating in the
ordinances of grace, we do Be the abuses never so palpable, if the person be
not authorized of God to reform them, or separate, it is not Just or lawful
for private persons to attempt them. For when Malefactors deserve to die, it is
not for private men to put them to death, without the Magistrate. Bilson
Christ. subject. part. 3. pa. 97. David committed adultery, Solomon erected
idolatry; both offenses being death by Gods law: might the people therefore
have David and Solomon to death?
approve such corruptions, and then be they one or many, great or small, we
must not communicate in the ordinances with them. Which if any man shall
lightly believe, he may know from whom, but not whither to fly: For there will
be found no society in the whole world, whereunto a Christian might lawfully
join himself, and yours much less than many others.

You tell us very confidently, that as zealous and judicious Nonconformists as
ever held that cause, affirm, that a man cannot without sin communicate in
that worship, where the Ceremonies are used. But whether should a man admire
more your impudency, or vain confidence herein? Must not he mistrust you in
every thing, that shall consider how notoriously you lavish in this particular?
Is it not contrary to their profession, protestation, and practice? Do they
not usually frequent the Congregations? have they not written in maintenance
and defense thereof? who have cried down by conference, preaching, writing,
the neglect of Gods ordinances, or the practice of separation more than they?
And yet you blush not to write, that our Assumption is assented unto by as
judicious and zealous Nonconformists as ever held that cause, and they have
brought good reasons for it.

First, You quote Mr Parker. lib. 1. page 20, 21.
Parker, That men must fly from Idols and Idolothites: but men when they come
to worship God in societies where the Ceremonies are used, they do not fly
from Idols, but draw near unto them. But if a man should have sought out a
place of purpose to manifest your fraudulent and unconscionable alleging of
men's words and sayings, he could scarce have found a second more pregnant. The
whole passage in Mr Parker, to which you send us, I will set down at large,
because it serves to clear the matter in many particulars, and all men may
take the better notice of your fidelity. There is an Idol more strictly taken
(says he) and an Idol of larger sense, which will include the Cross. For the
better understanding whereof, we must borrow a distinction from the Tho. Aqui.
com. in Epist. ad Coloss, c. 1. sect. 4.
Schoolmen, by which a thing may be guilty of Idolatry, Essentialiter,
participative, and causaliter: which our doctrine at Hom. of Idolat. par. 1.
page 4, 5.
home does back, that is confirmed by act of Parliament, affirming that to be
an Idol in Gods service, which has been or is like to be worshipped. What is
worshipped by our selves, that is an Idol essentially; what has been
worshipped or is now worshipped abroad by others, that is an Idol by
participation; what is likely to be worshipped, that is an August. vet. Testam.
qu. lib. 7. qu. 41.
Idol, causing Idolatry in time to come; In which sense, Gideons Ephod may be
termed an Idol quedam modo, and that it may be even before it was adored. And
hereby are many objections answered. Our Rainold. de Idol. lib. 2. ^ap. 2.
sect. 2. Bilson. Christ. subject. part. 4. p. 321. Call you the Image of Christ
an Idol; not unless it be worshipped; but if it be, then it is an Idol, and
incense burnt unto it is Idolatry.
Writers deny an Image in the Church, say some, to be an Idol, in case it be
not worshipped. True, an Idol essentially, but as many of them as desire to
have Images thrust out of the Church (of which sort there be a great number)
they hold them guilty of Idolatry by participation, and by occasioning, or else
why will they thrust them out. A second objection is wont to be made; If the
sign of the Cross be an Idol with us, then must men separate from our Church,
and from our Baptism; which follows not. From Idols essentially men ought to
separate by the example of the 2 Chronicles. 11.13.10.
Levites and the two tribes that made separation from the Calves of Jeroboam.
From Idols of participation and occasion, men ought to keep their own selves
pure, but not to separate, by the ensample of the 2 Reg. 16.21.
godly, who separated not from the Temple of God, for Damascus Altar there, and
from the 1 Reg. 22.43.
Church, because of her high places. It is objected once more against us; If
our sign of the Cross be an Idol, then our Ministers that do make it be
Idolaters, and our Church Idolatrous also. This follows not neither. For
denomination being from the form, and the cross not being formally an Idol
amongst us, but materially (I speak in comparison of the Popish Cross, in
regard whereof we may be said to use that which is an Idol, but we do not use
it idolatrously;) therefore as Dr Fulke Dr. Fulk against Greg. Mart. cap. 3,
sect. 20.
concludes of the Lutherans for having Images in their Churches, the same must
be said of all those Protestants, that will retain crosses, they sin against
the two first Commandments, through Idolothisme, not directly through
Idolatry, and therefore they may not be termed Idolaters. Howbeit, by way of
reduction, Idolothisme is in some sort guilty of Idolatry, as shows the 1
Cor. 10.34.
Apostle, who in stead of saying, Fly from Idolothisme, says, Fly from
Idolatry. This Idolatry by reduction what is it else, but Idolatry by
participation; as does appear by the 18.20. and 24. verses following. But this
participation is not in our Cross (will our opposits say) who first least
happily they should mistake us, we desire to recount the ancient Pet. Martyr. in
1 Cor. 10.16.
distinction; Plus est communio, quam participatio; nam ad hanc satis est
partem habere, sed ad illam requiritur ut prorsus uniamur, atque totum
percipiamus, quod nobis proponitur. This being premised, that we charge the
Cross not with a total communion, but with a Things ordained by God, must
have reverence, though they be but creatures, as things that be sacred by the
word and ordinance of God: But adoration they must not have. Aug. de doct.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9. Qui veneratur utile signum divinitus institutum, cujus
vim significationemque intelligit, non hoc veneratur quod videtur, sed illud
potius quo talia cuncta referenda sunt. But Images are signs unprofitable to
serve God with, and dangerous; And since the Law of God expressly and strictly
charge us not so much as to bow our bodies or knees to the likeness of any
thing in Heaven or Earth, which is made with hands, it can neither be Christian
nor catholic to do it. See Bilson. Christ, subject. part. page 391. and 534.
Theodoret. Dial. 2. uses the word Adoration for an external regard and
reverence. Veneration is a word that Augustine foundeth all the signs and
sacraments of the old and new Testament: Adoration he reserveth to God only.
Aug. de docr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9.
participation in part only, we do thus bring in our evidence against him.
Thus Mr Parker. Now consider how many ways you falsify his testimony, and
whether you did it willingly or no, let your conscience judge? Mr Parker says,
The Cross is an Idol materially but not formally, that is, amongst the
Papists it is an Idol essentially, and so the use of the Cross, is the use of
that which is an Idol, but not used idolatrously amongst us. You make him to
say, because we must fly from Idols, therefore we cannot communicate in the
worship of God where the Cross is used without sin. He says, Men must keep
themselves pure from Idolothites, and not partake in the use of them, but not
separate from the Church or ordinances of grace, because such rites or
ceremonies are used in the administration: you clean contrary make him to say,
That men cannot communicate in the ordinances, or worship God in that society,
where such things are practiced, but of necessity they must communicate in the
sin. He teaches, That he that uses the Idolothite or material Idol, is
not an Idolater, because he does not use it idolatrously: but you make the
Nonconformists to say, that it is an idolatrous worship, and that it defiles
the true worship of God, to all that are present. Mr Parker extends the guilt
of participation in part only, to him that uses the Idolothite, you make him
to affirm, that every one present at the worship, does communicate in his
offense. Perhaps you will say, it is your inference upon his words: But the
consequence is absurd and senseless: And to charge men to affirm directly as
a principle, what you would infer contrary to their express words, is far
from honest and plain dealing.

Secondly, You produce Mr Bates, saying, That bare presence argues approbation
or yielding in show to Ceremonies, I cannot say, you deal with Mr Bates, as
you have done by Mr Parker and others, for I have not seen his Book. But if
any such passage be found in him, it is his private opinion, not the judgment
of the most learned and zealous Inconformists: It is a bare assertion, not
confirmed by Scripture, or backed with reason, as is meet and convenient, when
it is the maine thing in question, and might easily be opposed by the
testimonies of Scripture, approved practice of the Saints in all ages of the
Church, the judgment of the godly learned, sound reason, and the consent of
all States that ever upheld or maintained Christian Religion. If bare presence
be approbation, I desire to know, how you can reconcile your self to your
self. When Dr Ames alleges, that every Church is not to be left, which has
something in it by participation Idolatrous. Can. Neces. of Separat. pa. 114,
115.
You answer; I know no man holds the contrary: therefore I cannot tell for what
end he speaks it, much less why he puts a schismatic conceit upon the Rej:
whose words, if they be well rectified, have substance and weight in them. But
if bare presence be approbation, how can we hold communion with that Church,
wherein any thing is left, which is by participation idolatrous, when this is
that which the Nonconformists impute to the Cross among us, that it is by
participation idolatrous in them that use it. And if the reason following be
well weighed (though in it self it has neither weight nor substance) it will
overweigh this: For if bare presence be approbation, why should not the
personal sins of the Minister hurt the people! or why are they not guilty of
his personal sins by participation, when they communicate with him in the
worship of God where they are practiced, as in prayer, preaching,
administration of the Sacraments, reading the Scriptures, etc. Presence in the
Idoll-Temple at Idoll-worship is sinful, though in heart men pretend to detest
Idolatry: vain, needless presence where Idolothites are used, as to eat of
things sacrificed to Idols in the place of their Idoll-banquet, or to sit
down, though he do not eat, is scandalous and offensive: but presence at
Gods worship, which God has commanded, where Christ is present to meet,
welcome and bless his servants, though some things by participation Idolatrous
be retained or used therein is neither sinful nor offensive, it carries no
evil appearance of approbation or consent.

This distinction of personal and ministerial sins, as it is here applied,
I never found in the writings of Nonconformist, and in it self it is a mere
invention and device, which has no ground from Scripture, and must have no
place in Divinity. For if the Minister be ignorant, proud, careless,
profane, corrupt in judgment, superstitious in some observations, be these
sins personal or public and Ministerial. If personal, then should not
they hurt the people, if this be true which here you affirm: But when you are
directly cross to your self throughout your whole book. If public and
ministerial, then the people are guilty of the Ministers ignorance,
carelessness, pride, passion, indiscretion, etc. And if these be public and
ministerial, I desire to know what is a personal and what a ministerial
fault. If a Minister in preaching or prayer put up a rash petition, or deliver
a rash sentence, give a weak reason, an unsound trial, use vain repetitions,
a confused method; if he mis-interpret the Scripture, or do not soundly
deduce his doctrines out of the Text he takes upon him to expound; if he
divide it not aright, or some way misapply it; are these public and
ministerial or personal and private faults, if personal, I desire to know
what makes a fault ministerial and public, and see it proved. If that which is
done by a Minister in preaching and prayer, blessing and administration of the
Sacraments be not ministerial, I know not what is to be called ministerial.
If they be public and ministerial, then whosoever communicates with a
Minister in the worship of God, he is guilty of all the sins publicly
committed by him in this kind, if that distinction be of any worth. Which if it
be granted, (If I may judge of your preaching by your writing) it is high time
for all your hearers to have from you, for you mis-alleadge Scripture, slander
the godly, speak evil of the ways of God, teach many falsehoods, and whiles
they join with you in the worship of God, they are partakers of your
transgression.

The exposition which is made of public and ministerial faults, to wit, such
as he performs for the people to God, is as strange, if not more strange then
the distinction it self, as it is applied. For in preaching the Word, and
reading the Scripture, a ministerial fault may be committed, which is not
performed for the people to God. In prayer, the faults of the Minister are not
ever ministerial, if we may believe the forenamed distinction, and yet prayer
is an action performed for the people to God. And let that description stand,
and the use of our ceremonies are no ministerial faults; for they are neither
performed for the people unto God, nor from God unto the people, as the Church
professes. But I have stood too long about these things, because in the first
Chapter the contrary has been showed at large.

And if Mr Bates be truly alleged in this particular, that bare presence in
his conceit was approbation, yet this is a piece of cunning in you not very
commendable, that you bring the private judgment of one man, as if it was the
common principle of the chiefest Inconformists. For so you do in this place,
and so a little Can. Neces. of Separat. page 96.
before you say, the strictest Inconformists affirm, that it is utterly
unlawful for Parents to bring their children to be crossed, for which you cite
only the testimony of the forenamed Author: And yet within a few leaves, you
are not ashamed to say in the names of many at least Can. Neces. of Separat.
page 118.
. Note here how greatly they contradict one another. They said even now, that
their ceremonies are such Idols, as a man cannot lawfully join with that
worship where they are used, yet here they say, that they are not worse than
were the superstitions in the Jews worship, unto which Christ and his Apostles
joined. The chief thing here to be noted is your unconscionable dealing.
First, you pretend to set down the principles of the Nonconformists, and to
infer upon their grounds the necessity of separation, when you relate
nothing less, than that which they affirm. Secondly, The Beza. Epist. 2.
Verum inquient, ut no^ inquinemur eorum peccato, attamen favere eorum errorem
sic videbitur. Imo ne hoe quidem satis recte dicitur. Quid enim absurdius est,
quam cum accusare tanquam alieni vitiis fautorem, qui ut fratrem lucratur, ejus
infirmitatem rolerat. Tibi non frangitur panis, sed integer datur and laudari
sane id no^ potest, nec debet, at tu certe id peccatum non committis, quod in
te potius committitur.
opinion of one man walking alone, you charge upon all, or the chiefest of the
Nonconformists, who dissent as much from him therein, as he does from the most
rigid Separatist. Thirdly, He says not, That our Ceremonies are Idols, but
speaks of the Cross only: and if he say of the use thereof, as it is amongst
us, that it is Idolatry, it is that which he can never prove, nor Inconformist
will take upon him to justify. And if bare presence be approbation and
consent, all worship must be forsaken, which has any thing annexed unto it
erroneous, irreverent, superstitious in the manner of performance by the
Minister: for we must not do the least evil for the greatest good. Fourthly,
Whatsoever you can make of our Ceremonies or other abuses and corruptions in
the worship of God, I do not think you can bring forth any one Nonconformist,
that ever said the use of the Ceremonies amongst us, are worse than the
superstitions and corruptions in the Jews worship in the days of our Savior
Christ and his Apostles; unto which worship our Savior and his Apostles joined
themselves.

Thirdly, You allege the A dispute against the English-popish Epist to all
reform. Though some of the co^troverted ceremonies have bin kept and reserved
in many (not all) the reformed churches, yet they are not therefore to be the
better liked of. For the reason of the reservation was, because some reverend
Divines, etc. is scarcely expected to effectuate so much as the purging of the
Church from fundamental errors and gross Idolatry, which wrought them to be
content, that lesser abuses in Discipline and Church Government should then be
tolerated, etc. All which since they were once purged away from the Church of
Scotland, etc.
Author of the Dispute upon communicating at confused Communions, affirming
that the sitter is accessory to the sin of the kneeler. But he was no
English-Nonconformist, nor does entreat of English conformity. And if there be
any special reasons, why presence should be accounted approbation with them in
that particular, it is no equity his private opinion should be brought to the
prejudice of them that maintain another cause. But as yet we cannot see either
from Scripture grounds, or Nonconformists principles, that it is utterly
unlawful to be present at the worship of God, in the administration whereof
some superstitious rite is used, or some fault committed.

Your long labor in setting down the faults to be found in our Liturgy is to
small purpose. The Nonconformists do except against many things appointed in
the Book, as inconvenient at least, and such as should be taken away or
reformed; as, The reading of Apocryphal books, under the title of holy
Scripture, specially such parts as be corrupt for matter: The Cross and
Surplice as Idolothites by participation and signs of mystical signification:
The corruptions in the translations: and some things in the forms of Burial,
Matrimony, Thanksgiving for Women after childbed, etc. But these they condemn
not as Idolatry, nor as that which makes the worship it self Magdeburg. centu
2. ca. 2. col. 109. A true Church as it contains the pure doctrine, so also it
keeps simplieitie of ceremonies; but an hypocritical Church, as it departs
from pure doctrine, so for the most part it changes and augmenteth the
ceremonies instituted of God, and multiplieth its own traditions, etc. Can.
Stay. pa. 123.
false and idolatrous. It is one thing to say such a rite is inconvenient,
superstitious, scandalous borrowed from the Papists, not warranted by the word
of God, in the use will worship, if the word be taken largely; another that the
worship it self is false and idolatrous. Therefore I will not stand to examine
the particulars therein, but proceed to examine what you bring further to show
the necessity of Separation.

SECT. IV.
HEre is a fit place to propound a Question or two; First, whether to hold,
teach, and practice the errors and lies contained in their Canons,
Service-booke, Book of Articles, and the ordering of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, do mak^ a false Prophet. Secondly, Whether to hide from the people
the knowledge of all the maine truths, which concern the outward regiment of
Christ's visible Church, make a false Prophet. Thirdly, Whether it be lawful to
hear any false Prophet known so to be. Qu: In what rank of Prophets,
unlawful Ministers be, and under what Scripture they are comprehended. I would
have a private Christian ask this Question of some learned Divine, whom he
knows does hold it lawful to hear false Ministers. And it is very likely he
will answer him with deep silence. There is one Question more, viz. whether the
Lords lawful Priests, which served at the Altar in Jerusalem, might not as
well urge their people to hear Jeroboams Priests at Dan and Bethel, as the
Ministers now under the Gospel, to persuade men to hear in false Churches. If
is be not all one, show the difference.

ANSWER.
TO your two last Questions, answer has been made diverse times in sundry
Treatises, and in the first chapter of this present answer, and you know the
Scriptures plainly alleged, to confirm what is said, which you should have
confuted if you had been able, and not again and again to come over with the
same thing. If any learned Divine shall answer the demand with deep silence, it
may be because the party demanding is incapable of an answer, not because
there is any great difficulty in the matter. It is a received Rule, That the
Accuser, Plaintiff, and Affirmer, should make proof of what they say, and if
you err, your Questionist will affirm, it is all one for the people of the
Jews to hear Jeroboams Priests at Dan and Bethel, and the people in England
to hear the word of God in our assemblies, you must either bring good evidence
for what you say, or bear the brand of Slaunderers or false Beza. Epist. 2. An
enim obsecro aliter est de Sacrame^tis. i. de doctrinae appendicibus, quam de
ipsa doctrina judicandum. At qui si nullam esse ecclesia^ dicamus ubi nullus
est prorsus in cunctis doctrinae Christianae dogmatibus naevus, refellent nos
Pauli Epistolae Corinthiacis, et Galaticis Ecclesiis inscriptae; etc. Itaque
ubi non satis pura est Ecclesia, Ecclesia tamen est in qua salvum manet
fundamentum, ac multo magis ubi ritus Caenae Domini mutilus est, Caena tamen
est, etc.
Accusers. Is it sufficient think you to say, If it be not so, let them show
the contrary. Your second Question will come to be handled in the next Chapter,
and there it shall be answered. Your first Question only which I scarce think
another man would have asked, pertains to this place whereunto I answer
directly and plainly, That a Minister of the Gospel, may hold, teach, and
practice, according to the Book of Common Prayer, Articles, and Ordination, and
be a true Minister of Jesus Christ. Nay, he cannot truly hold and practice
according to them, but of necessity he must be a true Minister in respect of
his office and administration. For the worship for substance there prescribed
is of God, the doctrine professed in respect of faith and Sacraments, sound and
true. No error either in speech heretical, or which does tend to overthrow
the foundation which is taught in them. Suppose the seventie errors which Can.
Neces. of Separat. page 243, 244, 245.
you reckon up were all true, and justly taken against the Books, and as many
more to them might be named; as it is not the number but the qualities of the
errors which make a false Prophet, false Church, or false worship. One
fundamental error (as the word is commonly used) overthrows the faith: and
twenty errors of inferior alloy, do not much hurt the truth and soundness
of faith. The maine truths which concern the very life and soul of Religion
be Usher. de success. Eccl. cap. 1.
few, and the failings which may stand with the substance of Religion many. Let
it ask a better wit and head then ever Mr Dar. (or your Can. Neces. of
Separat. page 185.
self) had to prove that there are half so many corruptions in the Religion
professed by the English-Anabaptists (add if you please, the Separatists,
Pelagians, Arrians) as are to be found in the English-Liturgie: It will not be
hard to prove that errors must be The communion of the Catholic Church is
not broken by the variety of rites, customs, laws, and fashions, which many
places and countries have different each from other, except they be repugnant
to faith or good manners. August. Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. Eusebius. hist. lib. 5.
cap. 26. and lib. 5. c. 23. Socrat. lib. 5. ca. 21.
weighed, and not numbered; and that the errors of all these sorts are in
specie much more dangerous and pernicious, though not so many. If you can prove
any one error in specie heretical, to be taught in those Books, according to
the true meaning and intent of the Books, then I will consent unto you, that
he which administers in all things according unto them, is not a true Minister
of Jesus Christ: But if that cannot be done (and I presume you will hardly be
drawn to attempt it) in all your raging terms and reproachful taunts cast
upon our worship, Church, and Ministry, you do but foame out your own shame.
The true Ministers of Christ may err in many things, else it will hardly be
found, that there is any true Minister: and therefore to prove a Minister to be
a false Prophet, it suffices not to say; he Cypr. li. 2. Ep. 3. If any of our
predecessors either ignotantly or simply did not observe and keep that which
the Lord by his example and authority willed, his simplicity may be pardoned
by the goodness of God. Aug. Ep. 48. This blemish in his most beautiful
breast, he covered with the tears of charity, August. de Baptis. l. 4. cap.
5. Ignosci potest simpliciter erranti.
erreth in many things; but we must show the errors for quality to be such,
as cannot be in a true or lawful Prophet of the Lord

And here I would ask you this one Question; Whether there was any true
Ministry in the Christian Churches, within the space of the fourth, fifth, or
fixed ages after Christ. If not; what is then become of the promises of God made
to the Churches of the New Testament? If yes; whether was not their course of
administration polluted with as many, or more dangerous errors, than can
truly be named in all the Books forementioned? And so expecting your
resolution of this one demand, I proceed to your third ground of Separation,
drawn, as you say, from the Nonconformists Principles.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
IF the public Assemblies of England have not the power of the censures, Can.
Neces. of Separat. p. 149, 150.
and excommunication, but stand under a government which came wholly and every
part from the Devil, and Antichrist, then is their condition naught, then are
they false and Antichristian Churches. The reason is, because this power is of
absolute necessity for the Churches of Christ, an essential property
thereof, and serve not only for their well-being, but the being it self, for
without this, there can be no coupling of the parts and members together. And
so much De consc. lib. 4. cap. 24. page 214.
Dr Ames testifies. Now the Assemblies of England were not gathered by any
such power, but in their first constitution wanted the same, and had this false
power which is exercised at this day, as the Nonconformists do acknowledge.
Our arguments which we have used in this point, have been to this effect: Every
true visible Church has a power immediately under Christ, to execute
Church Government. But the public Congregations of England, have not any such
power under Christ to execute Church Government. Therefore they are not true
visible Churches. What they will say to this I know not, but hitherto they have
been silent, or answered to no purpose in the world. For it is usually their
manner to tell us, how the Churches in Corinth, Pergamus, Thyatira, etc.
neglected to execute discipline, as though there were no difference betwixt
omitting to administer the ordinance, and the want wholly of it; yea, and to
have an Antichristian and devilish in the room of it.

ANSWER.
YOu undertook to prove the necessity of Separation from the Nonconformists
Principles: But here you reject their Principles with disdain, and build your
responsive conclusions, as you call them, upon your own foundation, which you
know does not accord with their Principles.

The Nonconformists hold discipline necessary to the wellbeing of a Church, the
safety of Religion, the preservation of Gods ordinances from contempt. They
compare it to the Bilson. perpet. chapter gov. ca. 1. Since the Church of Christ is
the house of God, the City of the living GOD, and the kingdom of his
welbeloved Son: Shall we think that God is careful for others, and
careless for his own? or that confusion ought to be less doubted and feared
in heavenly than in earthly things.
wall of a City, hedge of a Vineyard, fence of a Garden, and bounds of an
Orchard: but never said it to be of absolute Jewel. Sermon. on Josh. 6.1, 2, 3.
Discipline is so needful, that neither without it shall ye be able thoroughly
to discomfort those that seek to build up Jericho, etc.
necessity, that there could be no City, Vineyard, Garden, or Orchard without
it. But this in your judgment is broken-stuffe, not worthy any answer. For
where do they read, say Can. Neces. of Separat. page 151.
you, in Scripture, that this power which Christ has given to his Church, is
compared to a wall, or hedge, etc. But rather it may be likened to the power of
the body, which receives food, and thereby excrements are purged, and avoided,
the want whereof were in nature prodigious, neither could the body possibly
subsist and live. In the same page you take up Dr Laiton roundly after your
manner, for saying, that the Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 10. Council. Carthag. 3. ca. 35.
Gratian. decr. p. 3. did. 2. cap. 95, 96. Bills. Christ. subject. part. 2. pa.
335. I do not mislike that malefactors of all kinds, not only dru^kards,
railers, perjurers, adulterers, usurers, and such like, but also thieves,
robbers, ravishers, murderers, plagiaries, incendiaries, traitors and all other
heinous offenders, when their lives be spared by Princes, should be driven to
earnest and open repentance before they be received into the Church, or
admitted to the divine mysteries: yea, rather I think it very needful in a
Christian Commonwealth, that God be pleased, and the Church preserved from all
communion with these monstrous impieties, etc.
want of an integrall part of the whole is no sufficient ground of Separation.
He speaks, you say, as a man most ignorant of the nature of Church Power; for
were he able truly to define it, he should see that it is of such necessity as
a people cannot constitute themselves in the right order of the Gospel without
it, as we have before expressed. Expressed it may be, but not proved by
Scripture or reason, drawn from Scripture. How palpably you abuse Dr Ames
testimony is showed before, and it makes as plainly against your reason as a
thing can be spoken. But that is broken-stuffe which pleases you not, and he
is ignorant that applauds not your dictates. To be taunted and reviled, is
answer sufficient to be given to us simple poor ignorants, who know not truly
to define what Church Power is. But whether this stuff be broken, or the
Nonconformists ignorant what Church Power is or no: this is evident, your
inferences in this point are not correspondent to their Principles, nor can be
deduced from them, as in the beginning you promised: And then upon what bottom
does this reason stand, or by what prop is it underset, but your own bare
affirmation, which is much too weak to bear so great a weight. Whosoever
means ( Can. Neces. of Separat. page 210.
you say) to settle well the conscience, especially in a maine point of faith
and Religion, ought necessarily to bring good proofs from Scripture, for the
things whereof he speaks. For otherwise men must give no trust unto his
words, or if they do, it must be unadvisedly. And what think you then, if men
upon your bare word, give credit unto this argument, is it not unadvised? You
bid Bilson difference, part. 1. page 20. What we say without proof, reject you
without answer. If that rule may stand we need no further confutation of the
rest of your Apology, for there (besides taunts and terms) I see nothing.
prove the contrary, if any man be able. But that is not to ground the
conscience upon Gods truth. If your assertion be not taught in holy Scripture,
it is an unwritten tradition, an humane invention, a dream of your own, in
your conceit, false worship, and flat Idolatry, though your opposites be able
to say nothing against it but this, that it is not taught of God.

What the Nonconformists will say to this argument you know not, but hitherto
they have said nothing, or as good as nothing. It is well you say not both
Propositions are theirs, as you do in the former with as little truth, as if
you had said it here. But if you had perused their writings against Separation,
as you have observed what sharp words they let fall against the corruptions in
our Church and Liturgy, you might have known, that they say somewhat, and
somewhat to the purpose, not worthy your answer, but what can never be truly
answered: First, Discipline, they say, is taken two ways. First, Largely, for
the whole order pertaining to the gathering and governing of a Church, the
ordering of divine worship, and manner of men. And in this sense, Bilson,
perpet. Chapter govern. cap. 1. page 3. Order and Discipline the very nurse and
mother of all peace and quietness, as well in divine as in humane Societies,
and assemblies, though it be not the life or spirit that quickneth the Church:
yet does it fasten and knit the members thereof, as joints and sinews do the
parts of our bodies. Id. ca. 9. The Gospel must be preached, the Sacraments
must be frequented, for which purpose some must be taken to the public
service, and ministry of the Church, etc. Neither only the lack of the Word
and Sacraments, but the profanation and abuse of either, how greatly does it
endanger the state and welfare of the whole Church of Christ? yea, the casting
of holy things to dogs, and of pearls before swine, how dreadful a judgment
does it procure, as well to the consenters as presumers? A little Leaven
sowreth the whole mass: So that power to send Laborers into Gods harvest, and
to separate profane persons for defiling the mysteries and assemblies of the
faithful, must be retained and used in the Church of Christ, unless we will
turn the house of God into a den of thieves, etc. Act. 2.41, 42.44, 45, 46,
47. and 11.20, 21.26. and 13.43.48. and 14.1.21, 22, 23.
Discipline is neither the matter nor form of the Church, but an inseparable
property, and so there can be no Church without some Discripline. Secondly, It
is taken strictly, for the administration of the censures. in which sense, it
is not absolutely necessary to the being, but to the well-being and safety of
the Church. Secondly, They answer that by divine right the power of the keys
is given to every complete, Apostolical Church, but the execution of this
power may be wanting, either through their negligence, or because they are
hindered; as in Sardis, Thyatira, Ephesus, etc. And this is to the purpose, for
the Question is of the power to execute the Discipline of Christ, and not of
the simple right to execute it. And in your opinion the execution of Discipline
is absolutely necessary to the being of the Church, without which it can
neither be gathered, nor subsist. Take your own comparison, unless the body
do both receive food, and purge out excrements, it is not possible it should
subsist and live. If therefore Sardis, Pergamus, Thyatira, etc. continued the
true Churches of Christ, when the greater sort would not, and the better could
not purge out excrements, or all were grossly negligent, it follows that the
execution of discipline or power to execute discipline, is not absolutely
necessary to the being of the Church. Thirdly, The Church of England wants
not the discipline of Christ for substance either in respect of right or
execution, though it be not administered as it ought. These are the Answers
which they give, and they are too heavy to be spurned away with scorn, when
ever you shall try their weight.

Thus I might dismiss your first band, as being put to flight already. But I
will spend a little time to examine both propositions. And for the first it is
to be noted, that the word Church (to let pass other significations) is taken:
First, For the community of the faithful few or many, two, three, or more,
men or women, without guides or officers; for believers dispersed and scattered
by persecution, spoiled of their guides, or such as being newly called never
had guides set over them, are yet the true Church of Christ. Secondly, The
society of the faithful, joining together in the ordinances of worship under
a lawful Pastor is a true Church, though defective in many officers and
ordinances required to the perfection of the Church. Thirdly, A Bilson. ibid.
ca. 1. The internal regiment that God has by his Spirit and truth in the
hearts of the faithful, is the true kingdom of christ, cannot be varied, is
not questioned in the Church of England. But there is a necessity also of
external government, which respects the appointing of meet men, and
repelling of unmeete, to be trusted with the heavenly treasures of the Word and
Sacraments. As also the good using and right dividing of so precious Jewels
committed to their charge.
competent number of faithful people joined in society under lawful
Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, to watch over, rule, feed and guide them in the
ways of God, are a true and complete constituted Church of Jesus Christ.

The word Discipline also is used two ways, as has been said; First, In a
larger sense, as comprehending all order and behavior concerning a Church in
outward duties, and so (among the rest) the daily planting and building by the
calling and offering of the Word by the Ministers, and the hearing, receiving,
and obeying by the people. As military discipline is put for the whole art or
manner of ordering Soldiers. Secondly, In a more strict signification it is
the political guiding of the Church, and is exercised principally, if not
only in the Henry Ainsw. first answer, etc. page 30. Whereupon Christ
pronounced a blessing, and annexed promises, not for himself, but (as you
grant for his successors also, as I defend) for the other Apostles also. Ibid.
Set you down by the scriptures, what is mea^t by keys, and I will show you by
Scriptures also, that the 12 Apostles had equal power in using them.
administration of Church censures; and this is that discipline which
generally, all Ecclesiastical Writers speak of. And this power likewise must
be considered either in respect of right or the first act, as they call it, or
in respect of execution and the second act.

These distinctions thus plainly propounded, the answer to the Proposition is
distinctly this; First, If the word Discipline be taken in the largest
acceptance, it is necessary to the Church, because no Society can be held or
gathered without some order. Secondly, If it be taken in the strictest
signification, it belongs not to the Community of the faithful few or many.
For the power of governing the Church belongs to them primarily and in
respect of use and execution, to Bills: Christ, Subject. part. 2. p. 361. The
Priest has his Commission as a servant to call for subjection and obedience,
not unto himself, but unto his Lord and Master that sent him, etc. who must
preach himself, the servant of meaner men than Princes, and make himself the
servant of all men, if he note well the words of his Commission, etc.
whom Christ has communicated it. But Christ has not given this power to the
faithful, few or more, but to his officers, whom he has appointed to feed and
govern his folk. Thirdly, If a society enjoy but one Pastor or Teacher for
the time, the power of government does not belong unto him. For Christ has not
committed this power unto one but unto many. The power of A dispute part. 3. c.
8. p. 188. We must distinguish a twofold power of the keys; the one
Concionalis, the other Judicialis. The former is proper for Pastors alone,
whose vocation it is by the preaching and publishing of Gods Word, to shut and
open the Kingdom of heaven. The keys of external discipline belongs to the
whole Consistory. Trelcat. instit. Theol. lib. 2. page 287.
preaching and administration of the Sacraments is given to one, and may be
executed by him alone: But the power of guiding or governing is given to the
College Ecclesiastical, or company of Governors, and must not be executed by
any others. And if one alone may not challenge that which is committed unto a
society, it is not for one Pastor to excommunicate his people. And hence it
follows necessarily, that discipline or power of governing or dispencing the
keys, is not absolutely necessary to the being of the Church. For if there may
be a true Christian Church without Pastors or Teachers, but not Pareus in 1
Cor. 5. de Excom. Eorum quae convenient Presbyteris, vi ordinis sui
Presbyterialis, duo sunt genera: Alia enim immediate convenient singulis
personaliter: alia vero immediate convenient, non quidem singulis personaliter,
sed conjunctis collegialiter sive Presbyterio. Forb. Irenis. lib. 2. cap. 10.
prop. 13. page 191. de prohibitis ordinantibus.
power of the keys or Ecclesiastical government, then the power of government
is not absolutely necessary to the being of a Church. And if the Presbytery be
the only executioners of the censuring discipline, then if the Church may be
without a Presbytery, it may want the discipline in respect of execution. For
where the Officer is wanting, there the office also is wanting as touching the
execution thereof. If all the Officers of discipline should dye at once, or the
Church should want her officers; the faithful have not power of discipline
either originally or actually, either to conveigh it virtually or formally to
her Ministers, whom she might choose, or to execute it her self. But the
faithful do remain a Church, when her officers are Bilson. perp. gover. cap.
10. It is not to be doubted, that in the Apostles times every city where the
Gospel was received, had many Prophets Pastors and Teachers, not only
traveling to and fro, to exhort and confirm the brethren, but abiding and
persisting in the same, all laboring to increase the number of the Church, etc.
dispersed by persecution, taken away by death, be wanting through her
negligence, or some other way. In your own way and constitution, the Church may
be without both Pastor and Teacher, and that for a long time, till fit men may
be chosen unto that office; in all which time it must want the administration
of the Sacraments, and execution of discipline.

We have not learned, that every Christian is a King and a Prince, to rule with
Bilson. perpet. gover. cap. 3. External Regiment is no part of Christ's
Kingdom, which is proper to his person, and by many degrees excels all
other governments, for the divine force and grace, that are eminent in the
spiritual fruits and effects of his Kingdom.
Christ by open rebuke, if no other do rebuke in season, or by debarring them
from communion and fellowship of the Church, whom he judges or censureth
worthy to be cast out, as men out of covenant. For if all that are made of
Christ by communion with him Kings and Priests unto God, should be made Kings
and Priests unto God in order political to rule and govern his Church, then
power to govern should be given to every singular person,, not to the
community alone, to women and children no less than unto men. The life and
being of a Church stands in the very knitting of the faithful unto Christ:
for it is Christ that gives salvation to the body: And if union give it the
form of a Church, it must necessarily be a Church before it practice this
discipline, because it has no place but in an united body or Congregation.
Those three thousand souls that were gained at one prosperous Act. 2.38.41,
42, 44, 45, 46, 47.
Sermon of Peter, were the Church of God, when they received the Word with
gladness, and were baptized, before any power of Government was given unto or
established among them. The like is of the Act. 8.5, 6.11. and 9.31.
Church, or Congregation of Samaria.

Fourthly, Of right the communicated power of government belongs to every
complete Society, or rather to every Ecclesiastical college or assembly, set
apart by Christ for the guidance of his people: but the execution of that power
may be hindered through Zanc. de oper. redempt. in 4. praecep. de discipl.
Eccles. If it be a small Church, and not consisting of many learned and skilful
men, excommunication ought not to be done, except the neighbor churches be
asked counsel of.
ignorance, negligence, unjust usurpation, or the like. The right of government
in Christ's name belongs unto them, because it flows from the ordinance and
constitution of Christ, as a proper adjunct which cannot be separated from the
subject. But the action it self of government may be A disput. part. 3. c. 8.
p. 189. When we teach that the Pastor or Pastors of every particular Church
or congregation, with the Elders of the same, being met together have power to
bind and loose: we understand this only of such places, wherein a competent
number of understanding and qualified men, may be had to make up an Eldership.
hindered diverse ways, when the being of the Church is not destroyed. The
Pastors and Teachers may be ignorant of their privileges, and so give away
that which of right belongs unto them; or they may be negligent in the
execution of their office, and not heedfully attend to the Ministry committed
unto them. The greater part may prevail against the better, or some few may
usurp into their own hands the power which belongs unto the Society, which
being once gained cannot easily be regained or redeemed, in which cases the
lawful action of government is hindered, when yet the Church remains the true
Church of Christ. Thus it has been with the Ambros. in 1 Cor. cap. 5. The
Apostle decreed that by the consent and in the presence of all men, he should
be cast out of the Church, etc.
Church of God in all ages, ever since there was a Church upon the face of the
earth. And from this fountain have sprung the errors, abuses and corruptions,
which have prevailed in the Church of God. For if Hieron. ad He^iodor. in Id.
ad Reparium advers. Vigilantium.
disorders get head, of necessity the action of government is some way hindered
or neglected.

Now to your Assumption. First, Every particular August. contr. e^. Parm. lib.
3. c. 2.
Society of believers in the Church of England, or singular Pastor of this or
that Congregation has not the power of government, neither does it of right or
by divine gift belong unto the community of the faithful, or one singular
Pastor. Secondly, The power of Government as it consists in discerning
betwixt the precious and the vile, admonishing the inordinate, and
excommunicating the obstinate, is considered either in respect of the
substance, parts and duties thereof, or in respect of the ordering and
administration by such persons, and in such a course. This distinction must be
granted or else all the Churches which administer discipline amiss in any
circumstance at any time, must be charged to have no discipline at all; and
they that commit the administration of discipline to persons in men's opinion
not designed by Christ, not to have the discipline of Christ for substance: For
example, they that commit the execution of discipline to the Presbytery or
Classis, have not the discipline of Christ, in the judgment of the Separation,
because Christ (as they say) has committed it to the community or body of the
Society. And they that commit the power of government to the Chrysostom. in
Math. Hom. 83. No small vengeance hangs over your heads, if you suffer any
heinous offender to be partaker of this Table.
people or community jointly with the Elders, in the judgment of reformed
Churches, have not the discipline of Christ, because he has committed it to
the Presbytery. And every act of government may be excepted against as a
nullity, because in some circumstance or other the order prescribed by Christ
is not fully observed. This then considered, the Church of England is not
without the If any Prince would be baptized or approach to the Lords Table,
with manifest show of unbelief or irrepentance, the Minister is bound freely
to speak, and rather to lay down his life at the Princes feet, then to let the
King of Kings be provoked, the mysteries defiled, his own soul and the Princes
endangered, for lack of often and earnest admonition.
discipline of Christ for substance, whether the word be taken largely or
strictly, whether we respect right or execution; but the outward form and
ordering of the discipline is not in all things according to the Word of God.
I^ by divine right the power of government belongs, either to the society of
Church Governors, or the community of the faithful, it belongs also to the
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Assemblies among us. As for the execution of
discipline largely taken, all men know the Word is truly preached, and the
Sacraments are duly and rightly Bilson Christian subj. part 2. p. 302. If you
mean they may not minister the Sacraments unto Princes, without faith and
repentance which God requires of men that shall be baptized, or have access
to his Table, we grant they must rather hazard their lives than baptize
Princes which believe not, or distribute the Lords mysteries to them that
repent not Bilson Christ. subj. part 3 p. 2. and part. 3. p. 248. If the Prince
will not submit himself to the rules and precepts of Christ, but wilfully
maintain heresy and open impurity, the Bishops are without flattery to
reprove and admonish the Prince of the danger that is imminent from God, and if
he persist, they must cease to communicate with him in divine prayer and
mysteries. Bills. Chapter sub. part. 3. page 63, 64. 74.
administered: and in what society soever God is truly worshipped, of
necessity the discipline of Christ is in some sort observed. If we speak of
discipline more strictly, all men know the Church of England by doctrine
professes, by Law has established, and daily practices for substance, the
execution of the very discipline of Christ. The ordering and administration of
the censures as it is in the Church of England, is faulty and corrupt, and how
the godly have labored, according to their places, the redress of that evil,
is not unknown to the world in part. But the want of due execution of
discipline or disordered administration thereof, does not argue the Church to
want discipline, but the due ordering of discipline, nor to be no Church, but
to be defective and much out of order.

In the Church of the Jews in the old Jer. 20.1.2, 3. and 29.26, 27, Mat.
10.17. Jude v. 4.7.8.10.
Testament there was many times great neglect of discipline and abuse thereof.
In the Churches of the New Testament, as in Corinth, Galatia, the Churches to
which James and Jude wrote, and Rome, the execution of discipline could not
take place, or was much neglected. Diotrephes usurped over the Church, and
corrupted the discipline, when the Church continued the true Church of Christ,
and the faithful abode in that society; This instance Dr Ames truly
alleged, to show that the reprovers of abuses do not lay the foundation of
schism or separation from the Church, which Can. Neces. of Separat. page 163.
you do well to spurn at, because you know not how to remove it. For what if
you do not read that Diotrephes was an unlawful and Antichristian Minister?
you read that he usurped over the faithful, hindered the due execution of
Church Censures, abused excommunication, prated against the Brethren, and
practiced a false government. And if the want of discipline or neglect of due
execution, prove a Church to be no Church, the faithful in that society were
bound to separate. If the Church had not the power of government at this time,
(if we may believe you or receive your position) they were no church: if they
had power in their hands, and suffered it to be abused, their sin was the
greater. And if you take a view of your dealings in this or other particulars,
vilifying what you are not able to confute, and wresting men's words contrary to
their plain meaning, if your paper blush not, I can hardly think but your
conscience will smite.

SECT. II.
IF the Church of England has not Christ's keys, Can. Neces. of Separat. page
154.
she is not his, says Mr D. But the Church of England has not Christ's keys,
says Mr Brightman and Syons plea. 111.
others. Therefore she is not his house, and consequently to be separated from.

ANSWER.
YOur former reasons out of Mr D. I pass over, because they have been answered
already, and are here thrust in to no purpose, but only to cover the
insufficiency of your reply. His answer was, the want of discipline, though an
integrall part, is no sufficient ground of separation. This Can. Neces. of
Separat. p. 152, 153.
you offer not to disprove by any substantial reason, but with railing and
reproach to disgrace, wherein whether you more wound your own conscience, or
hurt your adversary, be judge your self. Can. Neces. of Separat. page 212. 1
Pet. 3.9. Romans 13.21.
You say truly, It is a Christian part not to render rebuke for rebuke, and a
thousand times better were it, to sustain even a legion of reproaches, than
for a man by turning (though but one) to give cause of suspicion, that evil
has got some part of conquest over him. But if you look into your own
writings, you shall find them stuffed with insolent boasting, scornful taunts
and reproaches, unbeseeming your place, person, and a good cause. I dare say,
all the Nonconformists that ever wrote in the cause of discipline, never went
in practice so much against their Principles, as you in this one particular,
go against your profession in the foresaid passage, and a good conscience.

The matter in hand betwixt you and Mr D. is the absolute necessity of
Church Discipline to the being of a Church; To what end then do you bring,
That the Book of common prayer used in the Assemblies of England, is an
infectious Liturgy, Romish-stuffe, a devised service, raked out of three
Romish Channells? That the Ministry of the Church of England is unlawful and
Antichristian! That the Ministry, worship, and government of of England are
corruptions! Does this make ought to confirm your position, or weaken the
answer which was truly given? But some thing must be said, whether to or
besides the purpose, it matters not.

Another stratageme Can. Neces. of Separat. page 153.
you put in practice in the same place, not very commendable. You would seem
to confute the D. out of himself. What say you, if it appear that Mr D.
arguments, do lead rather to separation, and that he speaks one thing, and
practices another; would not this be a strange sight, especially, to himself?
Now whether this be so, we will here try by some reasons in his own mood and
figure. But though the mood and figure be his, the reasons be your own, and
not his, and the conclusions unjustly drawn from the Premises, as the D.
answered, and we have showed before. Perhaps in war stratagems may be of use,
but in the cause of God such cunning devices are dangerous symptoms. This I
note, to entreat your serious reexamination of what you have done: and now I
come to the argument here propounded, whereunto I make answer as you relate it,
for I have not the D. Book to search out what he has written.

The power of the keys is twofold, Concioualis and Judicialis, as it is
usually called. The first consists in the preaching of the Gospel, wherein the
kingdom of heaven is opened to the penitent, sins remitted, life promised,
and heaven shut to the obstinate: which is the sword and the scepter of Christ,
whereby he saves his people, 2 Cor. 1.21. 2 Cor. 10.4. Isa. 11.4. Romans 1.16.
and conquereth his enemies, beats down every strong hold, p^ireeth to the
division of foul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and judges the
very cogitations and thoughts of the heart. These effects Christ executes by
his Word, even when it is not assisted by the To excommunicate is to remove the
wicked and irrepentant from participation of the Lords Supper: least by
sacrilegious presuming to violate that Table, the ungodly should condemn
themselves, and defile others. Bilson perpet. gov. cap. 9.
discipline spoken of. Now if it be rightly understood, the Church of God
cannot be without this key. For the Church is gathered by the Word, and is a
company or society which has received the Word in profession at least, and
does possess it, and amongst whom it dwells. The Judicial power of the
Excommunication is a mere spiritual punishment, and reaches no further by
Gods word than to take from offenders the remission of their sins, by wanting
the Word and Sacraments, until they repent. Bilson. Christian. part 3. page 52.
keys is the power of government, which consists principally in the right
ordering and dispensation of Church censures, and so of the manners and
necessities of all men: which agrees not to any one member, nor to the
community of the faithful, nor to any one singular governor, but to the
Ecclesiastical Senate, yet with due respect had to the community of the
faithful. In the first sense, the Church of England has the power of the
keys, Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3. I hardly persuade the people, yea, I am forced to
wrest it from them, before they will suffer such to be admitted. Bilson.
perpet. gov. c. 9. Great reason had those godly Fathers to see the whole Church
satisfied, before they released the sentence of excommunication, etc. and so
doing they showed not what right the multitude had to sit Judges with the
Bishop, but what ^^e themselves had to remove from the people all occasions of
stumbling.

Id. page 113. If you take Excommunication for removing the unruly from the
civil society of the faithful, until they conform themselves unto a more
Christian course of life, I am not altogether averse, that the whole Church
should concur in that action, etc. See August. contr. Par, Ep. 1, l. 2. ca.
1. Can. Stay, Sect. 12. page 123.


not so much as is to be desired, but in an eminent sort; and that with Gods
blessing upon the labor of his servants, if any other Church under Heaven. In
the second signification, the power of the keys for substance is in our
Church, but the manner of ordering and administration of them is corrupt and
faulty. But this power of the keys is not of absolute necessity to the being
of the Church, but to the well-being only. Here is a fit place to answer your
Question: Whether to hide from the people the knowledge of all the maine
truths, which concern the outward regiment of Christ's visible church, make a
false Prophet.

It would be known what you call maine truths, which concern the outward
regiment of Christ's visible Church. The power of government is proper and
communicated: Proper, that which Christ has reserved peculiar to himself, and
is executed according to his infinite wisdom, by the secret hand of his divine
power, and the effectual work of his holy Spirit, making the word of
exhortation and reproof, comfort and instruction, to some the savor of life
unto life; whence follows effectual answering to their calling, rejoicing,
comfort, and growing up to perfection. Not to mention further, how he
succoureth the godly, bestows some gifts, (though not such as accompany
Salvation) upon the wicked; bridleth, curbeth and confounds his enemies. His
communicated Government is that which being limited within the compass of
certain Laws and Canons of his holy Word; he has committed to be exercised
and executed in and by Societies, according to his appointment. The chief and
principal means Christ uses here, is the preaching of his Word, whereby he
saves his people, and conquereth his enemies. The discipline is as a Chariot
for the Word to ride upon, and to keep other ordinances from contempt; but it
is not the most ordinary or mighty means of Christ's government or
administration of his Kingdom.

These things being thus, The Ministers of the Gospel are to teach the people
the maine grounds and chief heads of Christian Religion, even all things
necessary to salvation in respect of faith and manners, otherwise they stand
guilty of the blood of souls. They are to teach them also what the Lord has
instituted for the well-ordering of his house, but in season, order, and as
they are able to bear it. It is not for men to set up the roof, before they
have laid the foundation. Experience for many years has taught us, that
diverse who have much busied themselves in the doctrine of Church Government,
have been unable to make Some deny the use of excommunication among the Jews.
Bills. perpet. Chapter gov. c. 4. The Scribes and Pharisees (you will say) did in
Christ's time excommunicate, and thrust out such as they thought offenders, out
of their Synagogues: But the Pharisees never learned that out of Moses. A
separation of the Leaper from the company of men, and of unclean for coming
near holy places or things, Moses prescribes, but not excommunication, that I
remember, etc. Aliens were not admitted to be of the number of the Lords
people; and any uncleanness of the flesh did separate for a season, the Jews
themselves from approaching near to the Congregation or Tabernacle of God: but
neither of these is excommunication, etc. So in the use of excommunication in
the Christian Church, etc. and many such like.
use of that which they have learned from others. If I should bring your self
for instance, who have received many good truths from the writings of the
Nonconformists, but miserably pervert them to your own hurt, the disturbance
of Gods Church; scandal of the Gospel, and the strengthening of such as are
turned aside into dangerous errors; I should not much miss the mark, and you
have more cause to take heed than to be offended. Also godly men, who follow
the truth in love, may be of different minds in these things, and for men to
hide that from the people, whereof they are not persuaded that it is the truth
of God, is not the note of a false Prophet.

Moreover, Those things which you call maine truths, concerning the external
government of Christ's visible Church, may justly be questioned, whether they be
truths at all. If I may conjecture by your writings, the maine truths you
intend are such as these; That power of Church Government is absolutely
necessary to the being of a Church; That all stinted or set-formes of prayer or
Liturgy, are forged or devised worship; That there is no lawful Minister, who
is not chosen, called, or ordained by that particular Congregation, where he is
to administer; That the Minister of one congregation may perform no
ministerial act in another; That the power of Government is in the community
of the faithful, and from them derived unto the Pastors, Teachers, or Elders,
etc. These and the like are the maine truths in your esteem, which I conceive
have no bottoming in the holy Scripture. And if the Nonconformists, or some
other, should ask of you this Question, whether to teach such points as maine
truths necessary to salvation, and to condemn all Churches who conform not to
your platform, as false and Antichristian, and their worship as false and
idolatrous; and whether to wrest and abuse Scriptures, and pervert Authors to
that purpose, make you not a false Prophet, consider advisedly what ound and
satisfying answer you could return.

SECT. III.
BEfore ^e proceed to another point, Can. Neces. of Separat. p. 159, 160.
we may here frame this argument; If the professors of the Gospel in England,
have not among them a true Church Government, but are under that which came
from the great Antichrist, then are they bound to set up the ordinance of God,
and practice it, no withstanding the Magistrate do forbid the said practice.
But the professors of the Gospel in England, have not among their a true
Church Government, but are under, etc. Therefore they are bound to set up the
ordinance of God and to practice it, notwithstanding the Magistrate does forbid
the said practice. These are both their own. positions, and so soundly proved;
that no man living is able to confute theus.

ANSWER.
IF your meaning be as the ordinary signification of the words import, it is
not to the purpose, for it is one thing in our own persons to practice
according to the ordinance of Christ, another, to separate from that society,
which does not practice in all things according to the institution of our
Savior. But you give cause to think, that by these words (erecting this
power, and exercising the same among them) you mean, that they are to separate
and draw themselves into such a society, where they may exercise that power.
For thus you write; I do not mean, Can. Neces. of Separat. page 155.
that any private person should meddle with the affairs of the Realm, but
that every one in his own person, do place himself about the throne of God,
leaving the abuses of the public State^, to be reformed by such as have a
calling thereto. And if this be your mind in that clause, you greatly wrong
the Nonconformists, and reformed Churches, in charging them with this position.
For it is their direct assertion to the contrary, that for want of orderly
administration of discipline, Christians are not to separate from the true and
sound Churches of Jesus Christ. Your phrase likewise of placing themselves
about the throne of God, is in no sort approved of them, or of the truth it
self: As if none were placed about the throne of God, or God did not
graciously vouchsafe his presence unto, or reign over any assembly, wherein
discipline is not rightly and orderly in all points administered.

But here it must be noted, that the power of government must be considered,
either in respect of the substance of it, or the orderly manner of
administration, as was said before. And a thing or office is called
Antichristian in two respects. First, as whatsoever is not of Christ is
Antichristian; in which sense, they of the Separation call all stinted
Liturgies Antichristian. Secondly, as that which is derived from the authority
and headship of the great Antichrist of Rome, and depends upon him as his
own institution, is Antichristian. And to apply these things to the purpose;
if we take the word Antichristian, in the first signification, the true Church
of God may be under Antichristian government, in respect of the manner of
dispensation of the censures, that is, the dispensation of the censures may be
committed to such persons as are not instituted, approved, and set apart of
Christ for that purpose, and in such manner. As if it be committed to an
usurped power over the Brethren, or to some few of many, or to such as be
ignorant, prophant, or the like.

It is true, the light has no fellowship with darkness, nor truth with
falsehood: but in this life light in men is miked with darkness, and the best
Christians infected with errors of Antichristianisme. In many of the Martyrs
of Jesus Christ, both before and since the revelation of Antichrist, their
knowledge was mingled with more darkness, and their Christianity with more
antichristianisme, if you will so call it, than can be found in our Church and
Ministry. Jos. 5.7.9. See Iun. annot.
It is true, the faithful must labor every one in his place to bring in the
ordinances of God, and reform abuses; but if they cannot prevail, they must
not cut themselves off from the body, and excommunicate the society. For if
the Church may want, yea, neglect the use of the Sacraments for a time, and yet
continue the true Hieron. in Tit. 1. Amb. in 1 Timothy 5. Bills. perpet. c. 11.
Gratian. Decret. cap. 15. qu. 7. ca. 2.5, 6, 7. Council. Turon. 2. c. 7. Nic.
Abbas, Panor. in decret. Gregor. 9. de consuetud. cap. 4. Olim presbyteri in
communi regebant ecclesia^, and ordinabant Sacerdotes. Cypr. epist. 6. or lib.
3. epist. 10. and lib. 1. epist. 9. Council. Carthag. 4. ca. 23. Tho. 1. (...)
qu. 71. art. 5. ad tertium. Bonav. in 1 sent. did. 48. art. 2. qu. 1. in
resol. Scor. in 3 sent. did. 9. qu. unica n. 4.
Church of God, then it may want the orderly use of discipline in respect of
the officers, by whom, and the manner how it should be duly exercised. For the
political guiding of a Church by the censuring discipline, is not to be
compared to the want and neglect of the Seals. If the Church shall think good
to keep in a member, which some private man judges worthy to be
excommunicated, must he cut off himself, or cast out the offender contrary to
the order. If the Power of government be exercised by the whole body of the
Society, which I conceive to belong only to the College Ecclesiastical,
must I needs separate from them as no Church of Christ?

Affirmative precepts bind perpetually, but not to all times; to disposition
and readiness always, but to practice, only, when time, place, and
opportunity occurreth. For example, a man is ever obliged to think the truth,
if he know it, but not either to profess or speak the truth at all times. Of
affirmative duties, some are absolutely necessary in men of age and discretion,
without which there can be no salvation, as belief in Christ, and repentance
from dead works. Others are necessary when God gives Neither do I know what
warrant any ordinary Minister has by Gods word in such a case, so to draw any
such Church or people to his private ministry, that thereby they should hazard
their outward state and quiet in the Commonwealth where they live, when in some
co^petent measure, they may publicly with the grace and the favor of the
Magistrate, enjoy the ordinary means of their salvation. Vnreasona. etc. page
61. Aug. epist. contr. Parm. lib. 3. cap. 2. Bezacontr. Eras. de Excom. Field
of the Ch^. lib. 1. cap. 17. Eccl. Lugdun. lib. de tenenda verit. script: post
medium in Biblioth. patr. tom. 4. par. 2. edit. 4.
opportunity, and calls a man forth thereunto; as profession of the faith,
by joining our selves to the Church of God, and partaking of the Sacraments.
Others oblige in a time free, which do not oblige in a time not free, as when
urgent necessity, the circumstance of time and place, the state and condition
of things do restrain and keep back. As the exercise of Ecclesiastical
discipline against open obstinate offenders, is an affirmative duty, imposed
by divine law upon the Governors of the Church, or (as you say) upon the whole
Society. But it lies not upon this or that particular member to do it, or
separate, when others be remiss, and either be not persuaded of, or do
neglect their duty, and will not be drawn unto it. They be not of the lowest
rank who think it may and ought to be forborne, when it cannot be used
without open and unavoidable schism. When a doctrinall error of less
importance and small evil consequence prevails in a Church, by public
authority, it is not the duty of a private Teacher publicly to strive
against it, to manifest and apparent schisms, but rather in a mild and
peaceable manner to cure them, and peaceably to tolerate some things, when the
good of Gods Church does call for and require it. Who does not calmely and
peaceably moderate that which he thinks, but is ready incontinent to
contentions, dissentions, and scandals, although he have not an heretical
sense, most certainly he has an heretical mind. And though the The
Apostleanever erected and planted public Churches and Ministers in the face of
the Magistrate, whether they would or no, or in despite of them. But such in
respect of the eye of the Magistrate, were as private as might be.
Unreasonableness of Separat. page 59.
Government of the Church depends upon the ordinance of God, yet it is not
for every particular and private man to set up that order in societies,
professing the faith publicly and established by Law, against the mind and
pleasure of the Christian Magistrate. And this the Nor^^^formists do both
teach and practice, and therefore they have humbly sued for reformation, but
never either practiced or approved your separation. That which you cite out of
the Harmony of confessions, as if the reformed Churches did allow or teach what
you practice, I will set down, and leave it to every man to judge of your
fidelity. The Church Gallic. confessed. art. 26. None but Princes can give
freedom and protection to these spiritual functions and actions. Bilson.
Christian part 2. page 309.
Gallican says thus; Credimus igitur nemi^^^ licer^, sese catibus subducer^,
and in seipso aequiescere, sed patius (...) s^^^il tuendam and conservandam
esse Ecclesiae unitatem, sese communi institutioni and jugo Christi
subijciendo, ubjcunque Deus ver^^n illam disaiplinam Ecclesiastio^n
constistuerit, etiamsi Magistratuum edicta reclament, a quo oxdi^^ quicubque
seipsos sei^^gunt) ordinationi Dei resistant. Psalm. 5. and 42. Ephesians. 4.11.
Act. 4.19. and 5.29. Heb. 10.25. And the Belgic. confessart. 28. Without the
help of Princes, though the faith and Canons of Christ's Church may be
privately professed and observed of such as be willing, yet can they not be
generally planted, or settled in any kingdom, nor urged by public Laws and
external punishments on such as refuse, but by their co^sents that bear the
sword. Bills. ibid. page 327. Id. part 3. page 296. If you will have the
assistance of the Magistrates sword to settle the truth and prohibites error,
and by wholesome punishments to prevent the disorder of all degrees, that
authority lies only in the Prince.
Belgic thus; Credimus qued cum sacer hic caetus and congregatio, sit little
qui servari debent, and salus nulla sit extra eam: neminem (cujuscunque
dignitatis aut nomini^ is fuerit) sese ab ea-subducere aut segregari debere, ut
sua tantu^ consu^tudine contentus solus, ac separatim vivat. Sed con^^a ^^^es
as singulos teneri huic caetui se adjungere, and Ecclesiae unitatem solicit
conservare, seque illius tum doctrinae tum disciplinae subjicere, collum
denique Christi jugo sponte submittere, and tanquan^ communia ejusdem corporis
membra adificationi fratrum inservire, prout Deus unicuique sua dona fuerit
largitus. Porro ut haee melius observentur, omnium fidelium parts sunt, sese
juxta Dei verbum ab eis omnibus disjungere, qui sunt extra ecclesiam
constituti: huicque fidelium caetui ac congregationi; sese adjungere, ubicunque
illam Deus constituerit: et si id contraria principum vel Magistratuum edicta
prohibeant, indicta etiam in eos capitis and mortis corporcae poena, qui id
fecerint. Quicunque igitur a vera illa Ecclesia recedunt, aut sese illi
aggregare recusant, aperte Dei mandato repugnant. Thus the Conclusion.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
ALL true visible Churches gathered and planted according to Gods Word, Can.
Neces. of Separat. page 173.
consisted in their constitution of Saints only: But the Churches of England
after Popery were not so constituted. For the greatest number of them were
profane people, even mockers and contemners of Religion, as Atheists,
Idolaters, Sorcerers, Blasphemers, and all sorts of miscreants and wicked
livers. Therefore the Churches of England are not true visible Churches. There
is never a part of this argument they can deny, unless they will let fall
their own principles. For the Assumption I make no question, but it will pass
without exception, and none of them will have the face to oppose it,
considering how generally the thing has been affirmed, and still is upon all
occasions both in word and writing. Now that the proposition may appear as
true also, I will prove the same; first, by Scriptures; secondly, by reason;
thirdly, by the testimonies of the learned.

ANSWER.
IF both parts of this Argument be Nonconformists principles, why do you
labor to prove the proposition true, more than the assumption? If it had been
a confessed principle, why do you not fight against them with their own
weapons, as you pretend to do throughout your Book. He is very dull, that
does not smell somewhat herein. But if it so please you, The proposition is the
Nonconformists, and it is not. For if this be the meaning thereof, That all
true Churches should consist of visible Saints, not only in their first
gathering, planting, and constitution, but also in their after continuance and
propagations, the Nonconformists do acknowledge it; for when sin and
wickedness springs or grows in the Church, the ordinance of God is
violated. But if this be the meaning; That the society which consists not of
Saints only, is not the true Church of Jesus Christ, that the Nonconformists
utterly deny. Also it is one thing to say, The Hieron. Prefar: lib. 2. in
Epist. ad Galat. Rursus facilitatis and superbiae arguunturs Id. ad princ.
Marcelle. Epitaph. Difficile est in maledica civitate, non aliqua^ sinistri
rumoris fabulam contrabere. Id. in Praefat. in lib. Dydimini. Sp. Sa. Cum
Babylone versarer, and purpuratae meritricis essem colon^, etc.
Church is not planted and gathered in all things according to Gods Word;
another to say it is no Church at all, which is not planted and gathered in all
things agreeable to the Word of God. If then the meaning of the proposition be
this; That all true Churches planted and gathered according to Gods Word,
consisted of Saints only, because the ordinance of God is violated, and his
house polluted; (...) notorious offenders are received or tolerated; the
No^conformists will acknowledge it: But if you understand it thus; That it is
no true Church at all, which consists not of Saints only, because it is not
gathered, planted, constituted, reformed in all things agreeable to the Word of
God, they never received it. If you could not discern this in their writings,
you were very blind and partial. If you did discern it and yet would pass
it over, that you might with some color traduce them as going contrary to
their own principles, or beguile others with an aequivocation, where was your
sincerity? The Nonconformists will not deny, but some things in the gathering
and planting, or rather the refining and government of the Church of England
was and is done amiss, not agreeable to the Word of God, which they heartily
desire and labor might be reformed; but for things done amiss, they dare not
condemn the Church, deny the grace of God, separate from her communion, or
approve them that do it. It may be questioned also, whether you dare not put a
trick upon your Reader in the phrase, gathered and planted, as if a church in
continuance might consist of such as are not Saint^; but if it be not gathered
of such only at the first, it is no Church. If this be your close intendment,
the proposition is far from truth, the mind of the Nonconformists, and the
matter in hand: for in the reformation a new Church was not planted, but a
corrupt Church refined or purified. And thus I might pass over that which
follows in your next Section, because every man may easily perceive it
reaches not to the point in hand, but that you should not complain as if your
reasons were neglected, I will follow you therein.

SECT. II.
IF we take a strict view of all the Churches which the Lord has constituted
since the beginning of the world, Can. Neces. of Separat. page, 174.
it will appear, that at the orderly gathering and planting, the members of
them were all holy and good. I here intend of visible and external holiness,
and so far as me^ may judge, and not of that which is within, and hid from
us. For I doubt not, but in Gods sight the purest Congregation on earth, might
consist at first of good and bad, and yet of men, every person to be judged
truly faithful and sanctified, until any one by his iniquity (outwardly
committed) appeared otherwise. Not to speak of the Church of the Angels, Dr.
Field of the Church, p. 3, 4. etc. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Eccl. 7.29.
which God created in heaven, and were all good and holy, till some by
transgression fell away. Neither of it in Paradise, consisting of two persons,
and both true believers. After the fall the constitution of the first, Church,
in the covenant of grace, was of good matters, and such was the Lord care to
have the purity of it still preserved, that he th^^^st out Cain from the same,
for the great wickedness which he fell into. The Lord gave not Circumcision to
Abraham, Genesis 12.1. and 17. Romans 4.11.10.15.19. 2 Pet. 1.4. Psalm. 45.11. Revel.
18.4. 2 Cor. 6.
the seal of the righteousinesse of faith, until he left his Fathers house,
and that idolatrous place wherein he had lived; which signifies to us, that
all men must necessarily come out of the world, and from worldly corruptions,
or else they are incapable to have a Church covenant in Christ, confirmed unto
them of Cod. As for the visible Churches planted by the Apostles, it is
evident, that in their collection, they consisted of such and none other, as
were called by the Gospel, confessed their sins, believed, walked in the
spirit, and separated themselves from the false state, in which they stood
members before. Such a beginning had the Congregations in Rome, Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, Thessalonica, etc. And who dares affirm,
that there was one man or woman admitted a member at the constitution of any of
these churches, which had been known to be an ill liver, and did not first
manifest sound repentance thereof.

ANSWER.
When you speak of visible Churches, and visible and external holiness, so
far as men can judge, it is to small purpose to mention the Church of Angels
in heaven. For the Church whereof you entreat, is a society of men, holy in
profession, and outward conformity, but not evermore in truth, whereas the
society of Angels (if it be comprehended under the Church) is invisible and
perfectly holy. I speak of them as they were by creation, and of as many as
stood in their integrity, who only are to be understood by that title.

It is to as little purpose, to speak of the Church in Paradise in the state
of innocence: For the Church understood in this pr^sent business, consists of
men considered in the estate, which they now have promised by God being made
man: or man fallen by sin and restored by Christ, who too^e them by the hand
and lifted them up. That is properly the Church, which was gathered after man
fallen, and is restored in Christ, which as it is visible consists of good
and bad, as you say. But the Church in the state of innocence, consisted of
such only as were created of God, perfectly holy, as befitted such creatures,
until by transgression they fell from their integrity. The state of the
Church which we must enquire into, is that which God has gathered, planted,
constituted, preserved, continued and propagated since the fall of man.

After the Fall, God entered into Covenant with our first Parents, Adam and Eve,
who received the promise, and were partakers of the good things promised. Their
seed also was within the Covenant, until they did discommon themselves; and so
Cain and Abel as members of the visible Church offered Sacrifice: In phrase of
Scripture therefore Cain was a Saint in profession; but whether he had given
testimony of sound and true holiness, so far as man could judge, is more
than can be proved. 1 Ioh. 3.12. Jude 11 verse.
The Scripture says plainly, He was of that wicked one, and therefore slew his
brother. And if no man suddenly become desperately wicked, it is probable Cain
had given no great fignes of piety in former times. Afterward many and great
corruptions came into the Church, when the sons of God took unto them wives
of the daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. See Rivet. in Genesis exercitat. 50.
whom they would: and it is strange to imagine all the members of the visible
Church in those times to be visible Saints in conformity, Genesis 9.24, 25.
so far as man can judge. The Church of God continued in the family of Noah,
whereof Cham remained a member, after the sentence denounced against Canaan: In
this Church therefore all visible members, were not visible Saints, so far as
man can judge. Gen, 10.1, 2, etc.
The world after the Deluge was replenished by the sons of Noah, and the
Church of God was conserved in their families, perhaps in the family of Cham,
and Canaan his youngest son, at least for a time. ^ Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.6.
For it is probable that Melchizede^, King of Salem, was some King of Canaan in
stock diver from the Hebi^wes, of the posterity of Cannan, who planted in
those parts, whom God did preserve in the midst of an ungodly people. And the
promise of God made to the posterity of Sh^^, and so of Abraham; did not
exclude all other familie^ from communion of piety and godliness. Jun: annot.
in Genesis 14.18. Calvin in loc. Mercer. in loc. Nulla prorsus ratione nituntur,
qui Semil cum Melchilsedeco confundunt. and probabilissinum est, id a Iudaeis
fuisse ex^^gitatum, quia non aequo animo ferebant, hominem alienigenam autori
gentis suae aliqua in re fuisse praelatu^. Rivet. in Genesis exercit. 77. (...)
Genesis 10.16. Genesis 14.24. v. 13. Genesis 20.5. 9, 10.14, 15.

Apparet autem in responsione Abimelechi, non fuisse hominem impium, vel o^^
cognitione. Dei destitutum. Nam Deum loquentem agnoscit, etc. Rivet. in Genesis
exercit. 100, 101. See Psalm. 18.21.25. 2 Samuel 22.21. Psalm. 73.13. Romans 4.11.
Genesis 17.12, 13.23. Rivet. in Genesis 17. Chamier. panstrat. tom. 4. lib, 5. cap.
11.


At that time we may well (...) were some others in the Land of Canaan, who did
(...) wou^d worship the (...) Goth. For not (...) mention A^er, Eskel, and
(...) with Abrah^^, at that time a (...) in the La^^d, with whom they (...) not
have (...) covenant, it is probable, if they had been gross Idolaters,
without all knownledge of the true religion; (...) King of (...) his fault)
carried himself (...) business of Abraham, as a man not altogether destitute
of the true stare of God.

That the true Religion was maintained in the family of Sh^^, is acknowledged
by all sorts, but in that family it was greatly corrupted: for the Scripture
testifies, that (...) the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and
Abraham himself before his calling served other Gods. J^sh. 24.2. The Church of
God did spread in the family of Abraham; to whom God gave Circumcision, as the
seal of the righteousness of faith: but the members thereof, were as well
they that were bought with his money, as they that were borne in his house. For
so we read that God commanded, and Abraham took Ismael his son, and all
that were borne in his house, and all that were bought with his money, that is;
every man child among the men of Abraham's house, and he circumcised the
foreskin of their flesh. Not only Abraham and his seed, but all that lawfully
appertained unto him, and were in his power, did partake of the seal of the
covenant, as such as formerly had been, or now were received into covenant. And
by analogy we may gather, that not only the children of believing parents,
but of Infidels, if they come lawfully into the power and hand of Christians to
be trained and brought up by them in the Christian faith, ought to be admitted
into Baptism. Now in what sense, Ismael and some others in Abraham's family
might be esteemed holy, (...) others judge. Esau was a member of Isaacs family,
which was the visible Church of God in those times, Genesis 25.31, 32, 33. Heb.
12.19.
after that he had sold sold his birth right for a ^esse of pottage, and many
other ways had discovered himself so to walk, as a man could hardly judge
him to be truly holy. Genesis 35.22. and 49.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 34.25. and 38.25,
26.
The family of Jacob was received into covenant, according to the pleasure and
dispensation of God, and all his sons were members of the visible Church,
when foul offenses were amongst them unrepented of. Genesis ^7.2. Sept. (...).
detr^^^ eos crimine malo.
Not to mention the facts of Ruben, Simon, and Levi, and J^dah, it is noted of
the sons of Zilpah and ^ilkah, that they run into slander, whereof we
cannot think they repeated suddenly. Joseph his Brethren conceived such hatred
against him, that they first conspired to kill him, but changing their minds
therein, they sold him unto the Is^elites. The whole body of Israel was a
peculiar people, Lev. 20.24. Sept. (...).
of whom every one was by the word of God separated into the covenant of mercy:
and if the whole Nation was the people of God, every particular person in that
Nation did stand under the same relation. But what the state and condition of
that people was when they were admitted into Church covenant, we may learn
from the holy Scripture.

When I passed by thee I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, Ezekiel. 16.6.8.
and I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Thou shall live; even when
thou wast in thy blood I said unto thee, Thou shall live. Now when I passed by
thee, and looked upon thee behold, thy time was as the time of love, and I
spread my skirts over thee, and covered thy filthiness: yea, I swear unto
thee, and entered into covenant with thee, 1 Reg. 8.53. Sept. (...).
says the Lord God, and thou be^amest (...). When God brought Israel out of
Egypt by the hand of Moses his servant, he separated them to himself, from
among all the people of the earth, Act. 7.38.
for an inheritance: and every singular person in that huge multitude was a
visible, member of that Church, Exodus 32.8, 9.22. Deuteronomy. 4.3. and 9.7, 8. Psalm.
106.7.13, 14.19, 2^.28. Number. 14.22. Act. 7.39, 40, 41, 42. Amos. 5.25, 26.
Josh. 5.7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 29.4.
and all of them by profession Saints or holy, the flock of God. But oftentimes
they sinned and rebelled against the Lord, being a stubborn and stiff-necked,
people, uncircumcised in heart, unbeleeving, forgetful of Gods works,
despising his covenant, idolatrous, which had neither eyes to see, nor ears to
hear, nor an heart to under stand. And what probability is there, that this
whole people was truly holy in the judgment of charity, or so fa^re as man
can judge, or that they ceased to be the Church of God; when they had grossly
corrupted their ways? If the true Church be gathered of Saines only
(externally and so (...) as man (...) judge) and of them alone framed, at of
the subject (...): which is only true, whilst it (...) such, and false when
it degenerate^ from this disposition^, and so as (...) and p^^trified stuff to
(...) cast out of the (...) let it be considered how the Congregation in the
Wilderness could be the true Church of God, which so often, (...), Act. 7.38.
and in many particular sinned against the Lord. It is more true, Exodus 24.3.7.
the Church and every member thereof outred into Covenant, either expressly or
implicitly to take God for their God, and to keep the words of the Covenant,
and do them: to seek the Lord with all their hearts, and to walk before him
in truth and uprightness. Deuteronomy. 29.4.
But Moses says of them that entered into Covenant, that they had not eyes to
see, nor ears to hear, nor an heart to understand, and with many of them God
was displeased, because they obeyed not his v^^y^e. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.
Ye stard this day all of you (says Moses) before the Lord your God, your
Captains of Tribes, your El^^ers, and your Officers, with all the men of
Israel: your little ones, your ^ives, and thy stranger that is in thy Ca^p;
from the (...) of thy wo^d, to the (...) of thy water, That thou should (...)
unto the Covetant (...) the Lord thy God, etc. But he testifies against them
also, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6.15, 16.
that they had corrupted themselves, that their spot was not the spot of his
children; that they were a froward and perverse generation, a foolish people,
and ^^wis^, who forso^ke God that (...) them, and regarded not the strong God
of their salvation. Josh. 5.5, 6, 7.
Joshua circumcised all the people which were borne in the Wilderness (for all
that time that Sacrament was neglected) and his fact is approved. But we read
not of any inquiry that was made of all that great multitude, what work of
grace God had wrought in every man's soul, and it is very improbable, that
there was not one who did not give good hope of sound and true cleaving unto
the Lord with all his heart. Psalm. 78.55, 56, 57.
When God had cast out the Heathen before them, and caused them to fall to the
lot of his inheritance, and made the Tribes of Israel to dwell in their
Tabernacles, they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his
testimonies, but turned back and dealt falsely like their Fathers. they turned
like a deceitful Bow.

Israel then was a chosen people, an holy nation, Deuteronomy. 14.23. and 29, 10, 11,
12. Romans 3.2. and 9.4. Act. 3.25. Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6. Isa. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.10.
the peculiar people of God, his treasure of delight or choice jewels; a
people in Covenant; the children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant; and yet
a stiffenecked people, corrupters, set on mischief, foolish and unwise. The
Lord protests that Israel did rebel against him, that they did not
understand but were a most sinful Nation, ye^ (...) and Gomor^ah, yet he
calls them his people and (...) passing Socleome in iniquity, Ezekiel. 16.47,
48, 49.51. Lam. 4.6.22. Isa. 5.1, 2, 3.5. Iere. 2.21. Ios. 24.1.14, 15.23, 24,
25. Judge. 2.8.11. and 3.9.15. and 6.7. and 10.10.16.17. 1 Samuel 7.2, 3, 4. 1 Chronicles. 13.2. etc. 2 Chronicles. 15.12. 2 Reg. 11.17. 2 Chronicles. 25.16. 2 Reg. 23.3, 2 Chronicles. 34.31. Neh. 10.29, 30.
and yet the daughter of his people, and the daughter of Zion, his pleasans
plant, and a noble Vine.

We read oftentimes that Israel after some grievous fall and requit, renewed
their covenant to walk with God; and serve him only, and to obey his ^oyce;
(...) the days of Joshu^, Judges, Samuel, David, Aso, Ju^sh, Josiah, Nehemi^h,
etc. But herein particular scrutin^e was not made, what work of grace God had
wrought in the hearts of particular persons, (...) the confession of finne, and
profession of obedience was renewed. And if the look into the state of (...)
all ages of that Church, and particularly under these religions and godly
Princes, by whose authority the Covenant was renewed, it will easily appear,
many did but flatter with their ^ips, neither was their heart steadfast in the
covenant. The Prophets every where cry out against the great iniquity of the
Princes, Priests, and people, their idolatry, injustice, oppression, contempt
of the Word, impenitency, st^bornnesse, so that it is superfluous diligence, to
refer to the several passages which mention these things.

When John the Baptist began to preach the Gospel, Matthew. 3.5, 6.
and gather a new people for Christ, he admitted none to Baptism but upon
confession of their sins, which was both a renouncing of them, and a
promising of amendment of life. But we find not that he repulsed any that
voluntarily submitted themselves, nor took time for trial, whether they made
nonfession in truth of heart, or no. It appears many ways, that when the
Apostles planted Churches, Act. 2.38. and 8.37. and 19, 17, 18, 19.
the people whom they received did enter into Covenant with God: But it is
diligehtly to be observed, whom they did receive upon confession of sins and
profession of faith, and whom they suffered after they were received. Simon
Mag^s. believed and was baptized, Act. 8.13. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. and 15.10.11.
etc. Gal. 3.1. Phil. 2.21. Jude 12 verse. Iac. 2.1, 2, 3. Rev. 2.14.20, etc.
who not long after offered money that he might obtain the gifts of the holy
Ghost. In Corinth Galatina and other Churches, many were admitted into the
society, who in short time turned aside both in practice and opinion, as to
deny the resurrection, and join the ceremonies of the Law with Christ in the
point of justification, and many other abuses: which is a great presumption,
they gave no sure testimony of any sound work of grace in their souls, when
first entertained into fellowship. And though the Apostles required a
confession of faith, and profession of obedience of them that joined in
Christian society, yet they tolerated great abuses in private persons, which
they could not redress. For without question they condemned the having of many
wives at once in all men, but when that custom at least secret and indirect, 1 Timothy 3.2.12. Tit. 1.6. Calvin in 1 Timothy 3.2.
prevailed among the Jews and Gentiles both in those times, they give no Dan.
in loc. Rivet. cathol. orthod: tract. 2. qu. 24. sect. 6.7. Chrysostom. in epist.
1. ad Tim. hom. 10. and in epist. ad Tit. hom. 2. Hieron. in epist. 1. ad Tim.
ca. 3. cathar. cathol. advers. error. Cajet. err. 99. Jewel def. of apel. par.
2. cap. 8. Div. 1. page 179. 1 Timothy 1.20. 1 Cor. 5.7.13. Rev. 2.5.16. and 3.16.
Commandment that each believer having two wives, should be cast out of the
society, but only that he should not be chosen into the place of a Bishop or
Deacon. Great and manifold abuses crept into the Churches, even whilst the
Apostles lived, and shortly after they were planted, and some of those were
reprehended only, calling the Churches to reformation and amendment; the
gross, obstinate, and most abominable transgressors, either they gave up to
Satan, or gave commandment to the Churches that they should cast them out: but
evermore, with such mildness and moderation, as it is most evident, they
forbore to pluck up the tares, least they should pluck up the good corn
also. It is also manifest, they threaten some Churches with Gods displeasure,
as that he would remove his Candlestick, cast them into the bed of sickness,
spew them out of his mouth, unless they repent: but they dischurch them not,
because of the disorders committed by some, tolerated by others, nor yet did
they command or counsel the godly in those societies to separate from the
ordinances of Religion, but to keep themselves pure.

The History of the Gospel in the New Testament contains but a short time,
viz. from the time wherein John the Baptist began to preach, to the end of the
acts and writings of the Apostles, which is not full fourscore years: so that
we cannot show the repetition of the Covenant from time to time, or what
patience was showed in tolerating abuses, or when men were adjudged obstinate,
or what repentance and profession was required in general abuses or revolts;
but by that which is said, we may discern who in phrase of Scripture are
called Saints, and holy, faithful, and called, and chosen; even, all and every
member of the commonwealth of Israel, and Christian Churches, until they were
cut off, or cast out, though they lived not according to their profession, but
were stiffenecked, scandalous, profane.

The practice of the Church according to the example of the Apostles in Council.
Laodicen. 14.46. Hilar. ad constant. lib. 2. imperf. I cannot receive any man,
but him that is willing: I cannot give care, but to him that entreats a I
cannot sign any, but him that professes. Raban. de instit. cleric. lib. 1.
cap. 25.27. Justine Martyr. apol. 2.
receiving Heathens and them that were without into society was this. First,
They were taught in the principles of Religion, and then the doctrine of Christ
being received, profession made, with promise to renounce the world, the flesh,
and the Devil, they were baptized. Justine sometime an Heathen Philosopher,
but after a famous Martyr of Christ, in his second Apology for Christians,
reports. That if any Heathen man desired to be received into the fellowship
of the Church, he was first Council. Agathens. ca. 25. Iudaei quoru^ perfidia
frequenter ad vomitum redit, si ad legem catholica^ venire voluerint, octo
me^ses inter catechumenos Ecclesiae limen introeant, and si pura fide no
scuntur venire, tum demum, etc. Socrat. lib. 7. hist. cap. 30. Hieron. ad
Pammach. Tert. de Baptism. Tert. de praescript. ca 14. and in apolog. ca. 47.
Ruff. in symbol. Math. 28.19. (...). Basil. cont. Eunom. l. 3. Our Baptism is
according to the tradition of the Lord, In the name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost.
catechized in the principles of Religion, and then hearing further the word of
God, as it were, the Conditions of the Covenant of grace; afterward came into
the face of the Congregation, and confessed that he did believe, and promised
that he would obey the word of God; whereupon he was baptized, and received
into the fellowship of the Church. And that this order might be the better
observed, the Church appointed certain times, and in some places a longer
space, at other times, and in other places a shorter time, for catechizing of
Heathen, before they were baptized. Socrates writes that when the Burgonians
desired to be initiated into the number of Christian people, after they had
been catechized seven days, they were baptized the eighth. Hierome says, the
custom in his days was to catechize them forty days, and then to baptize
them. Tertullian witnesses, that there were two times in the year, Easter and
Whitsontide, especially appointed by the Church for Baptism; and strangers
from the Covenant were instructed in the principles of Religion, all the rest
of the year, against these two times.

The profession at first required of all that were received to Baptism, was
that they believed in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. The Creed is honored
of the Ancients with glorious titles, as the rule of faith, the Sum of faith,
the body of faith, the persuasion of faith. But by the Creed, they understand
the Rule of truth, and law of faith, and institution of Christ, which was then
given, when he was about to ascend into heaven, and commanded his Disciples,
saying, Go and teach all Nations, Baptising them into the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. Regulam fidei per Baptismum accipimus. Iren. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Per ipsam Baptismi traditionem habemus confessionem; Basil. despir.
fanct. cap. 10. Regula quidem fidei, una omnino est, sola immobilis, and
irreformabilis, Socrat. Hist. lib. 1. ca. 5. Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 17. Hist.
Trip. lib. 2. ca. 9.
credendi sc, in unicum Deum omnipotentem, mundi conditores, and filium ejus
Jesum, etc. Tertul. de veland. virgin. The expositions of the Creed, which are
found in the ancient Fathers, Martial, Ignatius, Justine, Jreneus, Tertullian,
Origin, de rect. fid. dialog. princ. Novatian, lib. de Trin. 3. and others of
that age, go not beyond the Trinity, within which bounds the Nicene Creed is
terminated, as it is set down in History. Arius and Euzonius conclude their
confession of faith thus; Socrat. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 7. and lib. 1. cap. 19.
Sicut Dominus noster cum Discipules suos ad praedicandum mitteret, etc. This
faith we received from the Gospel, the Lord himself saying to his Disciples,
Go teach all Nations, etc. Erasm. ad censur. facult. Theolog. Parisien. tit.
11.
Erasmus shows how the Creed was increased by the addition of diverse
Articles, against the heresies that did arise, and though for substance it was
the very same every where, yet in some places, it received more enlargement
then in others. The western Churches, herein applied themselves to the
capacities of the meaner so^t, more than the Eastern did, using in their
Baptism, that shorter form of confession commonly called the Apostles Creed,
which in more ancient times, was briefer also than now it is; as we may easily
perceive by comparing the symboll recited by Marcellus Anciranus (in the
profession of the faith, Apud. Epiphan. in haeres. 72.
which he delivered to Pope Julius) with the expositions of the Apostles Creed,
written by the Latin Doctors. Wherein the mention of the Fathers being maker
of heaven and earth, the Sons death and descending into hell, and the
communion of Saints is wholly omitted. The Creed which the Eastern Churches
used in Baptism, was larger than this, being either the same, Eusebius. epist.
apud Socrat. lib 1. ca. 5. et 8. Theodor. lib. 8. ca. 12.
or very little different from that which we commonly call the Nicene Creed,
because the greatest part of it was repeated and confirmed in the first
general council held at Nice, where the first draught thereof was presented
to the Synod, by Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, with this Preamble, As we have
received from the Bishops that were before us, both at our first catechizing,
and when we received Baptism, and as we have learned from the holy Scriptures,
and as we have both believed and taught, when we entered into the Ministry, and
in our Bishopric it self. So believing at this present also, we declare this
our faith unto you. To this the Nicene Fathers added a more clear explication
of the deity of the Son (against the Arrian Heresy, wherewith the Church
was troubled) professing him to be begotten not made, Council. Constan. ap.
Theoder. lib. 5. c. 9.
and to be of one substance with the Father. The second general Council which
was assembled fifty-six years after at Constantinople, approving this
confession of the faith, as most ancient, and agreeable to Baptism, enlarged
it somewhat in the Article that concerned the Holy Ghost especially, which at
that time was most oppugned by the Macedonian Heretics. Epipha. in (...).
page 518. edit. Gr. Cassian. de incarn. verb. lib. 5.
And whereas the Nicene confession proceeded no further than to the belief,
which we have in the Holy Trinity, the Fathers of the Constantinople made it
up, by adding that which was commonly professed, touching the catholic
Church, and the privileges belonging thereunto. Epiphanius repeating this
Creed at large, affirms it to have been delivered unto the Church by the
Apostles. Cassianus avoucheth as much, where he urges this against Nestorius,
as the Creed anciently received in the Church of Antioch, from whence he came.
The Roman Church after the days of Charles the Great, added the Article of
the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, unto this Symboll. In the Sea
Bellarm. li. 4. de verbo Dei. c. 11. Quaedam in doctrina Christiana tam fidei,
quam morum, sunt simpliciter omnibus necessaria ad salutem, qualis est notitia
articulorum. Symboli Apostolici, item cogniti^ december praeceptorum, etc.
Symboll which Cyprian expounds there, is added, The resurrection of this
flesh; because of the Originists, who professed we should rise again, not with
these, but with other bodies. For things to be believed, this was the
acknowledgement which the Church required of them that were to be received into
the Congregation of Christ's flock. And for the practical part, or things to
be done, she required of them an Clement. constit. lib. 8. ca. 32. (...), etc.
(...).
abrenunciation of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, with all their sinful
works and lusts, which being solemnly-done, they were then baptized into this
faith.

The means whereby men were brought to the knowledge of Christ were diverse.
Some were won by the preaching of the Word, others, by private teaching,
conference, admonition, the constancy of the Saints in suffering, and the fame
and report of the great things which the Lord was pleased to work by his
people, as Rahab was converted by the fame of the great things which the Lord
had wrought for Israel. Thus the Country of the Secrat. hist. lib. 1. cap.
16. lat. Gr. cap. 20. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 24. Sozom. hist. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Sozom. hist. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Iberians was converted by a captive woman, who after she had instructed the
King and the Queen, they both became Teachers of the Gospel to the people.
Theridates is reported to be called to the Christian Religion, by a Sozom. li.
1. c. 7. (...), etc.
wonderful and divine vision, which appeared about his house, and by his Edict
he commanded all his Subjects, that they should addict themselves to the faith
of Christ. The Persians were brought to the faith by the conference which they
had with the Oswenians, and Armenians. Origin when yet he was not allowed for a
Minister by the Church, did by the blessing of God, turn many to the faith,
who gave testimony thereunto, by the loss of their lives. He preached also
publicly by the consent of the Church Governors, when he was not made
Minister, which Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus, Bishop of Cesarea, defend
against Demetrius; by the like examples of Eusebius, Paulinus, and Theodorus,
and as they add it is likely the same was done in other places. Eusebius. hist.
lib. 6. ca. 20. Gr. 3. lat. See Whitaker advers. Staplet. Duplic. lib. 1. cap.
7. page 100. and ca 9. page 139 and ca. 11 page 176, 177. Fulk. answ. to the Rh
in Romans 10 15. Wotton trial of the Church. See Socrat hist. l. 5. cap. 10.
Theodor. l. 5 ca. 16. Socrat. hist. lib. 1. ca. 15. lat. ca. 19. Gr.
Hence we may perceive, whom the Church both in the first planting, and
reforming of Religion, judged to be Saints, who were to be received into
society; wherein we are further to note, If ought were done amiss, in this or
that particular circumstance, it did not nullify the work, or reformation.

Now to apply this to the state of the British Churches, both in their first
plantation, continuance after, and that reformation which was made by King
Edward first, and after by Queen Elizabeth, and so is continued. Some Camden.
Britan. page 47. edit. Land. An. 1607. Fr. Godwin. de conv. Britan. ca. 3. page
23. Vsser de prim. Eccl. Brit. ca. 1. Gildas.
learned men are of opinion, that the Druides did instruct the Britains, in
the knowledge and worship of one God: but it is more probable, they lay drowned
in the days of ignorance, as other Nations, in the most miserable and fearful
idolatry, of serving and worshipping many and strange gods. But when the light
of the Gospel began to shine unto the world of the Gentiles, it pleased God of
his free and boundless mercy and compassion to look upon this Origin. in
Ezekiel. Hom. 4. Hieron. ad Heliodor. ep. 3. Gildas. Vsser de prim. cap. 16. page
740. Theodor. lib. 9. (...). Eusebius. hist. l. 2. ca. 2, 3. Vsser de prim. ca. 2.
page 20. and ca. 16. page 740, 741. viz. Vsser de prim. Eccl. Britan. ca. 1, 2,
3.
Island, and to send unto us the word of reconciliation, which was received and
brought forth fruit, grew and increased, until at length it filled the Land.
Which of the Apostles first preached the Gospel among us, is uncertain, but
that from the springing forth of the light, the faith of Christ was received,
is a thing generally acknowledged. Of the year when King Lucius received the
faith of Christ, and was baptized, there is great diversity among Historians:
but in the thing it self they all Ep. eleuther. ad Lutium inter. leges Edward.
cap. 17. Eusebius hist. l. 4. c. 7. Lat. 5. Gr. Ruffin. Eccl. hist. l. 4. cap. 8.
Gildas. Bedae hist. l. 7. c. 4. Orig. in Ezekiel. hom. 4. and in Luc. cap. 1. hom.
6. Tertul. lib. advers. Iudae: ca. 7. Gildas scriptor antiquissimus. Reges Dei
vicarij Vsser de prim. ca. 6. p. 104. and cap 7. page 143, 144, etc.
agree in the times of Hadrian and Antoninus, Emperors, the Christian faith
received mighty increase, as in the rest of the world; so in Britain, and
amongst some, remained entire and undefiled, until the persecution of
Dioclesian; which persecution burned furiously for the space of ten years in
many Provinces, but in Britain, it continued only one year. For Constantius
Chlorus, being declared Augustus, Eusebius. de vita Constan. l. 1, c. 12. and 9.
restored peace to Christians in the Province of his Dominions, scil. Spain,
France, and Britain. After the death of Constantius, Eusebius. hist. lib. 8. c.
29. Gr. Ruffin. 29 Sozom. l. 1. c. 6.
Constantine his Son, borne in England, and present with his Father at York
when he dyed, was made Emperor; in whose time and reign persecution ceased,
peace was generally given to the Church, Eusebius. hist. lib. 10. ca. 2. and lib
40. cap. 5. f.
Temples built, which before had been made equal with the ground, and the
profession of Christian faith restored. Under Constantine two great Counsels
were called. The first at Tom. 1. Council. Gall. edit. Paris. An. 1629.
Arles in France, An. 314. to take knowledge of the cause of the Donatists,
where were present out of our Britain Eborius. Bishop of York, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 3. ca. 18. Socrat. l. 1. cap. 6. and lib. 5. cap. 21. Theodor.
l. 1. ca. 10.
Restitutus, Bishop of London, Adelphius Bishop of Colchester, and Arminius
Diaconus, Presbyter. The second was the Nicene Council in Bythinia, An. 325
against Arius, where the Britains also were assembled. And though in the
Council of Ariminum, in Italy under Constantius, where Bishops out of Britain
were assembled with others, it was concluded for Arius, yet Britain was
preserved safe from the Arian infection, both in the reigns of Constantius,
and Julian the Apostata. Athanas. Graecolar. tom. 1. page 309. edit. Comelit.
Theodor. hist. l. 4. c. 3.
Pelagius a Britain by birth, troubled the Churches with his pestilent
Doctrine, denying the grace of God, attributing power and liberty to man to
live without sin, and keep the Commandments, if he would. This Heresy
arose about the year 405. or 406. and the Author thereof drew his first breath
in Britain, Prudent. (...). Trim. 13. speaking of Cyprian says, Gallos fovet,
imbuit Britannos, praesidet Hisperiae, Christum serit ultimis Hiberis. Vsser.
de prim. Eccles. Britan. ca. 16. page 787.
but he sowed not this heretical doctrine in Britain. And though it must be
confessed, That these Churches were not altogether free from that infection,
yet at first it was opposed, and after it was banished, by the blessing of God.
About the year 420. flourished Fastidius, of whom Gennedius in his catalogue
of Ecclesiastical Writers, says, Fastidius Bishop of the Britains, wrote to
Fatalis one book of Christian life, and another of keeping Widdow-hood, in
sound doctrine, and according to the truth of God. And John Trithemius,
Fastidius Bishop of the Britains, was a man learned in the holy Scriptures,
and an excellent Preacher of the word of God, famous in life and conversation,
in speech and wit notable: Prosper. contra. collater. cap. 41. Vsser de prim.
page 319, 320, 323, 324.
He wrote some devout little works, etc. And by the vigilance and care of
Lopis, and Germanus Antisiodorensis, the Britains were delivered from the
contagion which had begun to infect the Churches. After this the face of things
was miserable in that Kingdom, by reason of the invasion of the Repellu^t nos
barbari ad mare, repellit mare ad barbaros. Inter haec duo genera funeru^, aut
jugulamur autmergimur. Bed. hist. eccl. l. 1. cap. 14. Bilson. The true
difference between Christians. Par. 1. pa. 56. That this Land was infected
with Arianisme, and Pelagianisme, as many other places then were, I find it
reported in the story of Beda Eccl. his. gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 8. and lib. 1.
cap. 17. And the Bishops of France our neighbors upon request made unto them
by the Britains, sent Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops, chosen in a
Synod by the general liking, to convert this realm from Pelagius error, which
also they did with great celeritie.
barbarous enemy, the terrible famine, the direful contagion of the Pelagian
and Arian heresies, and the looseness, negligence, drunkenness, contentions,
and other vices of the Clergy. The Christian Religion thus corrupted, was
restored again by the second coming of Germannus: but after that grievously
oppressed by the coming in of the Anglo-Saxons, who could not yet so
extinguish the truth of God, but it did revive, spread and grow, though
sometimes more pure, sometimes more corrupt, and sometimes with greater,
sometimes with less freedom.

But to come to the last reformation which was made of Religion in this Land,
and it was not the conversion of England from infidelity to the profession of
the Gospel, but the restoring of it from a corrupt state or profession to a
more pure; from Christianity polluted, to Christianity unpolluted. Christians
they were who inhabited this Land, baptized into the true faith of Jesus
Christ, but Christians defiled with manifold superstitions, led aside into
manifold errors, which errors and superstitions removed, they become sound and
true Christians indeed. The true Chaloner. Credo S: 2. part. sect. 2: It will
soon appear that the Ch^ of Rome for a thousand years after our Savior,
professed no other faith, nor published any other belief in points
fundamental, either negative or affirmative, than we do, etc. After a
thousand and some few years more were expired (Transubstantiation, and
Adoration of the Host, with other dregs of Antichrist being established) though
we cannot say that the Church of Rome was from thence forth absolutely our
Church, yet we may boldly say, that our church was from that time until
Luther, both within the Roman Church and without it.
Church lay hid in Popery, as a little oar in a great lump of dross, not
refined, not purified, not coined, but true gold for substance, yea, that very
same for substance which being purified and stamped, is current coin. When the
invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, the Latin Service, and fabulous
Legends, the sacrifice of the Mass, and adoration of the Sacrament, with such
like abominations, were taken away; and in the room thereof, the true worship
of one true God in the mediation of Jesus Christ, and the right administration
of the Sacraments, and the reading of the holy Scriptures in a known tongue
established; when the omnipotency of the Pope is abandoned, with all corrupt
superstitions, which did undermine the foundation it self: and in stead
thereof the entire faith of the Lord Jesus, in all points necessary to
salvation, taught, professed, and received; then is the Church refined and
separated from that dross. To bring Infidells from the state of infidelity to
the faith, it is necessary that instruction go before, either by reading,
exhortation, preaching, or report of Christian faith, for faith comes by
hearing. But where men profess Christianity, abuses may be reformed by the
Edict of the Magigrate, without such particular instruction going before, as in
the former case is requisite. Many times Jo. 2.19.
heresy departs from the Church, or Heretics go out from the Church: and
sometimes the Church is compelled to go out from heresy, the heresy still
remaining. Revel. 18.4.
Come out of her my people, says the Lord: the godly then departing from
Babylon, according to Gods commandment, and gathering themselves into
Christian societies, the religious Magistrate, by his Edict or Proclamation
going before them, are the true churches of Christ. The Raynold. orat. epist.
ad fratrem. Non semper heresis exit ab ecclesia, aliquando manet heresis,
ecclesia exire cogitur.
Papacy was not the church, but the church lay hid in the Papacy, until the
time of separation, which being made according to Gods commandment, by the
authority of the Lords Vicegerent, the church, which was before August. epist.
48. ad Vincent. Donatist. Ecclesia est, quae aliquando obscuratur, and tanquam
obnubilatur, multitudine scandalorum.
obscured, does now shine forth. Thus our Divines do soundly and truly answer
to the Papists demanding, where our Church was before Luther, That it was where
now it is, but unrefined, unstamped; that it lay Beza. epist. 1. ad Duditium:
et si Papatun non sit Ecclesia, voluit Deus in Papatu servare ecclesiam.
hid among them for the time, as some fit stones for the building, under a
great heap of rubbish; and that we have not erected a new Church, but repaired
and restored a ruinous See Dr. Field of the Church, lib. 3. c. 6. and 8. Beza.
epist. 81. Quid interim misera Dei ecclesia? nempe haec tunc erat ipsius
co^ditio, quae olim in Israele temporibus Eliae, delirescentibu^ in spelu^ca
fidelibus Dei Prophetis: et qualis rum erar, quum everso Dei templo, and jugi
cessante sacrificio, captiva in Babylone teneretur. Servabat tamen Dominus
renascituri suo tempore, populi semen. Manebat salvus in papatu Baptismus, in
patris, filij and Sp. Sancti nomen, etc.
decayed and corrupt Church. If any of our men deny the Churches wherein our
Fathers lived to be the Churches of God, their meaning is limited in respect of
the prevailing faction that was in the church, and including them and all the
wicked impieties by any of them defended; in which sense, their negative is to
be understood. These things standing thus, might not the christian Magistrate
take away the Idol of the Mass, injoyne the reading of the Scriptures in a
known tongue; appoint that prayer should be made to God only in the mediation
of Jesus Christ, and take order that the Sacrament of the Supper might be
administered in both kinds, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8 9, 10.
according to the institution? Might he not Nabuchadneezer made a law, That no
man should blaspheme the God of Shadrac, etc. Dan. 3.29. Darius, that men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, Dan. 6.26. Joshua made a covenant
with the people, that they should put away their strange gods, Ios. 24.23. Asa
destroyed Idolatry, and commanded the people to serve and seek the Lord, 2
Par. 14.3, 4. and 15, 8, 9, 10, etc. Jehosaphat sent Princes to teach in the
Cities of Judah, and with them Levites, 2 Chro. 17.7, 8, 9. and 19.4. Hezekiah
sent to all Israel and Judah, that they should come to the house of the Lord, 2
Par. 30.1.6. Also he took away the high places, 2 Reg. 18.4. Josiah brake down
the altars of Baal, and brought back the people to the worship of God, 2 Chronicles. 34.3, 4, 5.7 29, 30, 32, 33. Polonia, Russia, Lithuania was forced at
the commandment of their Rulers to forsake their ancient Idols, and receive
Baptism. Munster Cosmograph. fol. 894.902. and diverse good Princes maintained
long and sharp wars, of purpose to compel the Saxons and Vandals to the
faith, Idem lib. 3. fol. 719.743. It is a strange and new kind of preaching
(for Bishops) to drive men to believe with whippings, as Bonner did; but in
Princes, who bear the sword, and are Gods Lievetenants, not only to procure
peace between men, but also by Laws to maintain Religion toward God, we
neither did, nor do dispraise moderate correction, when need so requires,
August. Epist. 127. Idem contra Erescon. lib. 3. cap. 50. Idem contra lit.
Petilian. lib. 2. cap. 86.83. Codex. lib. 1. tit. 5. de Haeretic. Socrat. lib.
1. ca. 34. Gr. lat. 21, 22. Eusebius. de vita Constable. lib. 1. cap. 37. Theoderet.
lib. 5. cap. 20. Multa enim cogit far necessitas quae tamen non probantur.
command all people throughout his Dominions professing the faith, to learn
the grounds of Religion, to call upon the Name of the Lord, to hear his Word
and to worship him truly and purely, according as the Lord himself has
appointed? And when the people could not, or were careless and negligent,
might he not provide means for their instruction and edification in the faith
of the Lord Jesus? This the Christian Magistrates did amongst us by authority
from God. They provided that the Scriptures should be read in a known language
in all Congregations, Ministers enjoined to catechize in the grounds of
Christian Religion, the Gospel was preached in many places, disputation was
proffered to the learned for satisfaction. If these things be advisedly
confidered, we shall hear no more from the Brethren of the Separation, that
our Church was gathered without the Word, by mere Proclamation, not called but
made up a Church in one day, at the commandment of the evil Magistrate: at
least, no man that has truly tasted of the Word of life, will be moved with
such like cavills, unless it be to condemn their rashness and
unthankfulness so much the more. It might here be added; that before
reformation many did earnestly desire it; some lay hid all the days of Queen
Mary, who never came to the Mass, but trained up their children and servants
at home in the grounds of Christian Religion; others fled into foreign parts:
some met together in private in their own Countries, as they had opportunity,
and many groaned under that bondage in which they were held; all which did
gladly welcome the truth, when it shined forth, and rejoiced when they might
join in the Congregation, understand their prayers, hear the Scriptures, and
be instructed in the principles of faith and holiness. And if I should say,
that at the first reformation, there were more godly, learned, painful
Preachers, that endeavored to bring forward the people in the ways of
godliness, by an hundred to one, than ever wane of your Separation since the
Gospel shined unto the world, I conceive you shall not be able to find an
Hyperbole in the speech.

And now suppose in this great and admirable work, such a course to be held,
as cannot be justified in all things, shall this make a nullitie of that which
is prosperously effected by the blessing of God? If ignorant Ministers should
not have been set over the people, when better could not be had; if people
should not have been admitted to the Lords Supper, before better instruction in
the grounds of Christian Religion (when yet the Law does presuppose them in
some sort instructed;) If profane and notorious wicked persons, which should
have been cast out, unless they had repented, were received into communion,
without any due course held before to reform and amend them, this argues Beza.
epist. 1. ad Dudetium. Valentinian the elder was a good man, and worthy the
Empire, being himself of the Nicene faith. Theod. lib. 4. ca. 5. Sozom. lib. 6.
cap. 6. and yet he molested not any that were of the contrary faith, neither
thought he it good to change Ecclesiastical laws into better or worse, Sozom.
li. 6. ca. 20. Socrat. l. 4. c. 1 and made a Law, that every man that would
might have two wives, and himself gave the first example in taking two.
Socrat. l. 4. Gr. ca. 30. lat. ca. 16. Can. Neces. of Separat. p. 175, 176: 1
Reg. 6.17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 1.8, 9.
imperfection in the reformation, and just cause that we should strive forward
to perfect what was happily begun, but proves not the assemblies to be
Antichristian, or the reformation to be of no worth and validity.

Look through all the Reformations mentioned in Scripture, or recorded in
other Antiquities; and set if this reformation be a nullity, whether ever there
was a reformed church in the world for any continuance.

SECT. II.
THe material Temple was a type of the visible Churches under the Gospel; Now
we read, that it was built from the very foundation ^f costly stones, of
Cedars, Algum, Fur, and the like choice and special trees, and those all
prepared aforehand, hewed and perfect for the building, so that neither hammer,
nor axe, nor any tool was to be hea din the house, in the building of it; no
common or vile thing was used toward it; neither might any polluted person
enter it and offer, until he had repented and embraced the faith, 2 Chronicles.
23.19. Levit. 22.19. and 27.11.
and been cleansed from his filthiness. By the gates of the house were
Porters set to keep the unworthy out. Upon the Altar there might be offered no
unclean beast, no nor that which was clean, having a blemish upon it. What in
all this was signified? Only this: Such as will build a spiritual house for
the Lord to dwell in, must be an holy people: for he is of that infinite
purity, that he will not vouchsafe his special presence unto profane
companies, which join themselves together; and therefore let it be far from
all men to prepare a place for him, with such trash, or to defile his holy
things with such unclean persons, or to offend his nostrills with the stink
of such sacrifices.

ANSWER.
IF this reason be ought worth, not only such as would build a spiritual house
to the Lord for his Majesty to dwell in, but such as would preserve it being
built, must be an holy people, holy in truth, and not only in the judgment of
charity: for he is an holy God, who will not be worshipped of the hypocrite or
profane, will not take the wicked dissembler by the hand, will not hear the
prayers of them that with delight look unto iniquity. If the Temple was built
from the very foundation with costly stone, hewn and prepared, after it was
built, it must be kept from all pollution. And then if the Temple was a type of
the visible Church in such sense as this reason affirms, it must be gathered
of a people truly holy and separated from the world, and only of such, so
that if any hypocrite shall craftily creep into it, or any wicked person be
tolerated afterward, it must cease to be a Church: August. de Baptis. contr.
Petilian. ca. 14. and in Epist. 1. Joh. Beda in epist. 1 Job. Glossa ordinar.
Sic sunt ficti in ecclesia, quomodo humores mali in corpore; quando evomu^tur,
releuatur corpus, sic qudndo excunt mali, relevatur Ecclesia.
which is directly contrary to the whole current of Scripture, and to that
which your self many times affirm. The Temple is thought to be a type of
Christ, of a Christian, of the Church, but whether of the true Catholic
Church, whereof every member is a living stone, elect and precious, or of the
visible congregationall assembly, consisting of good and bad, sincere and
hypocritical professors, it may well be questioned: For the visible Church is
not built all of costly stones, hewn and prepared: Therein many persons
inwardly polluted do offer, though outwardly they appear clean, and some may
be suffered to offer, which inwardly and outwardly appear to be unclean.

And if it was a type of the visible Church, it must be considered how far
the signification is to be extended, and wherein the resemblance stands. For
as it appertains to God only to design a type, so it is peculiar to him
alone to expound or notify the A dispute. par. 3. cap. 8. page 169. Men may
never at their pleasure ascribe to any rite whatsoever, a holy signification of
some mystery of faith or duty of piety.
signification of the type wherein it consists: It is an addition prohibited
for us to interpret divine instituted types upon our own heads, without ground
and warrant from God. The common Rule is good, if rightly limited; Theologia
symbolica non est argumentativa, which you had need to study better, for here
and elsewhere throughout your books, you thrust such significations of types
used in the old Testament upon your Reader, as are not taught in Scripture, not
for the matter it self consonant to the August. contr. 2. Gaudent. epist. l.
2. cap. 25. Did God or man tell it you? If God, read it unto us out of the
Law, the Prophets and Psalms, the Apostolical or Evangelicall Writings? Read
it if you can, which hitherto you never could; but if men have said it (or
rather no man but your self) behold the device of men, behold what you
worship, behold what you serve, behold wherefore you rebel, you rage, you wax
mad. Bills. Christ. subject. pars 3. page 22. You promised full proofs out of
the Word of God, etc. and now you come with empty figures of your own, applying
without truth or coherence. Amb. Epist. lib. 5. ep. 31. The mystery of Heaven,
let God himself teach me, which made (Heaven) not man which knew not himself;
whom should I rather believe concerning God, than God himself.
Scripture: and your whole frame of arguing is drawn from similitudes and
comparisons, which is the most popular, but deceitful and loose kind of
reasoning, if they be not rightly drawn and well proportioned. Let this
particular in hand be for example, and let us grant you more than you will
defire, scil. That the Temple was a type of the visible Church, and that all
the members thereof ought to be holy, truly holy and not in appearance only,
sincere Christians in the sight of God, and in the judgment of charity alone,
Saints and faithful in truth, and not only in profession and conversation in
some measure answerable: be it that no unclean thing must be offered upon the
altar, that no hypocritical service shall be accepted: Hence it will not
follow, that the society is no visible Church of God where such are tolerated,
or that the pure and unfeigned worship of the faithful, shall not be accepted;
when it is tendered in a society amongst whom there be some rebellious, which
hate to be reformed.

If the Temple be a type of the visible Church as it was built from the very
foundation of costly stones, what can it signify in your sense, but that the
spiritual house of the Lord must consist of them that are truly holy,
faithful, and called, so that they should need, neither axe, hammer, nor any
tool (so you press the matter) to fit or square. And then by your own
confession we are to expect no Church upon the earth, if ever there has been
any: For in the visible Church hypocrites are and have been mixed with the
faithful, as rubbish or counterfeit with costly stones, which could have no
place in the Temple. Can. Stay. sect. 4. page 33.
Thus (I might say to you, as you to your Pistoler) The man is snared in his
own words, and may say with the Poet; Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis! If
the Temple might be a type of the Church this notwithstanding, then it shows
only what the Church ought to be, not what it is; of whom it does consist as
prime, chief, principal members, partakers of all the Royalties and
privileges thereof, and not who are tolerated and suffered there as members in
an inferior degree, or as maimes and blemishes: And then you must lie under
the just imputation of abusing this instance to another purpose, not agreeable
to the truth. Can. Neces. of Separat. page 195. It will not be found that ever
we have denied, but many hypocrites may be in the true church, yea, of open
and vile transgressors: but here lies the point; If any man shall affirm that
the same may be first gathered of known lewd, and unconverted men, that indeed
we deny utterly, etc.
When you are pressed with the examples where wicked and ungodly men were
tolerated in the Church and did bear chief sway, and possessed the greatest
places and office in the Church, you fly to this, that you plead against the
first building of a Church of such wicked and ungodly men, and here you say. He
that will build a spiritual house to the Lord, and the orderly gathering and
planting of the members of them, were all holy: But if this reason be of any
force, it concludes for the continuance of the Church as well as the first
planting or gathering, that the members thereof must be truly holy. And if this
be not more cunning than beseems the sincere handler of Gods Word in a matter
of such importance, let the indifferent consider.

SECT. III.
THe reasons upon which our proposition is grounded are these; Neces. of
Separat. page 176, 177. Psalm. 50.16. Isa. 35.8. Zach. 14.21. Rev. 21. ult.
first, All wicked men are forbidden expressly by the Word of God, for meddling
with his ordinance or covenant. Now if men to escape temporal punishment are
afraid to transgress against the Laws of worldly Princes! much more fearful
should they be to break his, who is the King of Kings, and will inflict for it
upon their souls and bodies torments eternally 2. That which destroys a
Church and makes it either to become a false Church or no Church at all, cannot
be a true Church, or be true matter whereof it is made: But men visibly wicked
and profane, make the Church a Synagogue of Satan, Babylon, Sodom, Egypt,
and so be spied out and removed. 3. It is against sense and common reason, that
a Church should be constituted of unholy people: For as in a material house
the wood and stone must be first prepared, and then laid orderly in the
building: So in the spiritual, men and women by the word of God must
necessarily be first reformed, before they are any way fit to have any place
therein. 4. They which have no right to the holy things of God in the Church,
are not to be admitted into it, neither is that Church which is so gathered,
rightly constituted. Matthew. 7.6.
But men of wicked conversation have no right to the holy things of God in the
Church: And therefore that Church which is gathered of such, is not rightly
constituted. 5. They cannot perform the services and duties of members, Ephesians.
2.1.
for they are spiritually dead; If a Master will who covenant with one to be
his servant, which has in him no natural life, much less, etc. 6. They have
not Christ for their head, and therefore cannot be of his body; For as in the
natural body there must first be a natural (...) of the parts with the head,
before there can be day action of natural conjunction, Ioh. 15.2.4, Romans 8.
between the head and the members, and one member and another: so in the
spiritual body, the members must be first united with Christ the head, and
became one with him, before they can any way partake in his benefits, Romans 7.2.
Hos^a 2.19, 20.
or have communion one with another, as members of the some body (...) him the
head. 7. They are altogether incapable of this covenant; For as a woman which
has been once a wife, cannot marry again with another man, until her first
husband be deceased, or she from him lawfully divorced; So neither can these
be married to the (...), till they have mortified their corruptions, and put
the world and Satan away, unto which they were before (as it were) married. 8.
The godly and wicked are contraries, guided and lead by different causes: Now
true contraries are not capable of one and the same form.

ANSWER.
THe best way to be secure from the force of your darts, is to run unto the
mark. For here we have reasons numbered up which have weight in them for some
purpose (some of them at the least) but direct them to your mark, and they
recoyle back upon your self. When you have reckoned up first, second, and
third, etc. the conclusion is ever wanting, and not so much as one premise
which looks to the right conclusion to be confirmed. The thing to be proved is
this, that it is no true Church of God, which is not planted, gathered, or
built of Saints only: but that consequence will never follow from those
premises. For every thing in those Reasons must as well be applied to the
continuance of the church, as to the first gathering and planting of it. The
wicked are expressly forbidden to meddle with the covenant, or ordinances of
God, men visibly wicked make the church a Synagogue of Satan: Men must be hewn
and reformed before they are fit to have any place in the Church of God: Men of
wicked conversation have no right to the holy things of God: Bilson. perpet.
govern. ca. 10. p. 147. With open reproving by the Word, and excluding from the
Sacraments such as notoriously sinned, Pastors and Prophets might intermeddle,
the people might not: It was no part of their charge, but in banishing of
malefactors from all fellowship and company both civil and sacred, with the
faithful: Pastors were to direct, the people to assist and execute that
judgment. The Apostles do not leave it to the peoples liking, as a matter
indifferet, till they have consented, but enjoyneth it as a necessary duty, and
co^ma^deth them in the name^ of Christ Jesus to withdraw themselves from every
brother that walks inordinately, etc. Where there wants a believing
Magistrate, the Pastor shall not do wisely to proceed to any such rigor
against wilful and obstinate sinners, without the knowledge and consent of the
people. Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 34. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 17. Bilson.
Christian subject. part. 3. page 81, 82, 83, 86. The Question is not whether
Bishops shall receive Kings with open and obstinate vices to the Lords Table;
but whether they shall chase them from their Kingdoms or no: we mislike not
repentance in Princes, but resistance in subjects, etc. But mark what care
Augustine will have observed, how and when discipline should be administered.
They cannot perform the duties of members, they have nor Christ for their
head; they are incapable of the covenant, etc. Is any thing here spoken
peculiar to the members of the Church at the first planting thereof, which does
not hold true of the members of the Church established and confirmed? Are not
the wicked at all times forbidden to meddle with the ordinances of God,
incapable of the covenant, spiritually dead, not fit to have place in the house
of God? And if this hold true against such members of the Church at all times,
why do you bear the Reader in hand. That you only plead against the first
building of a Church of such wi^^ed and ungodly persons? Can. Neces. of
Separat. page 194, 195.
The Question (you say) has ever been about the true and natural members,
whereof Gods Church is orderly gathered, and planted, and not about the
degenerate and decayed estate thereof. But if any of these Reasons will
conclude ought, there was never society to be esteemed the true church of God,
all whose members were not Saints and holy, spiritually enlived, fit to
perform the duties of members, fitted, prepared and laid orderly in the
building, married to the Lord Christ. What you hold, that is not material in
this point, but what your Arguments conclude: for if they infer one thing and
you maintain another, of necessity they are weak, or you are cross to your
self, or both. Can. Neces. of Separat. page 195.
If they shall say, (thus you write) that obstinate and incorrigible sinners,
may lawfully be suffered therein, This we affirm to be untrue: But if they
say, that in a true visible Church, there may be great evils committed, you
and along time tolerated, we assent unto it. Howbeit, it is certain ( as Dr.
Ames faith) This forbearance is a grievous sin before God. Of the lawful
toleration of obstinate and incorrigible persons, we have no controversy with
you; But if any one reason here be brought by you to the purpose, it cannot be
the true Church of God, where any one obstinate known offender is suffered, or
which has not right to the holy things of God. That the members of the Church
ought to walk in holiness, you need not prove; but that the Congregation
cannot be the true Church of God, where such things are suffered as ought not
to be: And yet your Reasons go higher than so.

For if they be duly examined, whether do they speak of such as be truly
holy, or only visibly holy? Saints and faithful in the fight of God, or only
in the eyes and approbation of men? Only the Saints are capable of the
Covenant, spiritually alive unto God, married unto Jesus Christ, and have
communion with him: only they are hewn, fitly prepared and laid truly upon
the spiritual foundation; only their service is accepted of God in Jesus
Christ. It is nothing here to answer, the members of the Church are such in the
judgment of charity: For in the degenerate state, the Church does not ever
consist of such as you confess: and your reasons here speak of them that be
such indeed, in the judgment of truth, quickened by the Spirit, acceptable to
God, Saints by Covenant, the living members of Jesus Christ, and so heirs of
salvation.

And if we look into this matter more narrowly, the conclusion fights with
the premises, and does manifestly overturne what you would build. Psalm. 50.16.
Moller. in Psalm. 50.16.
The wicked are expressly forbidden to meddle with the Covenant. But those
wicked ones to whom the Lord speaks at that time, more visible members of the
true Church. The wicked make the Church of God (you say) a Synagogue of Satan,
Sodom, etc. And does not the Prophet call them Princes of Sodom, Isa. 1.10.
and people of Gomorrah, who were the people of God by covenant, members of the
true Church? Do they provoke God to spew them out of his mouth, or to remove
his Candlestick? But until he remove his Candlestick, or spew them out of
his mouth, they continue his Church and people. Ezekiel. 16.45, 46, 47, etc.
Rebellious Judah justified her Sisters Sodom and Samaria, and yet she
continued the Church of God, when they were cast off; A tree unhewen and
unprepared is unfit matter for an house, and so are tares, blasted corn, and
dry ears, to grow together in the field with good corn, as wheat, etc. But
the house cease not to be an house, though a piece of timber unprepared be
put into it, or the corn field to be a field of corn, because the tares are
suffered to abide until the harvest. A dead man cannot perform the office of a
living member, but instrumentally he may do the office of a member, or he may
be an instrument which the head is pleased to use, for the good of the body;
otherwise no hypocrite who is spiritually dead could be any means of good unto
the society. No wicked man is spiritually married unto Christ, nor hypocrite,
but hypocrites and wicked men may be members of the society which in respect
of external covenant is married unto Christ, or else the Church of the Jews
was not beloved of him. The godly and wicked are lead by different causes, and
so are hypocrites and sincere Christians, but they may be linked together in
the same outward society. Hypocrites, you confess, are members of the Church,
until they be dissevered and cast out: But the upright and the double-hearted
are contraries, lead by different causes, and so incapable of the same form,
to use your phrases.

SECT. IV.
FOr this we have the judgment of the learned also, Can. Neces. of Separat.
page 178. In Psalm. 15.
There must be (says Mollerus) a profession of true Religion and obedience
yielded thereto, at least, outwardly to become a member of the visible Church.
Beza says, Anno. in Act. 2.40.
He is rightly joined to the Church, which separates himself from the wicked.
Paul calls the Romans Saints (says Aretius) to put a difference between
their former estate wherein they lived, In Romans 1.7. Vol. these. theolog. page
256.
which was unholy and impure, and the condition to which they were now called.
Piscator affirms the matter of a particular Church to be a company of
Believers, etc.

ANSWER.
YOu may easily bring heaps of testimonies for that which these Authors
affirm. For I suppose there is not, Mark what care S. Augustine will have
observed, how and when discipline should be used. August. contr Parmenian.
lib. 3. ca. 2. If contagion of sin have invaded a multitude, the merciful
severitie of correction from God himself is necessary. Nam concilia
separationis inania sunt, and perniciosa atque sacrilega; etc.
nor ever was, godly, orthodox Divine, of another judgment. But that which
they say, and you maintain, are incompatible. Their Assertion is taught in
Scripture, professed by the godly learned in all ages, and is most evident to
right reason, illuminated by faith. But that which you contend for, is neither
taught in Scripture, nor confirmed by reason, or professed by godly and learned
Authors, ancient or modern, of one sort or other, parties excepted. For it is
one thing to say, the Church is a society of faithful people, joining
together in the ordinances of worship: Another, that it is no Church where the
ignorant or profane are tolerated. The first of these is affirmed: The latter
is that which you must prove out of those Writers (which you can never do) or
else you abuse both your self and them. Order is requisite in every
administration of the Church, Can. Neces. of Separat. page 186.
as the Apostle teaches, and chiefly in the collection thereof, you say. But
the want of order in every point requisite, either in the collection or
government of the Church, does not make it no Church. You know it is an usual
received distinction, that hypocrites and ungodly men are in the Church, but
not of the Church. And if at any time you read that notorious offenders are
neither of the Church, T. C. repl. 1. pa. 34, 35.
nor in the Church; The same Author has explained himself, that when he
says, There be no known Drunkards or Whoremongers in the Church, he speaks
of that which should be: T. C. 2. repl. par. 1: page 242.
As when Paul says, That the Church of God has no custom to contend, Aug. de
mor. Eccl. cathol. lib. 1. c. 34. Bring me not such Christians as either know
not or keep not the force of their profession. Rake not after the ruder sort,
which even in true Religion are entangled with superstition: my self knew many
that are worshippers of tombs and pictures.
he sets forth, not that which always comes to pass, but what ought to
be always. For it may be that contention may continue in a Church many years,
and yet it cease not to be the true Church of God.

In Mollerus I can find nothing that makes to your purpose, but many things
directly against you. First, he entreats in that Psalm of the true lively
members of the Church, and therefore your gloss (at least outwardly)
corrupts the Text. Thus in the argument of the Psalm he writes; Ostendit
qui sint cultus, aut opera quae Deo placeant, and quomodo vera and viva membra,
Ecclesia ab hypocritis and alijs manifest impijs, discerni possint and
debeant. And in the whole Psalm he shows that he speaks of the living
members of the Church, for whom salvation is prepared, and to whom it is
reserved, and not of visible members only. Thus upon the first verse, V^itur
autem hoc verbo, August. contr. Par. lib. 3. cap. 2. It cannot be an healthful
reproving by many, but when he that is reproved has no number to take his
part. But if the same disease has possessed many, the good have nothing left
for them to do, but to sorrow and mourn.
ut ostendat discrimen inter perpetuos Ecclesiae, cives, (...) inquilinos, seu
hypocritas; qui ad tempus sunt illis permisti. Hi enim etiamsi venditent se pro
veris Ecclesiae membris, externa prefessione, and observatione rituum: tamen
quia vera and solida pietate carent, and varijs sordibus sunt polluti, tandem
judicio divino separabuntur a veris Ecclesiae membris. And in his third
observation upon the first Verse; Quia saepe contingit, Ecclesiam Dei multis
inquinamentis deforment cernere, ne quis ad hoc scandalum impingat, discrimen
constituendum est, inter perpetuos Ecclesiae cives and inquilinos, qui ad
tempus sunt illis permisti. Damnandi igitur sunt Anabaptisti, qui non putant
veram esse Ecclesiam, quae vitia quaedane tolerare cogitur. If this be not
sufficient, see what he has upon the fifth Verse. And his observations upon
the first and fifth Verses. But what you allege out of him I cannot find.

Mr. Beza has that which you cite out of him, but he means nothing less,
than that a Christian should separate from the Church and ordinances of grace,
because ungodly men are suffered, which should be removed but are not. Bezae
Annot. Major in Act. 2.40.
In his Major Annotations, he explaineth himself thus; Express usus est hoc
verbo Lucas, Bezae, epist. 2. page 28, 29. Nec enim ut rite ad caenam accedam,
ut scrutandum est mihi qua quisque conscientia ad eam mecum accedat, sed de mea
ipsius conscientia mihi laborandum est. It aque and cum Adulteris, and cum
Homicidis, et cum sceleratisstmis quibusvis, medo nulla mea culpa tales sint,
si ad caenam castus and sceleris puras accessero, nihil illoru^ impuritas, mihi
nocuerit. Et quod de moribus duo etiam de doctrina, dico, quod interdum nec
pastores, satis pura^ tradunt, nec auditores satis recte percipiunt. Dicam
etia^ amplius si vel Turcam vel Judeu^ Past or quispia^ sive prudenter sive
imprudenter admitteret, tota illius facti culpa, in illum recideret, nec ego
propterea ou^ctanter ad me^sam Domini accessero, etc.
ut ostenderet ipsarum animarum salutem positam esse in discessione a
prophanorum caetibus. But the Church of God, wherein profane persons are
suffered to abide, is not the congregation of profane men in Mr. Beza's
judgment, from which we must depart. Let this or that be faultily done or
pretermitted of some (says he) are they not therefore Christians, or to be
esteemed brethren? But they will say, This is at least to communicate in their
sin, nay, this confequence is most false. For if I come prepared to the
Supper, I am not to search with what conscience any man does come to it with
me, but I must take care of mine own conscience. Therefore if I come to the
Supper, chaste and free from wickedness, though I communicate with adulterers,
with murderers, and with most wicked wretches, so they be such by no fault of
mine, their impuritie shall not hurt me. And what I speak of manners, I also
say of doctrine, which sometimes the Pastors do not purely deliver, nor the
hearers receive well and holily. I will say more, if some Pastor either
ignorantly or advisedly, should admit a Jew or Turk, the whole fault of that
fact shall fall upon him, and I would not come no more slackly to the Table of
the Lord; because his impure conscience, so I be without fault, does not
pollute mine which is pure; and that very Supper is pure to me, which that
impure person prophaneth. Thus Beza. And this may be showed to be the constant
judgment of all orthodox Divines, not parties in this case, and it is a thing
so well known, that it is superfluous labor to examine the rest particularly.
And here let it be noted, That it is usual to define the Church by the better
part, by the true and living, chief principal and perpetual members,
partakers of the royalties and liberties of the catholic Church, knit unto
Christ, quickened by the Spirit, heirs of salvation, and one with the
triumphant church: And not by all sorts, as in outward society and profession
are linked together, who yet are not excluded from the society in respect of
profession, nor denied to be members of the Church in their kind or in a sort
such as are called only by external vocation, are members in their kind of
that company called, or externally selected, but not true members of the Church
militant, nor militant members of the Church catholic, whereof Christ is the
head. And thus the church is a company of faithful people, sincere, upright,
walking with God, which is mixed with hypocrites and wicked livers, not as
living members of Jesus Christ, but as members in a sort of the visible
society; as members in the church by outward profession, but not of the true
militant church.

SECT. V.
BEfore I end this point, Neces. of Separat. p. 179, 180, 181. Babel no Bethel.
page 108. Chall. ca. 1. page 33, 34.
I will here lay down some few Syllogismes, entirely made up, between the
Inconformists and Conformists, all concluding the forenamed position, That
Church which has not a lawful Ministry, is not a true visible Church: But
the Church of England has not a true lawful Ministry: Ergo, The Church of
England is not a true visible Church. The proposition is affirmed of the
Conformists, Sutcl. Chal. pa. 40. and answ. to the except. page 65.
as Burton, Sutcliffe. The Assumption is granted by the Nonconformists, as we
have in the first chapter largely showed. The true visible Church of Christ is
a society of believing and faithful people, and a communion of Saints, so say
the Conformists. But the Church of England is not a society of believing and
faithful people, a communion of Saints (thus write the Nonconformists, see
page 169.) Ergo, the Church of England is not the true visible Church. The true
Church is the Kings daughter, described in Psalm 45. But the Church of England
is not the Kings daughter so described. Therefore the Church of England is not
the true Church of Christ. Burton. answer to Hicholia. page 100.
The proposition is laid down by the Conformists, whereby they prove Rome a
false Church. The Assumption is the Nonconformists; For if they say the truth,
their members have not those qualities belonging to the Kings daughter, neither
the Priest nor people. See page 15.16. 39.137 ^^ 69.170. The true Church of
Christ is the flock of Christ (...) the Church of England is not the true
flock of Christ, therefore the Church of England is not the true Church of
Christ. The proposition (say the Conformists) is undeniable: Burto^ in the same
Book, page 99.
Song. 1.6, 7, Act: 20.28. Joh: 10.16. The^e Assumption is proved by the
Nonconformists Principles, compared; with Joh. 10.3, 4.27. Christ's flock hear
his voice, and live it and follow it. But the Church of England submitting to
a^ unlawful Minisstery; worship, and discipline; hear not Christ's voice, nor
know; nor acknowledge, nor follow it, but the voice of Antichrist. The Church
of God does keep the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, without addition,
alteration or corruption; (thus the Conformists.) Sutcl. Chal. cap. 1. page 6.
arg. 9.
But the Church of England keeps not the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, without addition, alteration and corruption, say the Nonconformists;
Sec page; 108, Ergo, she is not the Church of God. No society can be termed
Gods Church, which retains not Gods true worship (this the Conformists.) But
the Church of England does not retaire Gods true worship, say the
Nonconformists. See page 78 to the 213. Ergo, The same Book, page 13. arg. 19.
she cannot be termed Gods church. The true Church consists not of fierce.
Lions, Wolves, Tigres, and such like wild and fierce beasts; But of Sheep,
and Lambs, which learn of Christ, and are meek, humble, gentle, etc. So say
the Conformists. But the English Church does consist of Lions, Id. page 27.
arg. (...).
Wolves, Tigres, and such like wild and fierce beast's, and not of Sheep and
Lambs, which learn of Christ, and are meek, humble, and gentle, etc. Thus
the Nonconformists; see page 31. etc. 145.169. Therefore it is not the true
Church. Here the Reader sees clearly how the Conformists Majors and the
Nonconformists Minors, make up entire Syllogismes, of Separation; And how they
will be able to loose these knots, I know not; except by revoking utterly their
own grounds, which if either of them do; yet I doubt not but we shall be well
enough able to maintain them against men.

ANSWER.
YOu please your self with the same Song, which here we have over again and
again, tuned with the same art. But that which you talk of the Conformists
Majors and the Inconformists Minors (your slanders set aside:) is idle and
toyish. For in that matter there is no difference betwixt the Conformists and
the Inconsormists. The Conformists Majors as they are truly meant, the
Inconformists do assent unto: And the abuse of ignorance, idleness,
profaneness, both of Ministers and people, whereof the Nonconformists
complain; the Conformists do acknowledge and bewail. And your self a little
after in a matter of the same nature affirm, that herein you say no more, than
what in effect is fully acknowledged, Can. Neces. of Separat. page 193.
by the Nonconformists, Conformists, the Church of England, the learned
generally, and all the reformed Churches upon earth: and for proof you quote
the same Authors you here all edge. And why then do you trifle thus with the
Conformists Major, and Inconformists Minor? Did the sound of those words please
you so well? But let the Majors and Minors be whose they will, no entire or
perfect Syllogismes of Separatisme can be made up of them, but such as
ignorance in not understanding, or an evil conscience in perverting or
falsifying their sayings, does conclude. They may well stand to their grounds
and unloose those knots, and if they understand their own principles, they
cannot but untie them. But how you can free your self from the guilt of an
evil conscience, unless you recant what you have written, repent of your
Separation, and acknowledge the wrong you have done to the Nonconformists, by
misreporting, perverting and falsifying their principles, as you call them; I
leave to your serious consideration, and the reexamination of what you have
done.

For the right understanding of the Conformists propositions (I^ speak in your
phrase) against the Church of Rome, we must note, That the Romanists hold the
Church of Rome to be the catholic Church of Christ here on earth, under the
Pope the Head; in which sense their propositions are to be understood: For the
true catholic militant Church is a faithful people, a communion of Saints,
the flock of Christ, that hears his voice, keeps the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, without addition or alteration, and worshippeth God
truly according to his will: And there is truly and properly no member of the
militant Church catholic, which does not this sincerely in truth and measure.
But they never thought nor taught, that every member in a sort, of the visible
Churches, were holy and sincere, the true sheep of Christ faithful, and
effectually called: much less, that it was no Church of Christ, wherein abuses
were to be found, or ungodly profane men were tolerated. The Bills. The
difference between christium subject par. 1. page 92. These ( se. the Church
militant and triumpha^t) be not two but one Church. Jerusalem which is above,
is the mother of us all. Gal. 4. Ye be now, says Paul, no more strangers and
forreiners, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2.
For you be come to the City of the living God, and Heb. 12. where you see the
Saints in heaven, be not removed from the Church of God, but be received to
their fellowship. Id. part 2. p. 230. The Church in heaven, is it another
Church from this on earth, or the same? Certainly, Christ has but one body
which it his Church, and of that body seeing the Saints ( sc. in heaven) be the
greater and worthier part, they must be counted the same church with us.
Church militant and triumphant, are not two Kingdoms, but two degrees of one
Kingdom. The Church visible and invisible are not two Churches, but distinct
considerations of the same Church. If then we speak of true, sound, living,
chief, principle members of the militant Church, such as partake in all the
royalties and privileges of members, every member of the Church militant is a
true branch in the Vine, knit firmly unto Christ, quickened by the Spirit, and
shall be an inheriter of eternal glory. But if we speak of members in a sort
of visible societies, so hypocrites may be members, and ungodly men, as they
are tolerated in the society, when the better part cannot reform or amend
them.

But to the Arguments in order.

First, The Church may be true though the Ministry be deficient in the order
of calling, qualification of persons, and execution of their office: But that
Church is false whose Ministry is altogether false for substance of their
office, that is the doctrine which they teach, Sacraments which they
administer, and functions whereunto they are set apart. Thus the Conformists
and Inconformists both. Now if we speak of the Ministry of the Church of
England, indefinitly, both Conformists and Inconformists will confess some
things to be faulty both in the entrance and execution of their callings; as
that some are ignorant, proud, covetous, careless, corrupt, not watching over
the flock: But absolutely that their Ministry is false in respect of the
substance of their office, that was never said by either of them, as you do or
might well know. The knot to be unloosed now remains in your conscience, in
that either you aequivocate in your Major, or against knowledge, charge the
Nonconformists in your Minor, with that which they never said.

Secondly, The true Church of Christ, that is, the true and lively members of
the militant church, and militant members of the catholic church, is a
company of The true Church is an universal congregation or fellowship of Gods
faithful and elect people, built upon the foundations of the Prophets and
Apostles, Christ Jesus himself, being the head corner stone. And it has
always three notes or marks whereby it is known; pure and sound doctrine,
the Sacraments ministered according to Christ's holy institution, and the right
use of Ecclesiastical discipline, Hom. 2. book, hom. for Whites. 2. part. The
Church consists not of men, but of faithful men, and they be the Church, not
in respect of flesh and blood, which came from earth, but of truth and grace,
which came from Heaven. Bilson. Christ. Subject. part 2. page 231.
faithful people, a communion of Saints, the true flock of Christ, which
hear, know, acknowledge, believe, and obey the voice of Christ; the kings
daughter which is all glorious within, knit to Christ and married unto him: But
in this society there are mixed not only secret hypocrites, but fierce Lions,
Tigres, Wolves, Bears, wicked Teachers, and ungodly livers. Thus the
Conformists and Inconformists. And in this sense the Church of England is a
society of faithful and believing people, the flock of Christ, the Kings
daughter, quickened by the Spirit, enriched with grace, decked with Gods
ordinances, walking in sincere constant conscionable obedience, though in
outward society and profession, mixed with many ignorant, vain profane
persons, who have received the presse-money of Christ, but indeed fight under
the Devils banner, as do all hypocrites and ungodly wretches; that is, in the
Church of England, there be some truly of the Church which hear the voice of
Christ, mixed with those which in words profess Christ, but in their deeds
deny him: Thus the Conformists and Nonconformists. The knot here lies only in
an aequivocation or gross abuse of the word Church, which sometimes notes the
whole visible society, linked in an external profession, and sometimes the
true and living members of Jesus Christ, against which the gates of hell shall
not prevail.

Thirdly, The Deo dat. Ital. Ioh. 10.1. The sheep are the true faithful,
endued with spiritual light and discretion.
sheep of Christ do hear his voice, but what sheep? not all that be sheep
in profession, but all that be sheep indeed and truth, effectually called and
gathered into Christ^ sheepfold. They hear, that is, acknowledge, believe and
obey Christ's voice sincerely, but not perfectly, fully, and completely: for the
faithful may err of frailty and infirmity, both in faith and manners:
sometimes they are mislead through ignorance, drawn aside by passions, foiled
by temptations. Christ's sheep do obey his voice, but Bills. Christ. subject.
part 2. pa. 233. The Church is not simply a number of men; for Infidels,
heretics, and hypocrites, are not the Church, but men regenerate by the Word
and Sacraments, truly serving God, according to the Gospel of his Son, and
sealed by the Spirit of grace, against the day of Redemption.
all that are linked with them in outward society, do not sincerely obey, not
yet in conversation fashion themselves to the direction and commandment of
Jesus Christ. And thus the Church of England, that is, the true and faithful
people in those societies, do hear and obey the voice of Christ in truth,
others mixed with them do hear and profess but not obey. If the Church do
err, it is of ignorance, nor of wilfulness, or stubbornness: In matters of
less importance, not fundamental or bordering thereupon: It is the error of
some only, add not of the whole Church, which errors Gratian. decret. par. 2.
ca. 24. qu. 1. cap. 9. A rectae in Gloss. Novitatibus. Ipsa congregatio
fidelium, hic dicitur Ecclesia, and (...) Ecclesia non potest nonesse.
cannot make that she is not the flock of Christ. The knot here to be
unloosed, is your sin in charging that upon the Nonconformists, the contrary
whereto they have ever maintained.

Fourthly, In the true Church of Christ, the true doctrine of Jesus Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles in matters fundamental is kept, but so as the living
members may err both in doctrine and manners, and others in society with them
may err grossly, impenitently, finally. And thus the Church of England does
keep the doctrine of Chaloner. Credo Sanct. 2 part, subject. The church in
respect of its outward part (as it enters the Creed) is not only an outward
profession of a doctrine or discipline, but a profession of the same under the
notion of truth. And that the Church in this sense is invisible. Gregory de
Valent. confess. in his third Tom. upon Thomas disp. 1 qu. 1. page 7. sect. 16.
and Bellarm. in his third Book de Eccles. ca. 15. Bilson Christ. subject. par.
3. page 305. The visible Church consisting of good and bad, elect and
reprobate, has no such promise, but she may err: only the chosen of christ,
which are the true members of his body, properly called his Church, they shall
not err unto perdition, etc.
Christ, the Prophets and Apostles entirely without addition or alteration,
though in the government and administration there be many things amiss; though
in the society there be many who be not qualified as sheep, humble and meek,
but fierce and cruel.

Fifthly, No society is the Church of Christ, which retains not the true
worship of God, but in the true Church of God, his pure worship may be stained
with rites and ceremonies, which might well be spared, and are justly disliked.
Thus both Conformists and Nonconformists, and all other sorts and sects of men.
And thus in the Church of England, the true worship of God is for substance
rightly maintained, though the Nonconformists dislike, and the Conformists
groan under some ceremonies not abandoned, The only knot here to be unloosed
again is your slander against the Nonconformists, in that you charge them to
say, that the Church of England does not retain the true worship of God.

And now I shall desire you calmely to consider how according to your
principles you can untie a knot or two, if they should be knit for you in this
wise.

First, He is no true Pastor of Jesus Christ, who grossly perverteth the
Scripture, falsifieth Authors, deceives with aequivocations, condemns the
true worship of God as pernicious idolatry, and the Jewel upon the first to
the These. chap. 1. v. 1. The Church of God is in God the Father, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ; it is the company of the faithful, whom. God has gathered
together in Christ, by his Word, and by the holy Ghost, to honor him, as he
himself has appointed. This Church hears the voice of the Shepherd. It
will not follow a stranger, but flies from him. Of this Church. Hieron. in
Mic. lib. 1. cap. 1. says, Ecclesia Christi in toto orb Ecclesias possidens,
etc.
societies of Saints as idolatrous and Antichristian Assemblies, and labors
to draw Christians from the communion of Saints, which ought to be kept and
maintained. Examine your writings in the fear of God, and add the proposition
wanting.

Secondly, He is no true Minister who derives his authority from them that are
not able to give it. But he that derives his authority from the people,
derives it from them that have no authority to give it. You know the
conclusion, and where it will light.

Thirdly, The true Church of God is the true flock of Christ, the Kings
Daughter, quickened by the Spirit, married unto Christ, gentle, meek, humble,
retaining the true worship of God, without addition or alteration, and keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; But the society of Separatists
is not the true flock of Christ, quickened by the Spirit, humble, meek,
gentle, keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. These properties
do not agree to all and every one in that society in truth, according as in
the former propositions, you say, they belong to the true Church of God. If you
shall be able to maintain the former propositions against men, as you vaunt, I
do not believe you shall be able to unloose these few knots.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
IT may be some will expect that I should write something of their Lecturers;
Can. Neces. of Separat. page 49, 50.
and the rather because they in the judgment of many, are thought to be the
best Ministers. Of their life and doctrine I say nothing. But as for their
Ministry, surely it is new and strange. For the Original of their name,
manner of entrance, and Administration, is unknown wholly to the Scriptures,
and I think never before heard of, till in these latter broken and confused
times. Therefore it is no marvel, when the Question has been propounded to
some of them, as it was by the Pharisees to John, Who art thou? That they have
not been able for their life to answer to answer the point. Neither could agree
among themselves what kind of Ministry it is that they have taken up. And
being hard pressed for resolution, they have ingenuously confessed, that
unless they be Evangelists, they could not see how their Ministry does accord
with any Ministry mentioned in the New Testament. This I write upon my own
certain knowledge, the persons I think are yet living, whose names for some
reason I forbear to express. Howbeit, I can and will do it if I see there be
a just and necessary occasion.

I do not think it strange that they should thus speak: for indeed I know
not what they can say better in defense of their standing. Pastors, I am sure,
they will not say they are: For,

First, They do not take any particular charge of a flock upon them.

Secondly, They perform not the office thereof, for they agree with the people
only to preach, and not to administer either the seals or censures to them.

Thirdly, Their coming unto the people is in a strange sort: for they make a
covenant each with other for some certain years, and when that time is out,
both parties are free, and so may leave one the other, and do many times: but
a true Pastor may not do so: For if he should he were worse than an hireling
which leaves not the sheep till he see the Wolf coming. But many of these
when they see a richer Lectureship coming toward them.

Fourthly, He that is a Parson or Vicar, is taken generally for the Minister of
the place. And truly, howsoever their calling be false and Anttchristian (as
the Nonconformists say) yet in many respects they do better resemble a true
Minister than any Lecturer whatsoever. Therefore not without just cause, Neces.
of Discipl. page 74.
do the Reformists utterly condemn this extraordinary office of Preachers:
And affirm, that they are neither Pastors nor Teachers which the Scripture
allows of.

ANSWER.
THis point concerning Lecturers, I have purposely deferred unto this place,
because it is distinct from the former in your apprehension, and in this you
do not pretend the Nonconformists principles, as you did in the former. The
exceptions also which you take against them, are not in respect of gifts,
learning, or diligence, nor that they are brought into the Church by
Antichrist, but chiefly in respect of the office and Ministry it self. That
which you object concerning the name, that it is new (as you do before against
Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, that they are Popish) is too slight to be
insisted upon. For these and diverse other names or titles given to the
Preachers of the Word, do not note different Ministeries for substance and
kind, but different accidents whereby the Ministers are distinguished, and
sometimes the employment whereabout they are principally exercised. But the
Ministry which is exercised under those names, is for substance one and the
same, which Christ has appointed and set his Church. If any man has not been
able to answer this Question when it has been propounded, what kind of
Ministry the Lecturers have taken up, it was from his weakness, not from the
difficulty of the matter. And this is no marvel, seeing many Questions seem
Riddles to you, which very easily untie themselves, or be knit in conceit
only. As to the Papists many Questions touching the certainty of our
Religion, the calling of our Ministers, the continuance of the faith, seeming
indissoluble, which a true hearted Christian can quickly dissolve. But you
write upon certain knowledge, that some have ingenuously confessed, that
unless they be Evangelists, they could not see how their Ministry does accord
with any Ministry mentioned in the New Testament.

I am not so diffident as to distrust every word that is spoken, nor must I be
so simple as to believe every thing. In the quoting of men's words in writing,
and giving the sense of them, I find you trip so often ignorantly or upon set
purpose; and so many times to quote that as making for you, which is as direct
against you as can be spoken, that without breach of charity, I may suspect
some such thing in this particular; either that you mistook their meaning, or
misrelate their words, or set down your own consequence for their position,
or the like. Instances of your mistaking enough has been formerly mentioned,
in this very place there be two of no small note, nor hard to be disproved.
First you say, The Nonconformists condemn the calling of Parsons and Vicars
(their office you mean) as false and Antichristian. But their practice and
profession both, does evidence the contrary to the whole world, as has been
showed. And if you will mistake their writings so palpably and again and
again affirm them from their writings, what is not there to be found, but is
direct contrary to their judgment, writing and practice, how can we believe
that you truly report their words. Secondly, you say; The Reformists do
utterly condemn this extraordinary office of Preachers. Lecturers you
understand by extraordinary Preachers; but extraordinary they are not, either
in respect of their calling, or the work wherein they are employed. And the
Nonconformists are so far from condemning that office, that it is well known
many, if not the greatest part of them, had none other calling, or office in
the Church. And I presume every reasonable man, will conceive it an unlikely
thing, that so many godly and learned men, suffering many and great troubles
against other abuses, should choose to live in such a calling, against the
light of their conscience. Can. Neces of ^parat. page (...) and 210. 2^3. If
Dr. And (...) not boasted of (...) man's book, etc. Id. page 224 This is the
book which Mr. Paget upbraids us with. Arr. against Separat. page 38.
And you know some have maintained, (whose judgment therein and works are
approved by others of the same rank,) That the Ministry of godly Preachers
(and so of Lecturers) in the Church of England, in all substantial and
essential parts, is that very Ministry which Christ has instituted and
ordained in the New Testament, and which he has blessed for the gathering and
building forward of his Church in faith and holiness.

It is not then the common judgment of the Reformists, nor the private opinion
of any particular man of that mind, that I have seen or heard of, that the
office or calling of a Lecturer is utterly to be condemned. Who the Author is,
or what the work which you quote, entitled, The Necessity of Discipline, I
know not, nor what he says.

Perhaps you allege him, as you have done others wrongfully; It may be he
speaks of some circumstances, not of the substance of the calling. If he go
any further, it is his private conceit, and must not be imputed to the
Reformists, as you style them.

We need not here dispute of the difference, betwixt the Pastor and the
Teacher, nor to enquire whether of these they are to be esteemed, until the
difference betwixt them be exactly defined, and substantially proved: If for
substance of Ministry they do the work of the Lord Jesus, and by his
approbation, this suffices.

First then here it is to be noted, that the Officers of the Church are not so
distinguished by heir special limits and bounds, but the superior may do the
office of the rest, if necessity require. As if the society be small, meet
Officers cannot be had, or be wanting for a time, or taken away by death, The
Pastor may supply the room of the Teacher, Elder, or Deacon, that is, he may
teach, watch over the manners of the people, and take special care of the
poor, as the Apostles did for a time.

Secondly, If the Pastor be aged, weak, sickly, unable to bear the burden of
his charge alone, he may take unto him, with consent of the society and
college Ecclesiastical, Assisters or Helpers; Videl. in Ignat: ad Mariam.
exercit. 3.
Vt tam praesentes in urbe sublevarentur, quam ut absentibus ipsis, Ecclesiae
pastoribus destituta non esset, delegerunt (scil. Apostoli) sibi coadjutores:
Quod nominatim ex Epiphanio here is. Sozom. hist. lib. 2. cap. 19. Eusebius. lib. 6.
ca. 10. Gr.
27. apparet. Tales fuerunt hi tres, Clemens, Linus, Cletus, Aut, ut noster
Author ait, Anacletus. So Maximus helped Macarius until his death; and
Augustine Valerius. And if the Pastor be careless or negligent, it is lawful
for the people to provide for themselves, by the best means that they can, or
God is pleased to afford unto them, that they might be taught and instructed in
the ways of holiness.

Thirdly, Pastors are to feed the flock committed unto their care, yet so as
many Pastors may be set over one flock, which they must feed in common. And
to this purpose some write, A dispute, par. 3. cap. 8. page 170.
that the Apostolic and Primitive times, knew neither Parishionall nor
Diocesan Churches, but Christians lived then in Cities only, not in Villages
because of the persecution. Act. 20.27, 28. Phil. 1.1. 1 These. 5.12. Act. 13.2.
and 15.2. Col. 4.11. James 5.14. Epiphan. haeres. 27. Ignat. ad Tralleus.
Sozom. li. 4. ca. 14. Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 10, 11. Gr. ca. 9. lat.
Gratian. Decret. part 2. cap 7. qu. 1. can. 12.
And it is to be remembered, that in Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse,
Thessalonica, and such other Cities, inhabited by Christians, there were more
Pastors than one, which did in common govern all the Churches within that
City, and there was not any one Pastor, who by himself, governed a certain
part of the City peculiarly assigned to his charge. Thus also the Ancients
write, that Peter and Paul, were the first Bishops and Apostles at Rome. Paul
had Linus and Timothy; Peter, Clemens and Anacletus. Liberius and Felix, both
governed the Apostolical Seat: Valerius and Augustine, Narcissus and Alexander
in the Church of Hippo. It is apparent, the Apostles ordained many Overseers in
one society, and it is not repugnant either to Scripture or reason, to think
there might be many Pastors of one flock; And the flock might be one under
the joint care of many Shepherds, Bilson. perpet. Gover. ca. 10. pa. 155.
Every church with them had many Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, the number and
need of the people, and time so requiring. T. C. repl. l. pa. 34.
though they did not ordinarily meet together in one place. For to assemble
together in one place, is merely accidental to the unity of a society:
Certain it is, in times of persecution they cannot so meet; and it is most
probable, in the Apostles times, many Churches were too populous in that manner
to assemble together. Those that know the state of France in time of
persecution, do well understand that every Church almost was gathered of
Towns, whereof some were six miles, some seven, some more from the place of
meeting, and keeping their Congregations. And therefore could not meet so
often, nor know one another so well, as we by the grace of God may do.

Fourthly, No one Pastor or Teacher has the power of the censures belonging
unto him, and whether the power of dispensing the Seals belong to every
Minister of the Gospel, I leave it to your consideration, (for I know not what
you will resolve) but the actual dispensation of the Seals may be forborne by
some, to whom the right of dispencing does appertain, specially when there be
others at hand to do that office. The Apostles had power to baptize, 1 Cor.
1.14, 15, 16. Can. Neces. of Separat. page 236.
but we may well think, they did not ordinarily baptize themselves. It is
possible (you say) a man may be a true Ecclesiastical Officer, and yet never
do the services thereof.

Fifthly, The Minister of the Gospel is not made absolutely a Minister by the
choice or election of this or that people, but only their Minister for the
time of his abode and continuance with them. Lay these things together, and
then your exceptions against the office of Lecturers will vanish. For if they
have not the chief charge or cure of souls, they be not sole Pastors or
Teachers of the flock; but joined in care or charge with others as Helpers or
Assistants, or chosen by the people to supply the want of such as should, but
do not feed the flock. If they dispense not the Seals, neither is that
necessary in respect of their standing: for right and power from Christ they
have to dispense them, but in the execution of that power they may be hindered,
or forbear it for a time. If they leave their place being lawfully called to
another flock, it may be with consent of the society and of the Church, and
what then does make it unlawful? or if the charge should be unlawful, it does
not make the Ministry strange or new, which is the thing in question.

SECT. II.
THat Ministry which is instituted and set up besides those which God has
appointed in his Word, Neces. of Separat. page 51, 52.
is unlawful and false. But the Ministry of Lecturers in England is
instituted and set beside these, which God has appointed in his Word.
Therefore that Ministry is unlawful and false. The proposition is plain and
undeniable, and we have their own words to confirm it. For thus they say, All
the Ministry is by the Word of God, and not left to the will of man to devise
at their pleasure, as appears by that which is noted of John, where the
Pharisees coming to him, after that he had denied to be either Christ, or
Elias, or another Prophet, conclude if he be neither Christ nor Elias, nor of
the Prophets, why baptizest thou? Which had been no good argument, if John
might have been of other function, than of those which were ordinary in the
Church, T. C. repl, 1. pa. 62, 63.
and instituted of God, etc. Again to devise another Ministry, than that
which God has appointed, is condemned by the second Commandment.

The Assumption is thus proved. First if their Lecturers have taken ordination
from the Bishops, and exercise by that power only, then is their office false,
by the reasons before laid down. Secondly, If it be objected, that they never
received the Prelates orders, or have repented thereof, I answer, This proves
not that they are therefore true Ministers. For as Jehu, though he did well to
suppress Ahabs idolatry, yet in that he followed the ways of Jeroboam, he
himself continued still a gross Idolater: Even so; howsoever some may
privately report, that they stand Ministers by no relation to the Bishops, yet
are they notwithstanding unlawful Ministers, seeing they were never elected,
chosen, ordained according to Gods Word. If any reply, that they have their
calling of the people: I answer, the thing is surely otherwise, as shall be
manifested presently. But if this were granted, yet I deny that any Church
under heaven, has power from Christ to ordain such a kind of Ministry, and
therefore if any people should do it, seeing it is against the Scripture, it
must needs follow, that it is an unlawful Ministry, and so consequently not
to be communicated with.

ANSWER.
YOu are strangely taken with this note; for you have brought nothing but a
bare repetition, of what you have said over and over. If you speak of the
substantial and essential parts of the Ministry, it is freely granted, that
the true Ministry is by the word of God, and heavenly. But if you extend it to
every circumstantiall order, whereby in this or that Society, the Minister is
to execute the function he has received of God, it is not approved. But of
this you need not to have made so many words. To your assumption, answer has
been returned already.

First, That the Ministers of the Gospel receive their office and authority,
neither from the Bishop, Patron, people, or College Ecclesiastical, but from
Christ immediately, whose servants they are, in whose name they minister, whose
flock they attend, and who has assigned them their work. And if you receive
your Ministry from the people, as their servant, from whom you derive your
office and authority, and from whom you receive your Commission; your
Ministry in that respect is no less false and antichristian, than theirs that
derive it from the Bishops.

Secondly, If Lecturers have received ordination from the Bishops, and be
called and chosen by the people, their calling is just and lawful, according
to the rules of Scripture, and their Ministry heavenly and from above, if they
preach the entire faith, and feed the flock of God. For they preach the pure
doctrine of salvation, not by authority from men, but by commission from the
chief Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: their calling may be justified by
the Word and warrant of truth, which shall stand for ever; the more heinous and
fearful is your sin, in matching the Ministry of such men, to the idolatry
of Jehu.

Thirdly, You are bold to affirm, That no Church under Heaven, has power from
Christ to ordain such a kind of Ministry, etc. And it is true, the Church
has no power to ordain any Ministry; for Christ is the Author and
institutour of the Ministry for his Church. But your meaning is, That this
kind of Ministry is against the Scripture not ordained, and then if we call
for your proof, we have nothing here, but I deny it. Can. Neces. of Separat.
page 217.
You take up Mr Br. (how well it becomes you, let the Reader judge) as a bold
Sophister, because he makes flat denial of expressed truths. As thus, I say
it is false, I deny it, etc. As if the weight of an argument were sufficiently
removed by empty denials. But when you should make proof of what you affirm,
it suffices you to say I deny, or this proves it not: or I have proved from
their writings; when you have falfified them only. And if an empty denial be
not sufficient answer to an empty affirmation, it is very strange. Bilson
Christ. subject. par. 1. p. 41.
I may justly say to you, as Dr Bilson to the Papist whom he answered; If great
vaunts were sound proofs, the victory were yours; you have words and cracks at
will, they cost you nothing.

SECT. III.
THat it is so I prove it thus; Neces. of Separat. page 53.
That Ministry is unlawful, which none may lawfully give. But none may
lawfully bestow the Ministry of a Lecturer. Therefore that Ministry is
unlawlawfull. The Assumption for shame cannot be denied, if the nature of it be
considered. For as we but even now said, their Lecturers take no charge of a
flock upon them, they make covenant we^h the people, but for a certain time;
the peculiar work of a Minister is not by the people laid upon them, weither
expected of them. If any object, that they preach the Word. To this Dr Ames
gives an answer fully, that the preaching of the Gospel is not a work
peculiar to a Minister: for such as are private men, and out of office, may and
ought to preach the Word, as occasion is offered, and not only privately, but,
says he, in the public Congregation, etc.

ANSWER.
WE have here the same thing over again, and when all is said, it is but
this, I deny it, or I say it. The assumption cannot for shame be denied. The
proposition rightly understood is true and sound, but it may carry diverse
constructions. As first, the meaning may be, That Ministry is for substance
unlawful, which none may lawfully give to such or such persons, scil. to such
as be unfit or profane. And in this sense, the proposition is not sound. For
the Ministry is unlawfully committed to an ungodly man, an hypocrite, but the
Ministry it self is heavenly, and from above. Or the sense may be, That
Ministry is unlawful which men may not lawfully give virtually or formally:
And then it is weak; For Pastors and Teachers are the gifts of Christ unto
his Church, from whom they receive their office, and not from men, Or it may
bear this sense. That Ministry is unlawful, which none may lawfully give in
such form, and manner, as it is executed? And then it is liable to exception.
For of right the power of administration of the Seals and Censures of the
Church, belong to the Pastors, Teachers, and Governors of the Church; when in
the execution of this office, they may be hindered. It is lawful to be an
assistant or helper to a Pastor for a time, when it is not lawful to give the
office of Ministry to a man for a time only, and then to expire. To the
assumption; The Lecturers of whom we speak, have derived their office from the
Lord Jesus Christ, by the Ministry of his Church, as instruments, their
entrance into it lawful, the service and work it self holy, the manner of
performing it warrantable, and the authority they have received the same which
Christ has communicated to the Ministers of the Gospel. To publish the truth
by way of instruction or exhortation, is not peculiar to the Ministers of the
Gospel, but by authority, (...) ^^culiar to the Minister. For the Scripture
joyneth together the preaching of the Word, and dispensation of the Seals, as
both belonging to the Officers, Math. 28.19. 1 Cor. 1.
who have received commission from Jesus Christ. And if private persons may
preach the Word in this sense, we see no reason why they may not administer the
Sacraments likewise, and so the Governors of the Church shall have power to
do nothing, which every private member of the society may not do as well as
they. But Lecturers preach the Gospel by authority, and as men set in office
by the Lord of the harvest. And this may suffice to show the vanity of such
exceptions as are taken against our Church, Ministry, and worship, to prove it
to be no true Church, worship, and Ministry; and how untruly and unjustly the
Nonconformists are charged to lay the grounds of that (...) and affected
Separation, which some have run into. To examine what argument is returned to
Dr Ames, Mr Daw: Mr Br: is needless; for nothing of weight is said against
them, but the same things vainly repeated, with insolent scoffs and
reproaches, as if by evil speaking you hoped to get the victory. It is to be
observed generally you say, Can. Neces. of Separat. page 211.
that those which stand for bad causes do after this sort still reproach the
Adversaries. Thus do the Papists the Protestants, so the Protestants the
Puritanes, and so they us, as here and in other writings usually. Now I would
entreat you to review your two books, and speak in good earnest, whether in
scoffing, reproaching, falsifications, you do not ordinarily exceed all men
that ever you met withal; Consider seriously, and then let conscience be
Judge, whether it be the note of a good or evil cause, etc.

FINIS.
A Table of some principal Points handled in this Treatise.
In the first Part.
Concerning a false Ministry, and communicating therein, p. 3, 4.
Nonconformists lay not the grounds of Separation, by complaining of the abuses
in our Church, p. 20, 21. From whence the outward calling of a Minister is
derived. p. 24, 25. Herein a distinction is considerable, betwixt an error in
admission into an office, and a flat nullitie of the office it self, p. 29.
Who are not, and who are Antichristian teachers, p. 41. The true nature of
worship, and what it is to worship God in a right manner, p. 43. Of an Idol
Church and Ministry, p. 45. Places of public worship allowed and prohibited
unto Isr^ell^, p. 59. Of worshipping God in a true Church, p. 61. Our Churches
are not to be reputed spiritual Babylon, p. 69. Concerning Churches true and
false, p. 71, Corrupt mixtures in true Churches, p. 81. The nature of
superstition, p. 89. Of Ordination received from Bishops, p. 93. Concerning
presence at Gods true worship, where something is faulty in the Ministers
calling, and the ^ann^r of administration, p. 105. Some things may stain,
which yet overthrow not the Ministry, p. 119. From whence the Ministers of
the Gospel derive their office, p. 126. The Ministers ignorance and scandalous
life does not nullify his Ministry, p. 128. Some touch given of Master
Cannes gross abuse of philosophical Canons, and of some Authors by him cited,
p. 132, 133, 134, etc. When Ministers may be said to run, though not sent, p.
139. Foreign reformed Churches acknowledge us the true Churches of Christ p.
141. The Ministers calling is not to be judged by the titles of Parson, Vicar,
etc. p. 143.
In the second Part.
THe lawfulness of set forms of prayer, p. 3. Nonconformists never utterly
condemned any use of our Common Prayer Book, p. 7, and 15, 16. Nor allowed
separation because of some abuses, p. 20, 22. The discussing and discovering of
that argument used against the Common prayer book, viz. that it was taken out
of the Mass Book. 9, 10, 11, 12. The pressing of subscription in the tenth
year of Queen Elizabeth, caused separation, and other troubles in our Church,
p. 13. The antiquity of set Liturgies, p. 17. Concerning idols, and separation
from them, p. 23, 24, 25. Of discipline how far necessary in a Church, and how
wanting amongst us, p. 33, 35, 37. etc. Concerning the matter, and manner of
gathering Churches, 50, unto 64 etc. The office of Lecturers justified. p. 84.
FINIS.
Errata in Part 1.
Page 2, line 1, put out, shall. p. 7, Marg. l. last, add lib. 1. p. 8. marg.
at end, ad^e et Repl. 1. p. 33. p. 9. marg. add hoc autem. p. 11. marg. add
Ier. 23.11.34. Esa. 28.7.9. Ier. 23.16.17. p. 44. l. 4. add in. p. 54. l. 14.
add the most of. p. 53 l. 11. for neither read either. p. 57. l. 12. for rom,
r. say. l. 17. our ministry is, insert, true, though. p. 62. l. 25. put out,
not. p. 64. l. 7. add sani. p. 80. l. 32. add in marg. 3. p. 90. l. 12. read
shaft. p. 100. l. last. for answered, r. censured, p. 105. l. 4. unto general
add rules, p. 108. l. 1. for it is, r. is it. p. 139. l. 37. put out, nor, p.
140. l. 30. add, it.

In part 2.
P. 7. l. 18. put out, have. p. 11. l. 34. for made, r. makes. p. 13. l. 24.
for former matter, r. form or matter. p. 16. l. 4. add into. p. 26. l. 31.
for when, r. then. p. 38. l. 7. for constitution r. institution. p. 50. l. 25.
for dare r. do. p. 52. l. 6. for promised. r. purchased. p. 55. l. 6. for more
r. most. p. 72. l. 23. for more, r. were. p. 73. l. 11. for dissevered r,
discovered. p. 74, last line r. Anabaptistae: p: 84: l: 12: add in.


