THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAW and GRACE UNFOLDED: OR, A Discourse touching the Law
and Grace. The nature of the one, and the nature of the other: showing what
they are, as they are the two Covenants; and likewise who they be, and what
their Conditions are, that be under either of these two Covenants. WHEREIN, For
the better Understanding of the Reader, there is several Questions answered
touching the Law and Grace, very easy to be read, and as easy to be
understood, by those that are the Sons of Wisdom, the Children of the second
Covenant. ALSO, Several Titles set over the several Truths contained in this
Book, for thy sooner finding of them; which are those following the Epistle.

Published by that Poor and Contemptible Creature, John Bunyan of Bedford.

The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did; by the
which we draw nigh to God,

Heb. 7. 19. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, without
the Deeds of the Law,

Romans 3. 28. To him therefore that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness,

Romans 4. 5. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry.
1685.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
IF at any time there be held forth by the Preacher, the freeness and fullness
of the Gospel, together with the readiness of the Lord of Peace to receive
those that have any desire thereto; presently it is the spirit of the World to
cry out, Sure this man disdains the Law, slights the Law, and counts that of
none effect; and all because there is not, together with the Gospel, mingled
the Doctrine of the Law, (which is not a right dispensing of the Word according
to truth and knowledge.) Again, if there be the terror, horror, and severity of
the Law, discovered to a People by the Servants of Jesus Christ, (though they
do not speak of it, to the end People should trust to it, by relying on it as
it is a Covenant of Works; but rather that they should be driven further from
that Covenant, even to embrace the tenders and privileges of the second) yet,
poor Souls, because they are unacquainted with the natures of these two
Covenants, or either of them; therefore, say they, here is nothing but
preaching of the Law, thundering of the Law; when alas, if these two be not
held forth (to wit) the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace, together
with the nature of the one, and the nature of the other; Souls will never be
able neither to know what they are by Nature, nor what they lie under. Also,
neither can they understand what Grace is, nor how to come from under the Law,
to meet God, in, and through that other most glorious Covenant; through which,
and only through which, God can communicate of himself, grace, Glory, yea, even
all the good things of another World.

I having considered these things, together with others, have made bold to
present yet once more to thy view (my Friend) something of the mind of God, to
the end, if it shall be but blessed to thee, thou may be benefited thereby.
For verily these things are not such as are ordinary, and of small concernment,
but do absolutely concern thee to know, and that experimentally too, if ever
thou do partake of the glory of God through Jesus Christ, and so escape the
terror and unsupportable vengeance, that will otherwise come upon thee through
his Justice, because of thy living and dying in thy Transgressions against the
Law of God. And therefore while thou live here below, it is thy duty (if thou
wish thy self happy for the time to come) to give up thy self to the studying
of these two Covenants, treated of in the ensuing Discourse; and so to study
them, until thou through grace, do, not only get the notion of the one and of
the other in thy head; but until thou do feel the very power, life, and glory
of the one and of the other. For take this for granted, he that is dark as
touching the scope, intent, and nature of the Law, is also dark as to the scope
nature, and glory of the Gospel: And also he that has but a notion of the one,
will hardly have any more than a notion of the other.

And the reason is this, because so long as People are ignorant of the nature
of the Law, and of their being under it, that is, under the curse and
condemning power of it, by reason of their sin against it; so long they will be
careless, and negligent as to the enquiring after the true knowledge of the
Gospel. Before the Commandment came, (that is in the spirituality of it) Paul
was alive, (that is) thought himself safe, which is clear, Romans 7. 9, 10.
compared with the 3. of Phil. the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. ver. etc. But when
that came, and was indeed discovered unto him by the Spirit of the Lord, then
Paul dies (Romans 7.) to all his former life (Phil. 3.) and that man which
before could content himself to live, though ignorant of the Gospel, cries out
now, I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ my Lord, ver. 8. Therefore, I say, so long they will be ignorant of the
nature of the Gospel, and how glorious a thing it is to be found within the
bounds of it; for we use to say, That man that knows not himself to be sick,
that man will not look out for himself a Physician; and this Christ knew full
well, where he says, The whole have no need of a Physician, but them that are
sick: that is, none will in truth desire the Physician, unless they know they
be sick. That man also, that has got but a notion of the Law (a notion, that
is the Knowledge of it in the Head, so as to discourse and talk of it) if he
has not felt the power of it, and that effectually too, he, it is to be
feared, will at the best be but a Notionest in the Gospel; he will not have the
experimental Knowledge of the same in his Heart: nay, he will not seek, nor
heartily desire after it, and all because, as I said before, he has not
Experience of the wounding, cutting, killing nature of the other.

I say therefore, if thou would know the Authority and Power of the Gospel,
labor first to know the Power and Authority of the Law; for I am verily
persuaded, that the want of this one thing, namely, the Knowledge of the Law,
is one cause why so many are ignorant of the other. That man that does not know
the Law, does not know indeed and in truth, that he is a Sinner; and that man
that does not know he is a Sinner, does not know savingly that there is a
Savior.

Again, That man that does not know the nature of the Law, that man does not
know the nature of Sin; and that man that knows not the nature of Sin, will
not regard to know the nature of a Savior. This is proved, John 8. 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36. ver. This People were Professors, and yet did not know the Truth
(the Gospel,) and the reason was, because they did not know themselves, and so
not the Law. I would not have thee mistake me, Christian Reader, I do not
say, that the Law of it self will lead any Soul to Jesus Christ; but the
Soul, being killed by the Law, through the operation of its severity seizing
on the Soul, then the man, if he be enlightened by the Spirit of Christ, to see
where Remedy is to be had, will not, through Grace, be contented without the
real and saving Knowledge, through Faith, of him.

If thou would then vvash thy Face clean, first take a Glass and see where
it is dirty; that is, If thou would indeed have thy Sins vvashed away by
the Blood of Christ, labor first to see them in the Glass of the Law, (Jam.
1.) and do not be afraid to see thy besmeared Condition, but look on every Spot
thou have; for he that looks on the foulness of his Face by the halfs, will
vvash by the halfs: even so he that looks on his Sins by the halfs, he will
seek for Christ by the halfs. Reckon thy self therefore, I say, the biggest
Sinner in the World, and be persuaded, that there is none worse than thy self;
then let the Guilt of it seize on thy Heart, then also go in that case and
condition to Jesus Christ, and plunge thy self into his Merits, and the virtue
of his Blood; and after that thou shall speak of the things of the Law, and of
the Gospel, experimentally; and the very Language of the Children of God shall
seelingly drop from thy Lips, and not till then.

Let this therefore learn thee thus much, He that has not seen his lost
Condition, has not seen a safe Condition; he that did never see himself in the
Devils Snare, did never see himself in Christ's Bosom. This my Son was dead,
and is alive again. Was lost and is found, with whom we all had our
Conversation in time past. But now are (so many of us as believe) returned to
Jesus Christ, the chief Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

I say therefore, if thou do find in this Treatise, in the first place,
something touching the Nature, End, and extent of the Law, do not thou cry out
therefore all on a sudden, saying, Here is nothing but the Terror, Horror, and
thundering Sentences of the Law.

Again, If thou do find in the second part of this Discourse, something of the
freeness and fullness of the Gospel; do not thou say then neither, here is
nothing but Grace, therefore surely an under valuing of the Law. No, but read
it quite thorovv, and so consider of it; and (I hope) thou shall find the two
Covenants (which all men are under either the one or the other) discovered,
and held forth in their Natures, Ends, Bounds, together with the state and
condition of them that are under the one, and of them that are under the other.

There be some that through Ignorance do say, how that such men as preach
Terror and Amazement to Sinners, are besides the Book, and are Ministers of the
Letter, the Law, and not of the Spirit, the Gospel; but I would answer them,
citing them to the 16. of Luke, from the nineteenth Verse to the end; and the 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. and Gal. 3. 10. Romans 3. from the ninth Verse to the nineteenth:
only this Caution I would give by the way, how that they which preach Terror,
to drive Souls to the obtaining of Salvation, by the Works of the Law, that
preaching is not the right Gospel-preaching. Yet when Saints speak of the sad
state that men are in by Nature, to discover to Souls their need of the Gospel,
this is honest preaching (see Romans 3. the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, etc.) and he that does do so, he does the Work
of a Gospel-Minister.

Again, there are others that say, because we do preach the free, full, and
exceeding Grace discovered in the Gospel, therefore we make void the Law; which
indeed, unless the Gospel be held forth in the Glory thereof without Confusion,
by mingling the Covenant of Works therewith, the Law cannot be established. Do
we through Faith, or preaching of the Gospel, make void the Law? Nay, stay,
says Paul, God forbid. We do thereby establish the Law, Romans 3. 31.

And verily, he that will indeed establish the Law, or set it in its own place,
(for so I understand the Words) must be sure to hold forth the Gospel in its
right color and nature; for if a man be ignorant of the nature of the Gospel,
and the Covenant of Grace, they, or he, will be very apt to remove the Law out
of its place, and that because they are ignorant, not knowing what they say,
nor whereof they affirm.

And let me tell you, if a man be ignorant of the Covenant of Grace, and the
bounds and boundlesness of the Gospel, though he speaks and makes mention of
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and also of the Name of the New
Covenant, and the Blood of Christ; yet at this very time, and in these very
Words, he will preach nothing but the Law, and that as a Covenant of Works.

Reader, I must confess it is a wonderful mysterious thing, and he had need
have a wiser Spirit than his own that can rightly set these two Covenants in
their right places, that when he speaks of the one, he does not justle the
other out of its place. O, to be so well enlightened, as to speak of the one,
that is the Law, for to magnify the Gospel; and also, to speak of the Gospel,
so as to establish (and yet not to idolize) the Law, nor any particular
thereof, it is rare, and to be heard and found but in very few men's Breasts.

If thou should say, what is it to speak to each of these two Covenants, so
as to set them in their right places, and also to use the terror of the one, so
as to magnify and advance the Glory of the other?

To this I shall answer also, read the ensuing Discourse but with an
understanding Heart, and it is like thou will find a Reply therein to the same
purpose, which may be to thy satisfaction.

Reader, if thou do find this Book empty of fantastical Expressions, and
without light, vain, whimsical Scholarlike terms, thou must understand, it is
because I never went to School to Aristotle or Plato, but was brought up at my
Father's House, in a very mean condition, among a Company of poor Countrymen.
But if thou do find a parcel of plain, yet sound, true, and home Sayings,
attribute that to the Lord Jesus, his Gifts and Abilities, which he has
bestowed upon such a poor Creature as I am, and have been. And if thou, being a
seeing Christian, do find me coming short, though rightly touching at some
things, attribute that either to my Brevity, or, if thou will, to my
Weaknesses, (for I am full of them.) A word or two more, and so I shall have
done with this.

And the first is, Friend, if thou do not desire the Salvation of thy Soul, yet
I pray thee to read this Book over with serious Consideration; it may be it
will stir up in thee some desires to look out after it, which at present thou
may be without.

Secondly, if thou do find any stirrings in thy Heart, by thy reading such an
unworthy man's Works as mine are; be sure that in the first place thou give
Glory to God, and give way to thy Convictions, and be not too hasty in getting
them off from thy Conscience; but let them so work till thou do see thy self by
nature, void of all Grace, as Faith, Hope, Knowledge of God, Christ, and the
Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, then in the next place, fly in all haste to Jesus Christ, thou being
sensible of thy lost Condition without him, secretly persuading of thy Soul,
that Jesus Christ stands open armed to receive thee, to wash away thy Sins,
to cloth thee with his Righteousness; and is willing, yea, heartily willing,
to present thee before the Presence of the Glory of God, and among the
innumerable Company of Angels with exceeding Joy. This being thus, in the next
place, do not satisfy thy self with these secret and first Persuasions, which
do, or may encourage thee to come to Jesus Christ; but be restless, till thou
do find by blessed experience, the glorious Glory of this the second Covenant
extended unto thee, and sealed upon thy Soul with the very. Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ. And that thou may not slight this my Counsel, I beseech thee
in the second place, consider these following things.

First, if thou do get off thy Convictions, and not the right way, (which is by
seeing thy Sins washed away by the Blood of Jesus Christ) it is a question
whether ever God will knock at thy Heart again or no; but rather say, Such a
one is joined to Idols; let him alone. Hos. 4. 17. Though he be in a natural
state, let him alone. Though he be in, or under the Curse of the Law, let him
alone. Though he be in the very hand of the Devil, let him alone. Though he be
a going post-haste to Hell, let him alone. Though his Damnation will not only
be Damnation for Sins against the Law, but also for slighting the Gospel, yet,
let him alone. My Spirit, my Ministers, my Word, my Grace, my Mercy, my Love,
my Pity, my common Providence, shall no more strive with him, let him alone. O
sad! O miserable! who would slight Convictions that are on their Souls, which
tend so much for their good?

Secondly, if thou shall not regard how thou do put off Convictions, but put
them off without the precious Blood of Christ being savingly applied to thy
Soul; thou art sure to have the mispending of that Conviction to prove the
hardening of thy Heart against the next time thou art to hear the Word preached
or read. This is commonly seen, that those Souls that have not regarded those
Convictions that are at first set upon their Spirits, do commonly (and that by
the just Judgments of God upon them) grow more hard, more senseless, more feared
and sottish in their Spirits; for some, who formerly would quake and weep, and
relent under the hearing of the Word, do now for the present sit so senseless,
so feared, and hardened in their Consciences, that certainly if they should have
Hellfire thrown in their Faces, as it is sometimes cried up in their Ears,
they would scarce be moved; and this comes upon them as a just Judgment of God,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.

Thirdly, if thou do slight these, or those Convictions, that may be set upon
thy Heart, by reading of this Discourse, or hearing of any other good man
preach the Word of God sincerely; thou will have the stifling of these or those
Convictions to account and answer for at the Day of Judgment: not only thy Sins
that are commonly committed by thee in thy Calling and common Discourse, but
thou shall be called to a reckoning for slighting Convictions, disregarding of
Convictions, which God uses as a special means to make poor Sinners see their
lost Condition, and the need of a Savior. Now here I might add many more
Considerations besides these, to the end thou may be willing to tend, and
listen to Convictions; as,

First, consider thou have a precious Soul, more worth than the whole World;
and this is commonly worked upon (if ever it be saved) by Convictions.

Secondly, this Soul is (for certain) to go to Hell, if thou shall be a
slighter of Convictions.

Thirdly, if that go to Hell, thy Body must go thither too, and then never to
come out again, Now consider this, you that (are apt to) forget God, (and his
Convictions) lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm.
50. 22.

But if thou shall be such a one, that shall, notwithstanding thy reading of
thy Misery, and also of God's Mercy, still persist to go on in thy Sins; know
in the first place, that here thou shall be left, by the things that thou
read, without excuse; and in the World to come thy Damnation will be
exceedingly aggravated, for thy not regarding of them, and turning from thy
Sins; which was not only reproved by them, but also for rejecting of that Word
of Grace that did instruct thee how, and which way, thou should be saved
from them. And so farewell, I shall leave thee, and also this Discourse, to God,
who I know will pass a righteous Judgment both upon that and thee. I am yours,
though not to serve your Lusts and filthy minds, yet to reprove, instruct, and
according to that proportion of Faith and Knowledge which God has given me, to
declare unto you the way of Life and Salvation. Your Judgings, Railings,
Surmizings, and disdaining of me, that I shall leave till the fiery Judgment
comes, in which the Ostender shall not go unpunished, be he you or me; yet I
shall pray for you, wish well to you, and do you what good I can. And that I
might not write or speak in vain, Christian, pray for me to our God, with much
Earnestness, Fervency, and frequently, in all your Knockings at our Fathers
door, because I do very much stand in need thereof; for my Work is great, my
Heart is vile, the Devil lies at watch, the World would fain be saying, aha,
aha, thus we would have it; and of my self, keep my self I cannot; trust my
self I dare not; if God do not help me, I am sure it will not be long before my
Heart deceive me, and the World have their Advantage of me; and so God be
dishonored by me, and thou also ashamed to own me. O therefore be much in
Prayer for me, thy Fellow, I trust in that glorious Grace that is conveyed from
Heaven to Sinners, by which they are not only sanctified here in this World,
but shall be glorified in that which is to come. Unto which, the Lord of his
Mercy bring us all.

JOHN BUNYAN.

These are the several Titles which are set over the several Truths contained
in this Book, for thy sooner finding of them.
The First Part.
1. THE Words of the Text opened, and the Doctrines laid down. 2. What the
Covenant of Works is, and when it was given. 3. What it is to be under the
Covenant of Works. 4. Who they are that are under the Covenant of Works. 5.
What men may attain to, that are under this Covenant of Works.
The Second Part.
1. The Doctrine proved. 2. The New Covenant made with Christ. 3. The
Conditions of the New Covenant. 4. The Suretiship of Christ. 5. Christ the
Messengerof the New Covenant. 6. Christ the Sacrifice of the New Covenant. 7.
Christ the High Priest of the New Covenant. 8. Christ completely fulfilled the
Conditions of the New Covenant. 9. The Covenant of Grace unchangeable; the
Opposers answered. 10. Who, and how men are actually brought into the New
Covenant. 11. A Word of Experience. 12. The Privileges of the New Covenant.
13. Two Hell -- bred Objections answered. 14. A Use of Examination about the
Old Covenant. 15. A Legal Spirit. 16. The Use of the New Covenant. 17. The
unpardonable Sin. 18. Objections answered for their Comfort who would have
their part in the New Covenant.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE Law and Grace unfolded: OR, A Discovery of the Law and
Grace, the Nature of the one, and the Nature of the other, as they are the two
Covenants, etc.
Romans 6. 14. For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.
IN the three former Chapters, the Apostle is pleading for the salvation of
sinners by Grace, without the Works of the Law, to the end he might confirm the
Saints, and also that he might win over all those that did oppose the truth of
this Doctrine, or else leave them the more without excuse; and that he might so
do, he takes in hand, First, to show the state of all men naturally, or as
they come into the world by Generation, saying in the third Chapter, There is
none righteous, no not one; there is none that understands, there is none
that does good, etc. As if he had said, It seems there is a Generation of men
that think to be saved by the righteousness of the Law, but let me tell them,
that they are much deceived, in that they have already sinned against the Law.
For by the disobedience of one, many, yea all, was brought into a state of
condemnation; Romans 5. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Now in the sixth Chapter,
he does as if he had turned him round to the Brethren, and said, My Brethren
you see now that it is clear and evident, that it is freely by the Grace of
Christ, that we do inherit eternal life. And again, for your comfort my
brethren, let me tell you, that your condition is wondrous safe, in that you
are under Grace, for says he, Sin shall not have dominion over you, that is,
neither the damning power, neither the filthy power, so as to destroy your
souls; For you are not under the Law, that is you are not under that, that will
damn you for sin; But (you are) under grace, or stand thus in relation to God,
that though you have sinned, yet you shall be pardoned. For you are not under
the Law, etc. If any should ask what is the meaning of the word [UNDER] I
answer, it signifies you are not held, kept, or shut up by it, so as to appear
before God under that administration, and none but that; or thus, you are not
now bound by the authority of the Law, to fulfill it, and obey it, so as to have
no salvation without you so do; or thus, if you transgress against any one
tittle of it, you by the power of it must be condemned: No, no, for you are not
so under it, that is, not thus under the Law. Again, For you are not under the
Law; what is meant by this word [LAW?] The word Law, in Scripture, may be taken
more ways then one, as might be largely cleared. There is the Law of Faith, the
Law of Sin, the Law of Men, the Law of Works, otherwise called the Covenant of
Works, or the first, or old Covenant, Heb. 8. 13. In that he says a new
Covenant, (which is the Grace of God, or commonly called the Covenant of Grace)
he has made the first old; that is the Covenant of Works, or the Law. I say
therefore the word [LAW] and the word [GRACE] in this sixth of the Romans, do
hold forth the two Covenants, which all Men are under, that is, either the one
or the other. For ye are not under the Law; that is, you to whom I do now write
these words, who are and have been effectually brought into the faith of Jesus:
you are not under the Law, or under the Covenant of Works. He does not
therefore apply these words to all, but to some, when he says, But ye, mark,
[YE] ye Believers, ye Converted persons, ye Saints, ye that have been born
again. Ye, for ye are not under the Law, implying others are, that are in their
natural state, that have not been brought into the Covenant of Grace, by faith
in Jesus Christ. The words therefore being thus understood, there is discovered
these two Truths in them.

Doct. 1. First, That there are some in Gospel times, that are under the
Covenant of Works.

Doct. 2. Secondly, That there is never a Believer under the Law, (as it is a
Covenant of Works, but under Grace through Christ) For ye, you Believers, you
Converted persons, Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace; or, for you are
delivered and brought into, or under the Covenant of Grace.

For the first, That there are some that are under the Law, or under the
Covenant of Works, see I pray you that Scripture in the third of the Romans,
where the Apostle speaking before of sins against the Law, and of the
denunciations thereof, against those that are in that condition, he says, What
things soever the Law says, it says to them that are under; Mark, it says to
them that are under the Law, That every mouth may be stopped, and all the World
become guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. That is, all those that are under the
Law, as a Covenant of Works, that are yet in their sins, and unconverted, as I
told you before. Again, Gal. 5. 18. He says, But if you be led by the Spirit,
you are under the Law, implying again, that those which are for sinning against
the Law, or the works of the Law, either as it is the old Covenant; these are
under the Law, and not under the Covenant of Grace. Again, Gal. the 3. the 10.
Verse, there he says, For as many as are of the Works of the Law are under the
Curse; that is, they that are under the Law, are under the Curse; for mark,
they that are under the Covenant of Grace are not under the Curse. Now there
are but two Covenants; therefore it must needs be that they that are under the
Curse are under the Law; seeing those that are under the other Covenant, are
not under the Curse, but under the Blessing. So then, they which be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham, but the rest are under the Law, Gal. 3. 9.
Now I shall proceed to what I do intend to speak unto.

First, I shall show you what the Covenant of Works, or the Law is, and when it
was first given, together with the nature of it.

Secondly, I shall show you what it is to be under the Law, or Covenant of
Works, and the miserable state of all those that are under it.

Thirdly, I shall show you who they are that are under this Covenant, or Law.

Fourthly, I shall show you how far a man may go, and yet be under this
Covenant, or Law.

For the first, What this Covenant of Works is, and when it was given?

The Covenant of Works, or the Law here spoken of, is the Law delivered on
Mount Sinai, to Moses, in two Tables of stone, in ten particular branches, or
heads; for this see Gal. 4. The Apostle speaking there of the Law, and of some
also that through delusions of false Doctrine, was brought again as it were
under it, or at least was leaning that way, Verse 21. He says, As for you that
desire to be under the Law, I will show you the mystery of Abraham's two Sons
which he had by Agar and Sarah; these two do signify the two Covenants, the
one named Agar, signifies Mount Sinai where the Law was delivered to Moses on
two Tables of stone, Exodus 24. 12. Chap. 34. 1. Deuteronomy. 10. 1. Which is that,
that whosoever is under, he is destitute of, and altogether without the Grace
of Christ, in his heart at the present, Gal. 5. 3, 4. For I testify again to
every man (says he) speaking to the same People, that Christ is become of none
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, namely, that given
on Mount Sinai. Ye are fallen from Grace. That is, not that any can be
justified by the Law; but his meaning is, all those that seek justification by
the Works of the Law, they are not such as seek to be under the second
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace. Also the 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8. The Apostle speaking
again of these two Covenants, he says, For if the Ministration of Death (or
the Law, for it is all one) written and engraven in stones (mark that) was
glorious: how shall not the Ministration of the Spirit (or the Covenant of
Grace) be rather glorious? As if he had said, It Is true, there was a glory in
the Covenant of Works, and a very great excellency did appear in it; namely, in
that given in the stones on Sinai, yet there is another Covenant, the Covenant
of Grace, that does exceed it for comfort and glory.

But secondly, Though this Law was delivered to Moses from the hands of Angels
in two Tables of Stone on Mount Sinai; yet this was not the first appearing of
this Law to Man; but even this in substance (tho possibly not so openly) was
given to the first Man Adam, in the garden of Eden, in these words, And the
Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every Tree in the Garden thou may
freely eat. But of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat
of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2. 16,
17. Which Commandment then given to Adam, did contain in it, a forbidding to do
any one of those things, that was and is accounted evil, although at that time
it did not appear so plainly, in so many particular heads, as it did when it
was delivered on Mount Sinai: but yet the very same, and that I shall prove
thus.

God commanded Adam in Paradise to abstain from all evil against the first
Covenant, and not from some sins only: but if God had not commanded Adam to
abstain from the sins spoken against the Ten Commandments, he had not commanded
to abstain from all, but from some; therefore it must needs be, that he then
commanded to abstain from all sins forbidden in the Law given on Mount Sinai.
Now that God commanded to abstain from all evil, or sin, against any of the Ten
Commandments, when he gave Adam the Command in the Garden, it is evident, in
that he did punish the sins that was committed against those Commands, that was
then delivered on Mount Sinai, before they were delivered on Mount Sinai, which
will appear as follows.

The first, second, and third Commandments were broken by Pharaoh and his men;
for they had false Gods which the Lord Executed Judgment against (as in Exodus
12. 12.) and blasphemed their true God; (Exodus 7. 17. to the end) for their
Gods could neither deliver themselves, nor their people from the hand of God;
but in the things wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them, Exodus 18. 11.

Again, Some judge that the Lord punished the sin against the second
Commandment, which Jacob was in some measure guilty of, in not purging his
house from false gods, with the defiling of his daughter Dinah, Genesis 34. 2.

Again, We find that Abimelech thought the sin against the third Commandment so
great, that he required no other security of Abraham against the fear of
mischief that might be done to him by Abraham, his son, and his sons son: but
only Abraham's Oath; (Genesis 21. 23.) the like we see between Abimelech and
Isaac, (Genesis 31. 53.) the like we find in Moses and the Israelites, who durst
not leave the bones of Joseph in Egypt; because of the Oath of the Lord, whose
Name by so doing, would have been abused, Exodus 13. 19.

And we find the Lord rebuking his People for the breach of the fourth
Commandment, Exodus 16. 27, 28, 29.

And for the breach of the fifth, the Curse came upon Ham, Genesis 9. 25, 26, 27.
And Ishmael dishonouring his Father, in mocking Isaac, was cast out, as we
read, Genesis 21. 9, 10. The sons in law of Lot, for slighting their Father,
perish in the overthrow of Sodom, Genesis 19. 14, etc.

The sixth Commandment was broken by Cain, and so dreadful a Curse and
Punishment came upon him, that it made him cry out, My Punishment is greater
then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13.

Again, when Esau threatened to slay his Brother, Rebecca sent him away saying,
Why should I be deprived of you both in one day? hinting unto us, that she knew
Murder was to be punished with death, Genesis 27. 54. Which the Lord himself
declared likewise to Noah, Genesis 9. 6.

Again, a notable Example of the Lords Justice in punishing Murder, we see in
the Egyptians, and Pharaoh, who drowned the Israelites Children in the River,
Exodus 1. 22. And they themselves were drowned in the Sea, Exodus 14. 27.

The sin against the Seventh Commandment was punished in the Sodomites, etc.
with the utter destruction of this City, and themselves, Genesis 19. 24, 25. Yea,
they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7. Also the Male Sechemites,
for the sin committed by Hamors son, were all put to the sword, Genesis 34. 25, 26.

Our first Parents sinned against the Eighth Commandment in taking the
forbidden fruit, and so brought the Curse on themselves, and their posterity,
Genesis 3. 16.

Again, the punishment due to the breach of this Commandment, was by Jacob
accounted death, Genesis 31. 30, 32. and also by Jacobs sons, Genesis 44. 9, 10.

Cain sinning against the Ninth Commandment, as in Genesis 4. 9. was therefore
cursed to the earth, verse the 11. And Abraham, though the Friend of God, was
blamed for false witness by Pharaoh, and sent out of Egypt, Genesis 12. 18, 19,
20. and both he and Sarah reproved by Abimelech, Genesis 20. 9, 10, 16.

Pharaoh sinned against the Tenth Commandment, Genesis 12. 15. and was therefore
plagued with great plagues, verse 17. Abimelech, coveted Abraham's Wife, and
the Lord threatened death to him and his, except he restored her again; Genesis 20.
3. Yea, though he had not come near her, yet for coveting and taking her, the
Lord fast closed up the Wombs of his house, verse 18.

I could have spoken more fully to this, but that I would not be too tedious,
but speak what I have to say with as much brevity as I can. But before I pass
it, I will besides this, give you an Argument or two more for the further
clearing of this; that the substance of the Law delivered on Mount Sinai, was
before that delivered by the Lord to man in the Garden. As first, Death reigned
over them that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adam's transgression,
(that is, though they did not take the forbidden fruit as Adam did) but had the
transgression been no other, or had their sin been laid to the charge of none
but those that did eat of that fruit, then those that was born to Adam, after
he was shut out of the Garden, had not had sin; in that they did not actually
eat of that fruit, and so had not been slaves to death. But in that Death did
reign from Adam to Moses, or from the time of his transgression against the
first giving of the Law, till the time the Law was given on Mount Sinai, it is
evident, that the substance of the Ten Commandments was given to Adam and his
Posterity under that Command, Eat not of the Tree that is in the midst of the
Garden. But yet if any shall say that it was because of the sin of their Father
that death reigned over them: to that I shall answer, that although original
sin be laid to the charge of his Posterity, yet it is also for their sins, that
they actually committed, that they were plagued: And again, says the Apostle,
For where there is no Law, there is no transgression, Romans 4. 15. For sin is
not imputed where there is no Law: Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to
Moses, says he, Romans 5. 13, 14. But if there had been no Law, then there had
been no Transgression, and so no death to follow after, as the wages thereof:
for death is the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23. and sin is the breach of the Law; an
actual breach in our particular persons, as well as an actual breach in our
public person, 1 John 3. 4.

Again, they are no other sins then those against that Law given on Sinai, for
the which those sins before mentioned was punished; therefore the Law given
before by the Lord to Adam and his posterity, is the same with that afterward
given on Mount Sinai.

Again, the Conditions of that on Sinai, and of that in the Garden are all one,
the one saying, Do this and live, the other saying the same. Also, Judgment
denounced against men in both kinds alike; therefore this Law, it appears to
be the very same, that was given on Mount Sinai.

Again, the Apostle speaks but of two Covenants (to wit, Grace and Works)
under which two Covenants all are; some under one, and some under the other:
Now this to Adam is one; therefore that on Sinai is one; and all one with this,
and that this is a truth, I say I know that the sins against that on Sinai was
punished by God, for the breach thereof, before it was given there: so it does
plainly appear to be a truth; for it would be unrighteous with God for to
punish for that Law, that was not broken: therefore it was all one with that on
Sinai.

Now the Law given on Sinai, was for the more clear discovery of those sins
that was before committed against it; for though the very substance of the Ten
Commandments was given in the Garden, before they were received from Sinai; yet
they lay so darkly in the heart of man, that his sins was not so clearly
discovered, as afterward they were; therefore says the Apostle, The Law was
added, Gal. 3. 19. (or more plainly given on Sinai, in Tables of Stone) that
the offense might abound; that is, that it might the more clearly be made
manifest, and appear, Romans 5. 20.

Again, we have a notable resemblance for this at Sinai, even in giving the
Law; for first, the Law was given twice on Sinai: to signify that indeed the
substance of it was given before. And secondly, the first tables that was given
on Sinai was broken, at the foot of the Mount, and the other was preserved
whole: to signify, that though it was the true Law, that was given before,
with that given on Sinai, yet it was not so easy to be read, and to be taken
notice of, in that the stones were not whole, but broken, and so the Law
written thereon somewhat defaced, and disfigured.

But if any object and say, though the sins against the one, be the sins
against the other, and so in that they do agree; yet it does not appear, that
the same is therefore the same Covenant of Works with the other.

Answ. That which was given to Adam in Paradise, you will grant was the
Covenant of Works; for it runs thus. Do thus and live, do it not, and die; nay
thou shall surely die. Now there is but one Covenant of Works: If therefore I
prove, that that which was delivered on Mount Sinai, is the Covenant of Works,
then all will be put out of doubt. Now that this is so, it is evident.

First, Consider the two Covenants, are thus called in Scripture, the one the
administration of death, and the other the administration of life; the one the
Covenant of Works, the other of Grace, but that delivered on Sinai, is called
the ministration of death; that therefore is the Covenant of Works, 2 Cor. 3.
For if (says he) the ministration of death Written and Engraven in stones, was
glorious, etc.

Secondly, the Apostle writing to the Galatians, does labor to beat them off
from trusting in the Covenant of Works; but when he comes to give a discovery
of that Law, or Covenant (he laboring to take them off from trusting in it) he
does plainly tell them, it is that which was given on Sinai, Gal. 4. 24, 25.
Therefore that which was delivered in two Tables of Stone on Mount Sinai, is
the very same that was given before to Adam in Paradise, they running both
alike; that in the Garden saying, Do this and live; but in the day tho eatest
thereof, (or do not do this) thou shall surely die.

And so is this on Sinai, as is evident when he says, The man that does these
things shall live by them, Romans 10. 5. and in case they break them, even any of
them, it says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, that are
written in the (whole) book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. now this being
thus cleared, I shall proceed.

A second thing to be spoken too, is this, to show what it is to be under the
Law; as it is a Covenant of Works, to which I shall speak, and that thus.

To be under the Law, as it is a Covenant of Works, it is, to be bound upon
pain of eternal damnation, to fulfill and that completely, and continually,
every particular point of the Ten Commandments, by doing them; do this, and
then thou shall live: otherwise, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
(in every particular thing) (or) things that are written in the book of the Law
to do them, Gal. 3. 10. That man that is under the first Covenant stands thus,
and only thus, as he is under that Covenant, or Law. Poor souls through
ignorance of the nature of that Covenant of Works, the Law, that they are
under, they do not think their state to be half so bad as it is: when alas
there is none in the World in such a sad condition again besides themselves;
for indeed they do not understand these things. He that is under the Law, as it
is a Covenant of Works, is like the man that is bound by the Law of his King
upon pain of Banishment, or of being Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered, not to
transgress any of the Commandeof the King: So here, they that are under the
Covenant of Works, they are bound upon pain of eternal banishment, and
condemnation, to keep within the compass of the Law of God of Heaven. The
Covenant of Works may in this case be compared to the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, which being once made, cannot be altered, Dan. 6. 8. You find that
when there was a Law made, and given forth, that none should ask a Petition of
any, God or Man, but of the King only: this Law being established by the King,
(verse 9.) Daniel breaking of it, let all do whatever they can, Daniel must
into the Lions Den, ver. 16. So here, I say, there being a Law given, and
sealed with the Truth, and the Word of God, (how, that the soul that sins
shall die, Ezekiel. 18. 4.) whosoever does abide under this Covenant, and dies
under the same, they must and shall into the Lions Den: nay worse then that,
for they shall be thrown into Hell, to the very Devils.

But to speak in a few partculars for thy better understanding herein. Know
first, that the Law of God, or Covenant of Works, does not contain it self in
one particular branch of the Law, but does extend it self into many, even into
all the Ten Commandments, and them Ten into very many more, as might be showed:
so that the danger does (...) lie in the breaking of one or Two of these Ten
only, but it does lie even in the transgression of any one of them. As you
know, if a King should give forth ten particular commaands to be obeyed, by his
subjects upon pain of death: now if any man does transgress against any one of
these ten, he does commit treason, as if he had broke them all, and (...)
liable to have the sentence of the Law, as certainly passed on him, as if he
had broken every particular of them.

2. Again, you know that the Laws being given forth by the King, which if a man
keep and obey a long time; yet if at the last he flips and breaks those Laws,
he is presently apprehended, and condemded by that Law. These things are clear
as touching the Law of God, as it is a Covenant of Works: if a man do fulfill
nine of the Commandments, and yet breaks but one, that being broken, will as
surely destroy him, and shut him out from the joys of Heaven, as if he had
actually transgressed against them all; for indeed in effect so he has: there
is a notable Scripture for this in the Epistle of James, 2 Chap. at the 10 ver.
For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all; that is, he has in effect broken them all, and shall have the
voice of them all cry out against him: and it must needs be so says James,
because, he that said (or that Law which said) Do not commit Adultery, said
also, do not Kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill, thou art
become a transgressor of the Law. As thus, it may be thou did never make to
thy self a God of Stone or Wood, or at least not to worship them so really and
so openly as the Heathen do; yet if thou have stolen, born false witness, or
lusted after a Woman in thy heart, Mat. 5. 28. thou have transgressed the Law;
and must for certain, living and dying under that Covenant, perish for ever by
the Law: for the Law has resolved on that beforehand, saying, Cursed is every
one that continues not in ALL things; mark, I pray you, in all things, that is
the word, and that feals the Doctrine.

3. Again, though a Man do not covet, steal, murder, worship gods of Wood and
Stone, etc. yet if they do take the Lords Name in vain, they are for ever gone,
living and dying under that Covenant, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord
thy God in vain; there is the command but how if we do? then he says, The Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain: No, though you live
as holy as ever thou can, and walk as circumspectly as ever any did; yet if
thou do take the Lords Name in vain thou art gone by that Covenant; For I
will not, mark, I will not, (let him be in never so much danger) I will not
hold him guiltless that takes my Name in vain, Exodus 20. 7. and so likewise for
any other of the ten, do but break them, and thy state is irrecoverable, if
thou live and die under that Covenant.

4. Though thou should fulfill this Covenant, or Law, even all of it, for a
long time, ten, twenty, forty, fifty, or threescore years, yet if thou do
chance to slip, and break one of them but once before thou die, thou art also
gone and lost by that Covenant; for mark, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things (that continues not in all things, mark that) which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them: but if a man do keep all the Law of
God his whole life time, only sin one time before he dies, that one sin is a
breach of the Law, and he has not continued in doing the things contained
therein; (For, for to continue according to the sense of this Scripture, is to
hold on without any failing, either in thought, word, or deed) therefore I say,
though a man do walk up to the Law all his life time, but only at the very last
sin one time before he die, he is sure to perish for ever, dying under that
Covenant. For my Friends you must understand that the Law of God is (yea) as
well as the Gospel; and as they that are under the Covenant of Grace shall
surely be saved by it, so, even so, they that are under the Covenant of Works
and the Law, they shall surely be damned by it, if continuing there. This is
the Covenant of Works, and the nature of it; Namely, not to bate any thing, no,
not a mite to him that lives and dies under it; I tell thee (says Christ) thou
shall not depart thence, that is from under the Curse, till thou have paid the
very last mite, Luke 12. 59.

5. Again, you must consider, that this Law does only condemn words and
actions, as I said before, but it has authority to condemn the most secret
thought of the heart, being evil; so that if thou do not speak any word that is
evil, as swearing, lying, jesting, dissembling, or any other word that tends
to, or savoureth of sin, yet if there should chance to pass but one vain
thought through thy heart but once in all thy life time, the Law takes hold of
it, accuses, and also will condemn thee for it. You may see one instance for
all in the fifth of Matthew at the 27, 28. verses, where Christ says, That
though a man do not lie with a woman carnally, yet if he do but look on her,
and in his heart lust after her, he is counted by the Law, being rightly
expounded, such a one that has committed the sin; and thereby has laid
himself under the condemnation of the Law. And so likewise of all the rest of
the commands; if there be any thought that is evil, do but pass through thy
heart, whether it be against God, or against man in the least measure, though
possibly not discerned of thee, or by thee, yet the Law takes hold of thee
therefore, and does by its authority both cast, condemn, and execute thee for
thy so doing. The thought of wickedness is sin, Prove.

6. Again, the Law is of that nature and severity, that it does not only
enquire into the generallty of thy life, as touching several things, whether
thou art upright there or no, but the Law does also follow thee into all thy
holy duties, and watches over thee there, to see whether thou do do all
things aright there, that is to say, whether when thou do pray, thy heart
has no wandering thoughts in it; whether thou do every holy duty thou do
perfectly, without the least mixture of sin; and if it do find thee to slip, or
in the least measure to fail in any holy duty that thou do perform, the Law
takes hold on that, and finds fault with that, so as to render all the holy
duties that ever thou did unavailable because of that: I say, if when thou
art a hearing, there is out one vain thought, or in praying but one vain
thought, or in any other thing whatsoever, let it be civil or spiritual, one
vain thought once in all thy life time, will cause the Law to take such hold on
it, that for that one thing, it does even set open all the Flood gates of Gods
wrath against thee, and (...) ^^^bly by that Covenant, it does bring eternal
vengeance upon thee. So that I say look which ways thou will, and fail wherein
thou will, and do it as seldom as ever thou ca^sto, either in civil or
spiritual things, as aforesaid; that is either in the service of God, or in thy
employments in the world, as thy trade or calling, either in buying or selling
any way, in any thing whatsoever: I say, if in any particular it finds thee
tardy, or in the least measure guilty, it calls thee an offender, (...)
accuses thee to God, it puts a stop to all the promises thereof, that are
joined to the Law, and leaves thee there as a cursed transgressor against God,
and a destroyer of thy own soul.

Here I would have thee If thou would have a more full discourse hereof.
Read D^d upon the Commandments.
by the way for to take notice, that it is not my intent at this time to
enlarge on the several Commands in particular; for that would be very me to
write, and thee to read: only thus much I would have thee to do at the reading
hereof; make a pause, and sit still one quarter of an hour, and muse a little
in thy mind thus with thy self, and say; Did I ever break the Law, yea or no?
had I ever in all my life time one sinful thought passed thorough my heart
since I was born, yea or no? and if thou find thy self guilty, as I am sure
thou can not otherwise choose but do, unless thou shut thy eyes against thy
every days practice; then I say conclude thy self guilty of the breach of the
first Covenant. And when that this is done, be sure in the next place, thou do
not straightway forget it, and put it out of thy mind, that thou art condemned
by the same Covenant; and then do not content thy self until thou do find, that
God has sent thee a pardon from Heaven, through the Merits of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Mediator of the second Covenant. And if God shall but give thee a
heart to take this my counsel, I do make no question but these words spoken by
me, will prove an instrument for the directing of thy heart, to the right
remedy, for the salvation of thy soul.

Thus much now touching the Law and the severity of it, upon the person that is
found under it, having offended, or broken any particular of it, either in
thought, word, or action; and now before I do proceed to the next thing, I
shall answer four objections that do he in my way; and also, such as do stumble
most part of the world.

The first Objection, And first, but you will say, methinks you speak very
harsh; it is enough to daunt a body: set the case therefore, that a man after
he has sinned, and broken the Law, repents of his wickedness, and promises
to do so no more; Will not God have mercy then, and save a poor sinner then?

1. Answ. I told you before, that the Covenant once broken, will execute upon
the offender that which it does threaten to lay upon him; and as for your
supposing that your repenting, and promising to do so no more, may help well,
and put you in a condition to attain the mercy of God by the Law: these
thoughts do flow from gross ignorance, both of the nature of sin, and also of
the nature of the justice of God. And if I was to give you a description, of
one in a lost condition for the present, I would brand him out with such a mark
of ignorance as this is.

2. Answ. The Law as it is a Covenant of works, does not allow of any
repentance unto life, to those that live and die under it; for the Law being
once broken by thee, never speaks good unto thee, neither does God at all
regard thee: If thou be under that Covenant, notwithstanding all thy
repentings, and also promises, to do so no more. No, says the Law, thou have
sinned, therefore I must curse thee; for it is my nature to curse, even, and
nothing else but curse every (...) that does in any point transgress against
me, Gal.. 3. 10. They brake my Covenant, and I regarded (...) not says the
Lord, Heb. 8. Let them cry, I will not regard them; let them report I will not
regard them; they have broken my Covenant, and done that in which I delighted
not; therefore by that Covenant I do curse, and not bless; damn, and not save,
frown, and not smile; reject, and not embrace; charge sin, and not forgive it.
They brake my Covenant, and I regarded them not. So that I say if thou break
the Law, the first Covenant; and thou being found there, God looking on thee
through that, he has no regard on thee, no pity for thee, no delight in thee.

Object. 2. But has not the Law promises as well as threatenings? saying, The
man that does these things shall live, (mark, he shall live) by them, or in
them.

Answ. First, to break the Commandments, is not to keep or fulfill the same; but
thou have broken them, therefore the promise does not belong to thee by that
Covenant. Secondly, the promises that are of the Law, are conditional, and so
not performed, unless there be a full and continual obedience to every
particular of it, and that without the feast sin. Do this, mark, do this, and
afterward thou shall live; but if thou break one point of it once in all thy
life, thou have not done the Law; therefore the the promises following the Law
do not belong unto thee, if one sin has been committed by thee. As thus, (I
will give you a plain instance) Set the case there be a Law made by the King,
that if any man speak a word against him, he must be put to death, and this
must not be revoked, but must for certain be expected on the offender; though
though there be a promise made to them that do not speak a word against him,
that they shall have great love from him: yet this promise is nothing to the
offender, he is like to have no share in it, or to be ever the better for it;
but contrariwise, the Law that he has offended must be executed on him; for
his sin shuts him out from a share of, or in the Promises. So it is here,
there is a promise made indeed, but to whom? Why, it is to none but those that
live without sinning against the Law: but if thou (I say) sin one time against
it in all thy lifetime, thou art gone, and not one promise belongs to thee, if
thou continue under this Covenant. Methinks the Prisoners at the bar, having
offended the Law (and the charge of a just Judge toward them) do much hold
forth the Law, as it is a Covenant of Works, and how it deals with them that
are under it. The Prisoner having offended cries out for mercy; good my Lord
mercy (says he) pray my Lord pity me; the Judge says, What can thou say for
thy self, that Sentence of Death should not be passed upon thee? Why, nothing
but this, I pray my Lord be merciful: But he answers again, Friend, the Law
must take place, the Law must not be broken: The Prisoner says, Good my Lord
spare me, and I will never do so any more: The Judge notwithstanding the man's
outcries, and sad condition, must according to the tenor of the Law, pass
Judgment upon him, and the Sentence of the Condemnation must be read to the
Prisoner, though it makes them fall down dead to hear it, if he executes the
Law, as he ought to do. And just thus it is concerning the Law of God.

Object. 3. I, but sometimes (for all your haste) the Judge does also give some
Pardons, and forgive some offenders, notwithstanding their offenses, though he
be a Judge.

Answ. It is not because the Law is merciful, but because there is manifested
the love of the Judge, (not the love of the Law) I beseech you to mark this
distinction; for if a man that has deserved death by the Law, be
notwithstanding this forgiven his offense; it is not because the Law says,
spare him, but it is the love of the Judge (or Chief Magistrate) that does set
the man free from the Condemnation of the Law: But mark, here the Law of Men
and the Law of God do differ; the Law of Man is not so irrevokable, but if the
Supreme please, he may sometimes grant a Pardon, without satisfaction given for
the offense; but the Law of God is of this nature, that if the Man be found
under it, and a transgrssor, or one that has transgressed against it, before
that Prisoner can be released, there must be a full and complete satisfaction
given to it, either by the man's own life, or by the blood of some other man;
For without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. that is, there
is no deliverance from under the curse of the Law of God; and therefore however
the Law of man may be made of none effect, sometimes by showing mercy without
giving of a full satisfaction, yet the Law of God cannot be so contented, nor
at the least give way, that the person offending that, should escape the curse,
and not be damned, except some one do give a full and complete satisfaction to
it for him, and bring the Prisoner into another Covenant, (to wit) the Covenant
of Grace, which is more easy, and soul-refreshing, and sin-pardoning.

I say therefore, you must understand, that if there be a Law made that reaches
the life, to take it away for the (...) given by the offender against it; then
it is clear, that if the man be spared and saved, it is not the Law that does
give the man this advantage, but it is the mere mercy of the King, either
because he has a ransom, or satisfaction some other way; or being provoked
thereto out of his own love to the person whom he saves. Now thou also having
transgressed and broken the Law of God, if the Law be not executed upon thee,
it is not because the Law is merciful, or can pass by the least offense done by
thee, but thy deliverance comes another way: Therefore I say, however it be by
the Laws of men, where they be corrupted and perve^ted, yet the Law of God is
of that nature, that if it has not thy own blood, or the blood of some other
man (for it calls for no loss) for to ransom thee from the curse of it, being
due to thee for thy transgression, and to satisfy the cries, the doleful cries
thereof, and ever for to present thee pure and spotless before God
(notwithstanding this fiery Law) thou art gone if thou had a thousand souls;
For without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. No forgiveness
of the least sin against the Law.

Object. 4. But you will say, I do not only repent (...) of my formed life, and
also promise to do so no more, but now I do labor to be righteous, and to live
a holy life; and now instead of being a breaker of the Law, I do labor to
fulfill the same: what say you to that?

Answ. See the case thou could walk like an Angel of God; set the case thou
could fulfill the whole Law, and live from this day to thy lives end,
without sinning in thought, word, or deed, which is unpossible: but I say, set
the case it should be so, why, thy state is as bad, (if thou be under the first
Covenant) as ever it was. For first, I know thou dare not say but thou have
at one time or other sinned; and it so, then the Law has condemned thee; and
it so, then I am sure, that thou with all thy actions, and works of
righteousness, can not remove the dreadful and unresistible Curse that is
already laid upon thee, by that Law which thou art under, and which thou have
sinned against, though thou live the holiest life that any man can live in
this world, being under the Law of Works, and so not under the Covenant of
Grace, thou must be cut off without remedy; for thou have sinned, though
afterward thou live never so well.

The reasons for this that has been spoken, are these.

First, Tho nature of Gods justice calls for it, that is, it calls for
irrecoverable ruin on them that transgress against this Law: for justice gave
it, and justice looks to have it completely, and continually obeyed, or else
justice is resolved to take place, and execute its office, which is to punish
the transgressor against it; you must understand that the justice of God is as
unchangable as his love; his justice cannot change its nature, justice it is,
if it be pleased, and justice it is be if it displeased. The justice of God in
this place, may be compared to fire; there is a great fire made in some place,
if thou do keep out of it, it is fire; if thou do fall into it thou will find
it fire; and therefore the Apostle uses this as an Argument to stir up the
Hebrews to stick close to Jesus Christ, lest they fell under the justice of
God, by these words, Heb. 12. 29. For our God is a consuming fire: into which
if thou fall, it is not for thee to get out again, as it is with some that fall
into a material fire; no, but he that falls into this, he must lie there for
ever; as it is clear where he says, Isa. 33. 14. Who among us can dwell with
everlasting burnings, and with devouring fire? For justice once offended,
knows not how to show any pity or compassion to the offender; but runs on
him like a Lion, takes him by the throat, throws him into Prison, and there he
is sure to lie, and that to all eternity, unless infinite satisfaction be given
to it, which is impossible to be given by any of (us) the sons of Adam.

Secondly, the faithfulness of God calls for irrecoverable ruin, to be poured
out on those that shall live and die under this Covenant. If thou having sinned
but one sin against this Covenant, and should afterward escape damning, God
must be unfaithful to himself, and to his Word, which both agree as one. First,
he would be unfaithful to himself; to himself; that is, to his Justice,
Holiness, Righteousness, Wisdom, and Power, if he should offer to stop the
runnings out of his Justice, for the damning of them that have offended it. And
secondly, he would be unfaithful to his Word (his written Word) and deny,
disown, and break that, of which he has said, Luke 16. 7. It is easier for
Heaven and Earth to pass away, than for one tittle of the Law to fail, or be
made of none effect; now if he should not according to his certain declarations
therein, take vengeance on those that fall and die within the threat, and sad
curses denounced, it that, his word could not be fulfilled.

Thirdly, Because otherwise he would disown the sayings of his Prophets, and
gratify the sayings of his enemies: his Prophets say he will take vengeance,
his enemies say he will not; his Prophets say he will remember their
iniquities, and recompense them into their bosom; but his enemies say they
shall do well, and they shall have peace though they walk after the imagination
of their own heart; Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. and be not so strict as the word
commands, and do not as it says: but let me tell thee, had thou a thousand
souls, and each of them was worth a thousand worlds, God would set them all on
a light fire; if they fall within the condemnings of his Word, and thou die
without a Jesus, even the right Jesus; for the Scriptures cannot be broken.
What do thou think that God, Christ, Prophets, and Scriptures, will all lie
for thee? and falsify their words for thee? it will be but ill venturing thy
soul upon that.

And the reasons for it are these, First, Because God is God, and Secondly,
because Man is Man.

First, Because God is perfectly just, and eternally just, perfectly holy, and
etern^lly holy, perfectly faithful, and eternally faithful; that is without any
variableness or shadow of turning: but perfectly continues the same, and can
as well cease to be God, as to alter or change the nature of his Godhead. And
as he is thus the perfection of all perfections, he gave out his Law to be
obeyed, but if any offend it, then they fall into the hands of this his eternal
justice, and so must drink of his irrecoverable wrath, which is the execution
of the same justice. I say, this being thus, the Law being broken, justice
takes place, and so faithfulness follows, to see that execution be done, and
also to testify that he is true, and does denounce his unspeakable,
^nsupportable, and unchangeable vengeance on the party offending.

Secondly, Because thou art not as infinite as God, but a poor created weed,
that is here to day and gone to morrow; and not able to answer God in his
Essence, Being, and Attributes, thou art found to fall under him, for that thy
soul or body can do nothing that is infinite in such a way as to satisfy this
God, which is an infinite God in all his attributes

But to declare unto you the misery of man by this Law to purpose, I do beseech
you to take notice of these following particulars, besides what has been
already spoken. First, I shall show the danger of them by reason of the Law, as
they come from Adam. Secondly, as they are in their own persons particularly
under it.

1. First, as they come from Adam, they are in a sad condition; because he left
them a broken Covenant: or take it thus, because they, while they were in him,
did with him break that Covenant. Oh! this was the treasure that Adam left to
his posterity, it was a broken Covenant, insomuch that death reigned over all
his Children, and does still to this day, as they come from him, both natural
and eternal death, Romans the 5. It may be Drunkard, Swearer, Liar, Thief, thou
do not think of this.

2. Secondly, he did not only leave them a broken Covenant, but also made them
(himself) sinners against it: he made them sinners; By one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, Rom 5. 19. And this is worse than the first.

3. Thirdly, not only so, but he did deprive them of their strength, by which
at first they were enabled to stand, and left them no more than dead men. Oh
helpless state! Oh! how beggarly and miserable are the sons of Adam?

4. Fourthly, not only so; but also before he left them, he was the
conduit-pipe through which the Devil did convey of his poisoned spawn and
venom nature into the hearts of Adams sons and daughters, by which they are at
this day so strongly and so violently carried away, that they fly as fast to
Hell and the Devil, by reason of sin, as chaff before a mighty wind.

5. Fifthly, in a word, Adam led them out of their Paradise, that is one more;
and put out their eyes, that is another; and left them to the leading of the
Devil; O sad! Can thou hear this, and not have thy ears to tingle and burn on
thy head? Can thou read this and not feel this and not feel thy Conscience
begin to throb and dagg? If so, surely it is because thou art either possessed
with the Devil, or besides thy self. But I pass this, and come to the second
thing, which is the cause of their being in a sad condition, which is by reason
of their being in their Particular persons under it.

First, therefore they that are under the Law, they are in a sad condition;
because they are under that which is more ready (through our infirmity) to
curse than to bless; they are under that called the ministration of
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. that is, they are under that dispensation, or
administration, whose proper work is to curse, and condemn, and nothing else.

Secondly, their condition is sad, who are under the Law; because they are not
only under that administration that does condemn, but also that which does wait
an opportunity to condemn: the Law does not wait that it might be gracious, but
it does wait to curse and condemn; I, it came on purpose to discover sin, Romans
5. 20. The Law entered, says the Apostle, that the offense might abound; or
appear indeed to be that which God does hate; and also to curse for that which
has been committed, as he says, Cursed is every one that continues not in
all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them; Gal. 3. 10.

Thirdly, they are in a sad condition; bebecause that administration they are
under, that are under the Law, does always find fault with the sinners
obedience, as well as his disobedience; (if it be not done in a right spirit,
which they that are under that Covenant cannot do, by reason of their being
destitute of Faith) therefore, I say, it does control them, saying, This was
not well done; this was done by the halves; this was not done freely, and that
was not done perfectly, and out of love to God: and hence it is that some men,
notwithstanding they labor to live as holy as ever they can, according to the
Law; yet they do not live a peaceable life, but are full of condemnings, full
of guilt and torment of Conscience; finding themselves to fail here, and to
fall short there, omitting this good which the Law commands, and doing that
evil which the Law forbids; but never gives them one good word for all their
pains.

Fourthly, they that are under the Law are in a sad condition; because they are
under that administration that will never be contented with what is done by the
sinner: if thou be under this Covenant, work as hard as thou can, the Law
will never say, Well done; never say, My good servant: No, but always it will
be driving of thee faster, hastening of thee harder, giving of thee fresh
commands, which thou must do; and upon pain of damnation not to be left undone.
Nay, it is such a Master that will curse thee, not only for thy sins, but also
because thy good works were not so well done, as they ought to be.

Fifthly, they that are under this Covenant or Law, their state is very sad;
because this Law does command impossible things of him that is under it; and
yet does but right in it, seeing man at the first, had in Adam strength to
stand, if he would have used it, and the Law, was given then, (as I said
before) when man was in his full strength; and therefore no unequality, if it
commands the same still, seeing God that gave thee strength, did not take it
away. I will give you a similitude for the clearing of it; set the case that I
give to my servant ten pounds, with this charge, lay it out for my best
advantage, that I may have my own again with profit; now if my servant contrary
to my command, goes and spends my money in a disobedient way; is it any
unequality in me to demand of my servant what I gave him at first? nay, and
though he have nothing to pay, I may lawfully cast him into Prison, and keep
him there until I have satisfaction. So here, the Law was delivered to man, at
the first when he was in a possibility to have fulfilled it; now then, though
man have lost his strength, yet God is just in commanding the same work to be
done. I, and if they do not do the same things, I say, that are impossible for
them to do, it is just with God to damn them, seeing it was they themselves
that brought themselves into this condition; therefore says the Apostle, What
things soever the Law, or Commands says, it says to them that are under the
Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God, Romans 3. 19. and this is thy sad condition that art under the Law,
Gal. 3. 10.

But if any should object and say, but the Law does not command unpossible
things of natural man.

I should answer in this case as the Apostle did in another, very much like
unto it, saying, They know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm: For does
not the Law command thee to love the Lord thy God, with all thy soul, with all
thy strength, with all thy might; etc. and can the natural man do this? Jer.
13. 23. How can those that are accustomed to do evil, do that which is
commanded in this particular? Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard
his spots?

Does the Law command thee to do good, and nothing but good? and that with all
thy soul, heart, and delight, (which the Law as a Covenant of Works called for)
and can thou being Carnal do that? But there is no man that has
understanding, if he should hear thee say so, but would say that thou wast
either bewitched, or stark mad.

Sixthly, they that are under the Law, are in a sad condition; because, that
though they follow the Law, or Covenant of Works, I say, though they follow it,
it will not lead them to Heaven; no, but contrariwise, it will lead them under
the Curse. It is not possible, says Paul, that any should be justified by the
Law, (or by our following of it) for by that is the knowledge of sin, and by it
we are condemned for the same, which is far from leading us to life, being the
ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3. and again, Israel that follows after the Law
of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness: wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but by the Law, and by the Works thereof,
Romans 9. 30, 31, 32.

Seventhly, they that are under the Law, are in a sad condition; because they
do not know whether ever they shall have any wages for their work or no; they
shall have no assurance of the pardon of their sins, neither any hopes of
eternal life: but poor hearts as they are, they work for they do not know what,
even like a poor Horse that works hard all day, and at night has a dirty
Stable for his pains; so thou may work hard all the days of thy life, and at
the day of death instead of having of a glorious rest in the Kingdom of Heaven,
thou may, nay, thou shall have for thy sins, the damnation of thy soul and
body in Hell to all eternity; for as much as I said before, that the Law, if
thou sinnest, it does not take notice of any good work done by thee; but takes
its advantage to destroy and cut off thy soul for the sin thou have committed.

Eighthly, they that are under the Law, are in a sad condition, because they
are under that administration, upon whose souls God does not smile (they dying
there) for the administration that God does smile upon his Children through, is
the Covenant of Grace, they being in Jesus Christ, the Lord of life and
consolation: but contrariwise to those that are under the Law; for they have
his frowns, his rebukes; his threatenings, and with much severity they must be
dealt withal. For they break my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord, Heb. 8. 9.

Ninthly, they are in a sad condition; because they are out of the faith of
Christ: they that are under the Law, have not the faith of Christ in them; for
that dispensation which they are under, is not the administration of faith, The
Law is not of faith, says the Apostle, Gal. 3. 2.

Tenthly, because they have not received the Spirit; for that is received by
the bearing of faith, and not by the Law, nor the Works thereof, Gal. 3. 2.

Eleventhly, in a word, if thou live and die under that Covenant, Jesus Christ
will neither pray for thee, neither let thee have one drop of his Blood to wash
away thy sins; neither shall thou be so much as one of the least in the Kingdom
of Heaven; for all these privileges come to souls under another Covenant, as
the Apostle says, For such are not under the Law, but under Grace, that is,
such as have a share in the benefits of Jesus Christ, or such as are brought
from under the first Covenant, into the second; or from under the Law, into the
Grace of Christ's Gospel; without which Covenant of Grace, and being found in
that, there is no soul can have the least hope of eternal life, no joy in the
holy Ghost, no share in the privileges of Saints, because they are tied up
from them by the limits and bonds of the Covenant of Works. For you must
understand, that these two Covenants have their several bounds and limitations,
for the ruling and keeping in subjection, or giving of freedom to the parties
under the said Covenants: now they that are under the Law, are within the
compass and the jurisdiction of that, and are bound to be in subjection to
that; and living and dying under that, they must stand and fall to that, as
Paul says, To his own master, he shall stand or fall. The Covenant of Grace
does admit to those that are under it, also liberty and freedom, together with
commanding of subjection to the things contained in it, which I shall speak to
further hereafter.

But now, that the former things may be further made to appear, that is, what
the sad condition of all them that are under the Law is; as I have shown you
something of the nature of the Law, so also shall I show, that the Law was
added and given for that purpose, that it might be so with those that are out
of the Covenant of Grace.

First, God did give the Law, that sin might abound, Romans 5. 20. not that it
should take away sin in any, but to discover the sin which is already begotten,
or that may hereafter be begotten, by Lust and Satan: I say, this is one proper
work of the Law to make manifest sin; it is sent to find fault with the sinner,
and it does also watch that it may so do, and it does take all advantages for
the accomplishing of its work in them that give ear thereto, or do not give
ear, if it have the rule over them. I say, it is like a man that is sent by his
Lord to see and pry into the labors and works of other men, taking every
advantage to discover their infirmities and failings, and to chide them; yea,
to throw them out of the Lords favor for the same.

Secondly, Another great end why the Lord did add or give the Law, it was that
no man might have any thing to lay to the charge of the Lord, for his
condemning of them that do transgress against the same. You know that if a man
should be had before an Officer or Judge, and there be condemned, and yet by no
Law; he that condemns him, might be very well reprehended or reproved for
passing the Judgment; yea the party himself might have better ground to plead
for his liberty, than the other to plead for the condemning of him: but this
shall not be so in the judgment day, but contrariwise; for then every man shall
be forced to lay his hand on his mouth, and hold his tongue at the Judgment of
God, when it is passed upon them; therefore says the Apostle, What things
soever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law (that is all the
commands, all the curses and threatenings that are spoken by it, are spoken
says he) that every mouth may be stopped; mark, I beseech you, it says, says
he, that every mouth might be stopped, and that all the world might become
guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. So that now in case any in the judgment day,
should object against the judgment of God, as those in the 25. of Matthew do,
saying, Lord when saw we thee thus and thus? And why do thou pass such a sad
sentence of condemnation upon us? surely this is injustice and not equity: Now
for the preventing of this, the Law was given; I, and that it might prevent
thee to purpose, God gave it betimes, before either thy first father had
sinned, or thou wast born. So that again, if there should be these Objections
offered against the proceedings of the Lord in justice, and judgment, saying:
Lord, why am I thus condemned, I did not know it was sin? now against these
two, was the Law given, and that betimes, so that both these are answered. If
the first come in and say, why am I judged? why am I damned? then will the Law
come in, even all the Ten Commandments, with every one of their cries against
thy soul, the first saying, he has sinned against me, damn him; the second
saying also, he has transgressed against me, damn him; the third also saying
the same, together with the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. even all of them will
discharge themselves against thy soul, if thou die under the first Covenant,
saying he, or they, have transgressed against us, damn them, damn them: and I
tell thee also, that these ten great guns, the Ten Commandments, will with
discharging themselves in justice against thy soul, so rattle in thy
conscience, that thou will in spite of thy teeth, be immediately put to
silence, and have thy mouth stopped; and let me tell thee further, that if thou
shall appear before God, to have the Ten Commandments discharge themselves
against thee, thou had better be tied to a tree, and have ten, yea ten
thousand of the biggest pieces of Ordnance in the world, to be shot off against
thee; for these could go no further, but only to kill the body; but they both
body and soul to be tormented in Hell with the Devil to all eternity.

3. Again, if the second thing should be objected, saying, But Lord I did not
think this had been sin, or the other had been sin; for no body told me so:
then also will the giving of the Law take off that, saying, nay, but I was
given to thy father Adam before he had sinned, or before thou wast born, and
have ever since been in thy soul to convince thee of thy sins, and to control
thee for doing the thing that was not right. Did not I secretly tell thee at
such a time, in such a place, when thou wast doing of such a thing, with such a
one, or when thou wast all alone, that this was a sin, and that God did forbid
it; therefore if thou did commit it, God would be displeased with thee for
it? And when thou wast thinking to do such a thing, at such a time, did not I
say, forbear, do not so? God will smite thee, and punish thee for it, if thou
do do it? And besides God did so order it, that you had me in your Houses,
in your Bibles, and also you could speak and talk of me; thus pleading the
truth, thou shall be forced to confess it is so; nay, it shall be so in some
sort with the very Gentiles and barbarous People, that fall far short of that
light we have in these parts of the world (for says the Apostle) The Gentiles
which have not the Law, these do by nature the things contained in the Law;
these having not the Law (that is, not written as we have, yet they) are a Law
unto themselves, which shows the works of the Law is written in their
hearts, Romans 2. 14, 15. that is, they have the Law of works in them by nature,
and therefore they shall be left without excuse; for their own consciences
shall stand up for the truth of this, where he says, Their conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing
one another. I but when? Why, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 15, 16. So this I say is
another end, for which the Lord did give the Law, namely, that God might pass a
sentence in righteousness, without being charged with any injustice, by those
that shall fall under it, in the judgment.

4. A fourth end, why the Lord did give the Law, it was, because they that die
out of Jesus Christ, might not only have their mouths stopped, but also that
their persons might become guilty before God (Romans 3. 19.) and indeed this will
be the ground of silencing (as I said before) they finding themselves guilty,
their consciences backing the truth of the judgment of God passed upon them,
they shall become guilty, that is, they shall be fit vessels for the wrath of
God to be poured out into, being filled with guilt, by reason of transgressions
against the Commandments: thus therefore shall the parties under the first
Covenant be fitted to destruction (Romans 9. 22.) even as wood, or straw, being
well dried, is fitted for the fire, and the Law was added and given, and speaks
to this very end that sins might be shown, mouths might be stopped from
quarrelling: And that all the world, mark, the world might become guilty
before God, and so be in justice for ever and ever overthrown, because of their
sins.

And this will be so, for these reasons.

First, Because God has a time to magnify his justice, and holiness, as well
as to show his forbearance and mercy. We read in Scripture that his eyes are
too pure to behold iniquity, Hab 1. 13. and then we shall find it true. We read
in Scripture, that he will magnify the Law, and make it honorable, and then
he will do it indeed.

Now because the Lord does not strike so soon as he is provoked by sin,
therefore poor souls will not know, nor regard the Justice of God; neither do
they consider the time in which it must be advanced (which will be) when men
drop under the wrath of God as fast as hail in a mighty storm, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Psalm. 50. 21, 22. Now therefore look to it all you that count the
long-suffering and forbearance of Gods slackness; and because for the present
he keeps silence, therefore to think that he is like unto your selves. No,
no, but know that God has his set time for every purpose of his, and in its
time, it shall be advanced most marvellously, to the everlasting astonishment
and overthrow of that soul, that shall be dealt withal by Justice and the Law.
O! how will God advance his Justice? O! how will God advance his Holiness?
First, By showing men that he in justice cannot, will not regard them, because
they have sinned: And secondly, In that his holiness will not give way for such
unclean wretches to abide in his sight, his eyes are so pure.

Secondly, Because God will make it appear that he will be as good as his word
to sinners; sinners must not look to escape always, though they may escape a
while, yet they shall not go for all ado unpunished; no, but they shall have
their due to a farthing, when every threatening and curse shall be accomplished,
and fulfilled on the head of the transgressor. Friend, there is never an idle
word that thou speak, but God will account with thee for it; there is never
a lie thou tellest, but God will reckon with thee for it; nay, there shall not
pass, so much as one passage in all thy lifetime, but God, the righteous God,
will have it in the trial by his Law (if thou die under it) in the Judgment-day.

But you will say: But who are those that are thus under the Law?

Answ. Those that under the Law, may be branched out into three ranks of men:
either, first such as are grossly profane, or such as are more refined; which
may be two ways, some in a lower sort, and some in a more eminent way.

First, Then they are under the Law as a Covenant of Works, who are open
profane and ungodly vvretches, such as delight not only in sin, but also make
their boast of the same, and brag at the thoughts of committing of it: now as
for such as these are; there is a Scripture in the first Epistle of Paul to
Timothy, the 1 Chap. at the 9. and 10. verses, which is a notable one to this
purpose, The Law (says he) is not made for a righteous man (not as it is a
Covenant of Works) but for the (unrighteous or) lawless and disobedient; for
the ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy, and profane, for murderers of
fathers; and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, for whore-mongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, liars (look to it liars)
for perjured persons, and (in a word) if there be any other thing that is not
according to sound Doctrine. These are one sort of People that are under the
Law, and so under the curse of the same, whose due is to drink up the brim-full
Cup of Gods eternal vengeance, and therefore I beseech you not to deceive your
selves. For know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? Neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminates, nor
Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10. Poor souls, you think that you may have your sins, your lusts and
pleasures, and yet you shall do pretty well, and be let to go free in the
Judgment day: but see what God says of such in that 9. of Deuternomy, at the
19. and 20. verses, Which shall bless themselves in their heart, saying, I
shall have peace, I shall be saved, I shall do as well as others, in the day
when God shall judge the World by Jesus Christ (but says God) I will not spare
them; no, but my anger and my jealousy shall smoke against them. How far, even
to the executing all the curses that are written in the Law of God upon them.
Nay, says God, I will be even with them; For I will blot out their names from
under Heaven. And indeed it must of necessity be so, because such souls are
unbelievers, in their sins, and under the Law, which cannot, will not show any
mercy on them; for it is not the administration of mercy and life, but the
administration of death and destruction (as you have it, 2 Cor. the 3. Chap.
the 7, 9. verses) and all those, every one of them, that are open profane and
scandalous wretches, are under it, and have been so ever since they came into
the World to this day; and they will for certain live and die under the same
dispensation, and then be damned to all eternity, if they be not converted from
under that Covenant, into, and under the Covenant of Grace (of which I shall
speak in its place) and yet for all this, how brag and cranck are our poor
wantons, and wicked ones, in this day of forbearance? as if God would never
have a reckoning with them, as if there was no Law to condemn them, as if there
was no hell fire to put them into: but Oh! how will they be deceived? when they
shall see Christ sitting upon the Judgment Seat, having laid aside his priestly
and prophetical Office, and appearing only as a Judge to the wicked. When they
shall see all the records of Heaven unfolded and laid open; when they shall see
each man his name out of the Book of Life, and in the Book of the Law; when
they shall see God in his Majesty, Christ in his Majesty, the Saints in their
Dignity; but themselves in their Impurity, what will they say then? whither
will they fliethen? where will they leave their glory? Isa, 10. 3. O sad state!

Secondly, They are under the Law, also, who do not only so break and disobey
the Law, but follow after the Law, as hard as ever they can, seeking
justification thereby; that is, though a man should abstain from the sins
against the Law, and labor to fulfill the Law, and give up himself to the Law,
yet if he look no further than the Law, he is still under the Law; and for
all his obedience to the Law, the righteous Law of God, he shall be destroyed
by that Law. Friend, you must not understand that none but profane persons are
under the Law: No, but you must understand that a man may be turned from a
vain, loose, open, profane Conversation, and sinning against the Law, to a
holy, righteous, religious life, and yet be in the same state, under the same
Law, and as sure to be damned as the other that are more profane and loose.
And though you may say this is very strange, yet I shall both say it, and prove
it to be true. Read with understanding that Scripture in Romans 9. at the 30,
31. verses, where the Apostle speaking of the very same thing, says, But
Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness; mark, that followed after
the Law of righteousness; they notwithstanding their earnest pursuit, or
hunting after the Law of righteousness, fell short of the Law of righteousness.
It signifies thus much to us, that let a man be never so earnest, so servent,
so restless, so serious, so ready, so apt and willing to follow the Law, and
the righteousness thereof, if he be under that Covenant, he is gone, he is
lost, he is deprived of eternal life; because he is not under the ministration
of life (if he die there) read also that Scripture, Gal. 3. 10. (which says)
For as many as are of the Works of the Law are under the Curse, mark, they that
are of the Works of the Law; now for to be of the works of the Law, it is to be
of the works of the righteousness thereof; that is, to abstain from sins
against the Law, and to do the commands thereof, as near as ever they can for
their lives, or with all the might they have; and therefore I beseech you to
consider it; for men's being ignorant of this, is the cause why so many go on,
supposing they have a share in Christ; because they are reformed, and abstain
from the sins against the Law, who when all comes to all, will be damned
notwithstanding; because they are not brought out from under the Covenant of
Works, and put under the Covenant of Grace.

Object. But (can you in very deed make these things manifestly evident from
the Word of God) methinks to reason this is very strange, that a man should
labor to walk up according to the Law of God, as much as ever he can, and yet
that men notwithstanding this should be still under the Curse. Pray clear it.

Answ. Truly this does seem very strange, I do know full well, to the natural
man, to him that is yet in his unbelief; because he goes by beguiled reason:
but for my part I do know it is so, and shall labor also to convince thee of
the truth of the same.

First, Then the Law is thus strict and severe, that if a man do sin but once
against it, he (I say) is gone for ever by the Law, living and dying under that
Covenant: If you would be satisfied, as touching the truth of this, do but read
the third of the Galations at the 10. verse. Where it says, Cursed is every
one (that is, not a man shall misss by that Covenant) that continues not in
all (mark, in all) things that are written in the book of the Law to do them:
pray mark, here is a curse in the first place, if all things written in the
Book of the Law be not done, and that continually too, that is, without any
failing, or one slip, as I said before. Now there is never a one in the world,
but before they did begin to yield obedience to the least command, they in
their own persons did sin against it, by breaking of it: the Apostle methinks
is very notable for the clearing of this in that 3 of the Romans, and also in
the fifth, in the one he endeavors for to prove that all had transgressed in
the first Adam, as he stood a common person representing both himself and us in
his standing and falling, Romans 5. 12. Wherefore (says he) as by one man sin
entered into the World, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men;
mark that, but why? for that all have sinned, that is, for as much as all
naturally are guilty of original sin, the sin that was committed by us in Adam:
So this is one cause why none can be justified by their obedience to the Law,
because they have in their first place broken it in their first parents. But
secondly, In case this should be opposed and rejected by quarrelsome persons,
though there be no ground for it, Paul has another argument to back his
Doctrine, saying, For we have proved (already) that both Jews and Gentiles are
all under sin. First, As it is written, there is none righteous, no not one.
Secondly, They are all gone out of the way, they are together (mark, together)
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Thirdly, Their
throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit, the
poison of asps is under their lips. Fourthly, Their mouths are full of cursing
and bitterness. Fifthly, Their feet are swift to shed blood. In a word,
Destruction and misery are in their ways: And the way of peace they have not
known. Now then says he, having proved these things so clearly, the conclusion
of the whole is this, That what thing, soever the Law says (in both showing of
sin and cursing for the same) it says (All) to them that are under the Law,
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God, Romans 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. So that here I say
lies the ground of our not being justified by the Law, even because in the
first place we have sinned against it; for know this for certain, that if the
Law does take the least advantage of thee, by thy sinning against it, all that
ever thou shall afterward hear from it, is nothing but curse, curse, curse
him, For not continuing in all things that are written in the book of the Law
to do them.

Secondly, Thou can not be saved by the righteous Law of God, the first
Covenant, because, that (together with this thy miserable state, by original
and actual sins, before thou did follow the Law) since thy turning to the
Law, thou have committed several sins against, the Law. (In many things we
offend all) So that now thy righteousness to the Law, being mixed with
sometimes the lust of concupiscence, for^idation, coverousness, pride,
heart-risings against God, coldness of affection toward him, backwardness to
good duties, speaking idle words, having of strife in your hearts, and such
like; I say, these things being thus, the righteousness of the Law is become
(do) weak through this our flesh, (Romans 8. 30) and so notwithstanding all our
obedience to the Law, we are yet through our weakness under the Curse of the
Law; for as I said before, the Law is so holy, so just, and so good, that it
cannot allow that any failing or slip should be done by them that look for life
by the same. Cursed is every one that continues not in every thing, Gal. 3.
10. and this Paul knew full, well, which made him throw away all his
righteousness (But you will say that was his own. Answer, But it was even that
which while he calls it his own, he also calls it the righteousness of the Law,
see Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.) and to account it but dung, but as dirt on his
shoes, and that, that he might be found in Christ, and so he saved by him
without the deeds of the Law, Romans 3. 28.

But thirdly, Set the case the righteousness of the Law, which thou have, was
pure and perfect without the least flaw, or ^au^o, without the least mixture of
the least sinful thought, yet this would fall far short of presenting of thee
blameless in the sight of God. And that I prove by these arguments.

The first Argument is, That that which is not Christ, cannot redeem souls from
the Curse. It cannot completely present them before the Lord. Now the Law is
not Christ; Therefore the Moral Law, cannot (by all our obedience to it)
deliver us from the curse that is due to us, Act. 4. 12.

The second Argument is, That that righteousness that is not the righteousness
of faith (that is by believing in Jesus Christ) cannot please God. Now the
righteousness of the Law as a Covenant of works is not the righteousness of
faith; Therefore the righteousness of the Law as acted by us, being under that
Covenant, cannot please God. The first is proved in Heb. 1^. 6. But without
faith it is impossible to please him, mark, it is impossible. The second thus,
The Law is not of faith, Gal. 3. 12. Romans 10. 5, 6. compared with Gal. 3. 11.
But that no man is justified in the sight of the Lord by the Law, it is
evident; for the just shall live by faith, and the Law is not of faith. But for
the better understanding of those that are weak of apprehension, I shall prove
it thus.

First, That soul that has eternal life, he must have it by right of purchase,
or redemption (Heb. 9. 22. Ephesians. 1. 7.) Secondly, this purchase or redemption,
must be through the Blood of Christ. You have redemption through his Blood.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission. Now the Law is not in a
capacity to die, and so to redeem sinners by the purchase of Blood, which
satisfaction justice calls for (read the same Scriptures, Heb. 9. 22.) justice
calls for satisfaction, because thou have transgressed, and sinned against it,
and that must have satisfaction; therefore, all that ever thou can do cannot
bring in redemption: though thou follow the Law up to the nail-head (as I may
say) because all this is not shedding of blood: for believe it, and know it for
certain, that though thou had sinned but one sin, before thou did turn to
the Law; that one sin will murder thy soul, if it be not washed away by blood,
even by the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ, that was shed when he did hang upon
the Cross on Mount Calvary.

Object. But (you will say) methinks that giving up you selves to live a
righteous life should make God like better on us, and so let us be saved by
Christ, because we are so willing to obey his Law.

Answ. The motive that moves God to have mercy upon sinners, is not because
they are willing to follow the Law, but because he is willing to save them. Not
for thy righteousness, or for thy uprightness of heart do thou possess the
Land, Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5, 6. Now understand this; if thy will to do righteousness
was the first moving cause why God had mercy on thee through Christ, then it
must not be freely by grace. (I say freely) but the Lord loves thee and saves
thee upon free terms, having nothing beforehand to make him accept of thy
soul, but only the Blood of Christ; therefore to allow of such a principle, it
is to allow, that grace is to be obtained by the works of the Law, which is so
gross darkness as lies in the darkest dungeon in Popery, and is also directly
opposite to Scripture. For we are justified freely by his grace: through the
redemption that is in Christ, not through the good that is in our selves or
done by us (Romans 3. 24 (...)) No, But by faith, without; mark that, without the
deeds of the Law, verse 28. Again, not of works, lest any man should boast,
Ephesians. 2. 9. (No, no, says he) Not according to our works (or righteousness)
but according to his own purpose; mark, according to his own purpose and
grace which was (a free gift) given us in Christ Jesus (not lately, but) before
the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Object. But you will say, then, why did God give the Law, if we cannot have
salvation by following of it?

Answ. I told you before, that the Law was given for these following reasons.

First, That thou might be convinced by it of thy sins, and that thy sins
might indeed appear very sinful unto thee; which is done by the Law these ways.
First, By showing of thee what a holy God he is that did give the Law; and
secondly, By showing thee thy vileness and wickedness, in that thou contrary to
this holy God, have transgressed against, and broken this his holy Law;
therefore says Paul, The Law was added, that the offense might abound, Romans 5.
20. that is, by showing the creature the holiness of God, and also its own
vileness.

Secondly, That thou may know, that God will not damn thee for nothing in
the Judgment day.

Thirdly, Because he would have no quarrelling at his just condemning of them
at that day.

Fourthly, Because he will make thee to know that he is a holy God, and pure.

Quest. But seeing you have spoken thus far, I wish you would do so much as to
show in some particulars, both what men have done and how far they have gone,
and what they have received, being yet under this Covenant, which you call the
ministration of condemnation.

Ansvv. This is something a difficult question, and had need be not only
warily, but also home and soundly answered. The question consists of three
particulars. First, What men have done. Secondly, How far men have gone.
Thirdly, What they have received, and yet to beunder the Law or Covenant of
Works; and so in a state of condemnation.

As for the first, I have spoken something in general to that already, but for
thy better understanding, I shall speak yet more particularly. First, a man
has, and may be convinced and troubled for his sins, and yet be under this
Covenant, and that in a very heavy and dreadful manner; in so much that he may
find the weight of them to be intolerable and too heavy for him to bear, as it
was with Cain, Genesis 4. 13. My punishment (says he) is greater than I can bear.

Secondly, A man living thus under a sense of his sins, may repent, and be
sorry for them, and yet be under this Covenant, and yet be in a damned state,
Mat. 27. 3. And when he (Judas) saw what was done he repeated.

Thirdly, Men may not only be convinced, and also repent for their sins; but
they may also desire the prayers of the Children of God for them too, and yet
be under this Covenant, and Curse, Exodus 10. 16, 17. And Pharaoh called for
Moses and Aaron, and said, I have sinned; entreat the Lord your God that he may
take away from me these plagues.

Fourthly, A man may also humble himself for his offenses, and disobedience
against his God, and yet be under this Covenant, see 1 Kings 21. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29.

Fifthly, A man may make restitution unto men for the offense he has done unto
them, and yet be under this Covenant.

Sixthly, A man may do much work for God in his generation, and yet be under
this first Covenant, as Jehu, who did do that which God bid him, 2 King. 9, 25,
26. and yet God threatens even Jehu, because, though he did do the thing that
the Lord commanded him; yet he did it not from a right principle; for had he,
the Lord would not have said, Yet a little while and I will a^enge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, Hos. 1. 4.

Seventhly, Men may hear, and fear the servants of the Lord, and reverence them
very highly; yea, and when they (...), they may not only hear, but hear and do,
and that gladly too, not one or two things, but many; mark, many things gladly,
and yet be lost, and yet be damned (see Mar 6. 20.) For Herod feared John (why?
not because he had any civil power over him) but because he was a just man, and
holy, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things; and heard
him gladly; it may be that thou think, that because thou hear such and
such, therefore thou art better than thy neighbors: but know for certain that
thou may not only hear, but thou may hear and do, and that not with a
backward will, but gladly; mark, gladly and yet be Herod still, an enemy to the
Lord Jesus still: consider this I pray you.

2. But Secondly, To the second thing, which is this, How far may such a one
go? to what may such a one attain? whither may he arrive? and yet be an undone
man, under this Covenant.

Answ. First, Such a one may be received into fellowship with the Saints, as
they are in a visible way of walking one with another; they may walk hand in
hand together (see Mat. 25. 1. where he says) The Kingdom of Heaven (that is a
visible company of professors of Christ) is likened to ten Virgins, which took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom, five of them were wise, and
five were foolish. These in the first place are called Virgins; that is, such
as are clear from the pollutions of the world. Secondly, They are said to go
forth; that is, from the rudiments and traditions of men. Thirdly, They do
agree to take their lamps with them; that is, to profess themselves the
Servants of Jesus Christ, that wait upon him, and for him; and yet when he
came, he found half of them (even them Virgins) that had Lamps, that also went
forth from the pollutions of the world, and the customs of men, to be such as
lost their precious souls (see verse 10.) which they should not have done, had
they been under the Covenant of Grace, and so, not under the Law.

Secondly, They may attain to a great deal of honor in the said company of
professors (that which may be accounted honor) in so much, that they may be
put in trust with Church Affairs, and bear the bag, as Judas did. I speak not
this to shame the Saints: but being beloved I warn them; yet I speak this on
purpose, that it might (if the Lord will) knock at the door of the souls of
professors, consider Demas.

Thirdly, They may attain to speak of the word as Ministers, and become
preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in so much that the people where they
dwell, may even take up a Proverb concerning them, saying, Is he among the
Prophets? his gifts may be so rare, his tongue may be so fluent, and his matter
may be so fit, that he may speak with a tongue like an Angel, and speak of the
hidden mysteries, yea, of them all; mark that (1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and yet
be nothing, and yet be none of the Lords anointed ones, with the Spirit of
grace savingly, but may live and die under the Curse of the Law.

Fourthly, They may go yet further; they may have the gifts of the Spirit of
God, which may enable them to cast out Devils, to remove the biggest Hills or
Mountains in the World; nay, thou may be so gifted as to prephesie of things
to come, the most glorious things, even the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to
reign over all his enemies, and yet be but a Balaam, a wicked and a mad
Prophet, see 2 Pet. 2. 16. Numb. 24. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

Fifthly, they may not only stand thus for a while, for a little season; but
they may stand thus till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with his holy
Angels, I, and not be discovered of the Saints till that very day. Then all
those Virgins arose (the wise and the foolish) then, when? why, when this voice
was heard, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go you out to meet him, (Mat. 25. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) and yet was out of the Lord Jesus Christ, and yet was under the
Law.

Sixthly, Nay, further, they may not only continue in a profession till then
(supposing themselves to be under the Grace of the Gospel, when indeed they are
under the Curse of the Law) but even when the Bridegroom is come, they may
still be so confident of their state to be good, that they will even reason out
the case with Christ, why they are not let into the Kingdom of glory, saying,
Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence? and have not thou
taught in our streets? Nay further, Have not we taught in thy Name? and in thy
Name cast out devils: nay not only this, but, done many; mark, we have done
many wonderful works; nay further, they were so confident, that they commanded
in a commanding way, saying, Lord open to us. See here I beseech you, how far
these went, they thought they had had intimate acquaintance with Jesus Christ,
they thought he could not choose but save them, they had eat and drunk with him,
sat at the table with him, received power from him, executed the same power. In
thy Name have we done thus and thus; even wrought many wonderful works, see
Mat. 7. 22. Luke 13. 25, 26. And yet these poor creatures was shut out of the
Kingdom. O consider this (I beseech you) before it be too late, lest you say,
Lord, let us come in, when Christ says, thrust him out, verse 28. Hears you
cry, Lord open to us, when he says, Depart I know you not; lest, though you
think of having joy, you have weeping and gnashing of teeth.

3. But Thirdly, The third thing touched in the question, was this; What may
such a one receive of God, who is under the Curse of the Law?

First, They may receive an answer to their Prayers from God, at sometimes, for
some things as they do stand in need of. I find in Scripture that God did hear
these persons, that the Apostle says was cast out, see Genesis 21. 17. And God
heard the voice of the Lad (even of cast out Ishmael) And the Angel of the Lord
called to Hagar out of Heaven (which was the bond woman, and under the Law,
Gal. 4. 30.) and said unto her, Fear not: for God has heard the voice of the
Lad where he is. Friends, It may be you may think, because you have your
prayers answered in some particular things, therefore you may suppose, that as
to your eternal state, your condition is very good. But you must know that God
does hear the cry of a company of Ishmaelites, the sons of the Bondwoman, who
are under the Law as a Covenant of Works. I do not say he hears them as to
their eternal state, but he hears them as to several streights, that they go
through in this life, I, and gives them case and liberty from their trouble.
Here this poor wretch was almost perished for a little water, and he cried, and
God heard him, yea, he heard him out of Heaven. Read also the 107 Psalm, 23.
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them their desire, and sent
leanness to their souls.

But some may say, methinks this is yet more strange, that God should hear the
Prayers, the cries of those that are under the Law, and answered them.

Answ. I told you before, he does not hear them as to their eternal state, but
as to their temporal state; For God as their Creator has a care of them, and
causes the sun to shine upon them, and the rain to distill upon their
substance, Mat. 5. 45. Nay he does give the Beasts in the field their appointed
food, and does hear the young Ravens when they cry, Psalm. 147. 9. which are far
inferior to man. I say therefore, that God does hear the cries of his
Creatures, and does answer them too, though not as to their eternal state; but
may damn them nevertheless when they die for all that.

Secondly, They may receive promises from the mouth of the Lord. There are many
that have had promises made to them by the Lord, in a most eminent manner, and
yet (as I said before) are such as are cast out and called the Children of the
Bondwoman (which is the Law) see. Genesis 21. 17, 18. And the Angel of the Lord
called out of Heaven to Hagar (that was the Bondwoman) saying, fear not: for
God has heard the voice of the Lad where he is. Arise, lift up the Lad, and
hold him in thine hand: FOR I WILL MAKE OF HIM: mark, there is the promise. For
I will make of him (of the son of the Bondwoman) a great Nation.

Thirdly, Nay they may go further; for they may receive another heart than they
had before, and yet be under the Law. There is no man I think, but those that
do not know what they say, that will think or say, that Saul was under the
Covenant of Grace, yet after he had talked with Samuel, and had turned his back
to go from him, says the Scripture; God gave him another heart (1 Samuel 10. 9.)
another heart; mark that, and yet an outcast, a rejected person, 1 Samuel 15.
26, 29. Friends, I beseech you let not these things offend you, but let them
rather beget in your hearts an enquiring into the truth of your condition, and
be willing to be searched to the bottom, and also, that every thing which has
not been planted by the Lords right hand, may be rejected, and that there may
be a reaching after better things, even the things that will not only make thy
soul think thy state is good now; but that thou may be able to look sin,
death hell, the curse of the Law* together with the Judge in the face with
comfort, having such a real, sound, effectual work of God Grace in thy soul,
that when thou hear the Trumpet sound, see the graves fly open, and the
dead come creeping forth out of their holes: when thou shall see the Judgment
set, the books opened, and all the world standing before the Judgment seat; I
say, that then thou may stand, and have that blessed sentence spoken to thy
soul, Come ye blessed of my Father, wherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
before the Foundation of the World, Mat. 25. 34.

Object. But (you will say) for all this we cannot believe that we are under the
Law; for these reasons. As first, because we have found a change in our hearts.
Secondly, Because we do deny that the Covenant of Works will save any. Thirdly,
Because for our parts, we judge our selves far from legal principles; for we
are got up into as perfect a Gospel order, as to matter of practice and
discipline in Church Affairs, as any this day in England, as we judge.

Answ. First, That man's belief that is grounded upon any thing done in him, or
by him only, that man's belief is not grounded upon the death, burial,
resurrection, ascension, and intercession of Jesus Christ, for that man that
has indeed good ground of his eternal salvation, his faith is settled upon
that object which God is well pleased, or satisfied withal, which is that man
that was born of Mary, even her firstborn Son; that is, he does apply by faith
to his soul, the virtues of his death, blood, righteousness, etc. and does look
for satisfaction of soul, no where else, then from that, neither does the soul
seek to give God any satisfaction, as to justification any other ways: but does
willingly and cheerfully accept of, and embrace the virtues of Christ's death,
together with the rest of his things, done by himself on the Cross as a
Sacrifice, and since also as a Priest, Advocate, Mediator, etc. And does so
really and effectually, receive the glories of the same, That thereby; mark
that, thereby he is changed into the same image, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.
18. Thus in general: but yet more particular.

First, To think that your condition is good, because there is some change in
you from a loose profane life, to a more close, honest, and civil life and
conversation; I say to think this testimony sufficient for to ground the stress
of thy salvation upon, is very dangerous. First, Because such a soul does not
only lay the stress of its salvation besides the man Christ Jesus that died
upon the Cross: But Secondly, Because that his confidence is not grounded upon
the Savior of sinners; but upon his turning from gross sins, to a more refined
life (and it may be to the performance of some good duties) which is no
Savior: I say this is very dangerous; therefore read it, and the Lord help you
to understand it; for unless you lay the whole stress of the salvation of your
souls upon the merits of another man (namely Jesus) and that by what he did do,
and is a doing without you; for certain, as sure as God is in Heaven, your
souls will perish: And this must not be notionally neither, as with an
assenting of the understanding only: but it must be by the wonderful,
invisible, invincible power of the Almighty God, working in your souls by his
Spirit, such a real, saving, holy says, that can through the operation of the
same Spirit by which it is wrought, lay hold on, and apply these most heavenly,
most excellent, most meritorious benefits of the man Christ Jesus, not only to
your heads and fancles but to your very souls, and consciences, so effectually,
that you may be able by the same faith to challenge the power, madness, malice,
rage, and destroying nature, either of sin, the Law, death, the Devil, together
with hell, and all other evils, throwing your souls upon the death, burial,
resurrection, and intercession of that man Jesus without, Romans 8, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

But Secondly, Do you think that there was no change in the five foolish
Virgins spoken of in Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3. Yes, there was such a change in them
very people, that the five wise ones could give them admittance of walking with
them, in the most purer ways and institutions of the Gospel of Christ, and yet
but foolish; nay, they walked with them, or shall walk with them, until the
Lord Jesus Christ shall break down from Heaven; and yet but foolish Virgins,
and yet but under the Law; and so under the Curse, as I said before.

Object. But (say you) we have disowned the Covenant of Works, and turned from
that also.

Answ. This is sooner said than done: Alas, alas, poor souls think because
they can say grace, grace, it is freely by grace; therefore they are under the
Covenant of Grace. A very wide mistake; you must understand thus much, that
though you be such as can speak of the Grace of the Gospel, yet if you your
selves be not brought under the very Covenant of Grace, you are yet
notwithstanding your talk and profession, very far wide, of a sense, and of a
share in the Covenant of the Grace of God, held forth in the Gospel.

The Jews were men of a clearer understanding many of them, then to conclude
that the Law, and only the Law, was the way to salvation; for they, even they
that received not the Christ of God, did expect a Savior should come, John 7.
27, 41, 42, 43. but they were men that had not that Gospel Spirit, which alone
is able to lead them to the very life, marrow, or substance of the Gospel in
right terms, and so being muddy in their understandings, being between the
thoughts of a Savior, and the thoughts of the Works of the Law, thinking that
they must be accomplished for the obtaining of a Savior, and his mercy toward
them; I say, between these, they fell short of a Savior. As many poor souls in
these days; they think they must be saved alone by the Savior: yet they think
there is something to be done on their parts, for the obtaining of the good
will of the Savior: as their humiliation for sin, their turning from the same,
their promises and vows, and resolutions to become a new man, join in
Church Fellowship, and what not; and thus they bringing this along with them,
as a means to help them, they fall short of eternal salvation, if they convert
not; see that Scripture, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. The Apostle says there, that they
that sought not did obtain, when they that did seek fell short. What shall we
say then, says he, that the Gentiles which sought not after righteousness,
have attained to righteousness (yea) even the righteousness of faith; and what
else? Why, But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, have not
attained to the Law of righteousness; how came that to pass? because (says he)
they sought it not by says, but as it were; mark, he does not say altogether:
no, but it were, that is, because as they sought, they did a little by the by
lean upon the Works of the Law. And let me tell you, that this is such a hard
thing to beat men off of, that though Paul himself did take the work in hand,
he did find enough to do, touching it; How is he saint to labor in the ten
first Chapters of his Epistle to the Romans, for the establishing of those that
did even profess largely in the Doctrine of Grace? And also in that Epistle to
the Galatians, and yet lost many, do what he could. Now the reason why the
Doctrine of Grace does so hardly down (even with professors) in truth,
effectually; it is because there is a principle naturally in man, that does
argue against the same, and that thus: why? says the soul, I am a sinner, and
God is righteous, holy, and just; his holy Law therefore having been broken by
me, I must by all means, if ever I look to be saved; In the first place be
sorry for my sins. Secondly, Turn from the same. Thirdly, Follow after good
duties, and practice the good things of the Law, and ordinances of the Gospel,
and so hope that God for Christ's sake may forgive all my sins; which is not the
way to God, as a Father in Christ, but the way, the very way to come to God by
the Covenant of Works or the Law, which things I shall more fully clear, when I
speak to the second doctrine.

Again therefore, those that this day profess the Gospel, for the generality of
them, they are such that notwithstanding their professien, they are very
ignorant of that glorious influence, and I^stre of the same; I say, they are
ignorant of the virtue and efficacy of the glorious things of Christ held forth
by and in the Gospel; 2 Cor. 4. 3. which does argue their not being under the
Covenant of Grace, but rather under the Law or old Covenant. As for instance,
If you do come among some professors of the Gospel, in general, you shall have
them pretty busy, and ripe; also able to hold you in a very large discourse
in, several, points of the same glorious Gospel; but if you come to the same
people, and ask them concerning heart-work, or what work the Gospel has
wrought on them, and what appearance they have had of the sweet influences and
virtues on their souls and consciences; it may be they will give you such an
answer as this: I do find by the preaching thereof, that I am changed, and
turned from my sins in a good measure, and also have learned But only in tongue.
to distinguish between the Law and the Gospel, so that for the one, that is,
for the Gospel I can plead, and also can show the weakness, and
unprofitableness of the other; and thus far it is like they may go, which is
not far enough to prove them under the Covenant of Grace, though they may have
their tongues so largely tipped with the profession of the same, see 2 Pet. 2.
20. where he says, For if after they have escaped the pollutious of the world,
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (which was not a
saving knowledge) they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end
of that man is worse than his beginning. See also Mat. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and
also Mat. 7. 22.

Object. But (you will say) is not this a fair declaring of the Work of Grace,
or does it not discover that without all gainsaying, we are under the Covenant
of Grace, when we are able, not only to speak of the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ; but also to tell, and that by experience, that we have been changed
from worse to better, from sin to a holy life by leaving of the same, and that
by hearing of the Word preached.

Ans. A man may in the first place be able to talk of all the mysteries of the
Gospel, and that like an Angel of God, and yet be no more in Gods account, than
the sounding of a Drum, Brass, or the tinkling of a Cimball, which are things
that notwithstanding their sound and great noise, are absolutely void of life,
and motion; and so are accounted with God as nothing, that is, no Christians,
no Believers, not under the Covenant of Grace for all that. See 1 Cor. 13. 1,
2, 3, 4.

Secondly, Men may not only do this, but may also be changed in reality for a
season, from what they formerly were, and yet be nothing at all in the Lords
account, as to an eternal blessing. Read (2 Pet. 2. 20.) the Scripture which I
mentioned before; for indeed that one Scripture is enough to prove all that I
desire to say, as to this very thing; for if you observe, there is enfolded
therein, these following things; first, that reprobates may attain to a
knowledge of Christ. Secondly, This knowledge may be of such weight and force,
that for the present, it may make them escape the pollutions of the world, and
this by hearing the Gospel. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of
the world, through the knowled, (...) of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the last end of that man is
worse than his beginning. Now that they are Reprobates, Some professors take
them at the best, they are but like Dogs, spuing out their filth for a time.
Dogs or Sows. Read further, But (says he) it is happenened to them according
to the true proverb; the Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow,
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, verse 21. 22.

But (say you) our practices in The last part of the Objection.
the worship of God shall testify for us, that we are not under the Law; for
we have by Gods goodness attained to as exact a way of walking in the
ordinances of God, and as near the examples of the Apostles, as ever any
Churches since the primitive time, as we judge.

Answ. What then? do you think that the walking in the order of the Churches of
old, as to matter of outward worship, is sufficient to clear you of your sins
at the judgment day? or do you think that God will be contented with a little
bodily subjection to that which shall vanish, and fade like a flower, when the
Lord shall come from Heaven in flaming fire, with his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.
7, 8. Alas, alis, how will such professors as these are, fall before the
Judgment Seat of Christ? then such a question as this, Friend, how came thou
in hither, not having on thy wedding garment? will make them be speechless, and
fall down into everlasting burnings, thousands on a heap; for you must know,
that it is not then your crying Lord, Lord, that will stand you in stead, nor
your saying, We have eat and drunk in thy presence, that will keep you from
standing on the left hand of Christ.

It is the principle as well as the practice, that shall be enquired into at
that day.

Quest. The principle (you will say) what do you mean by that?

Answ. My meaning is, the Lord Jesus Christ will then enquire and examine,
whether the Spirit from which you acted, was Legal, or Evangelical; that is,
whether it was the spirit of adoption, that did draw you out to the thing you
took in hand, or a mere moral principle, together with some shallow and common
illuminations into the outward way of the Worship of God, according to Gospel
rule.

Quest. But (you will say its like) how should this be made manifest, and
appear?

Answ. I shall speak briefly in answer hereunto, as follows. First then, that
man that does take up any of the ordinances of God, namely, as Prayer, Baptism,
breaking of Bread, Reading, Hearing, Alms-deeds, or the like; I say, he that
does practice any of these or such like, supposing thereby to procure the love
of Christ to his own soul, he does do what he does from a Legal, and not from
an Evangelical, or Gospel Spirit, as thus; for a man to suppose that God will
hear him, for his Prayers sake, for his Alms-sake, for his Hamiliation sake, or
because he has promised to make God amends hereafter, whereas there is no such
thing as a satisfaction to be made to God by our Prayers, or whatever we can
do; I say, there is no such way to have reconciliation with God in. And so
also, for men to think, because they are got into such and such an Ordinance,
and have crowded themselves into such and such a Society, that therefore they
have got pretty good shelter from the wrath of the Almighty; when alas poor
souls there is no such thing; No, but God will so set his face against such
professors, that his very looks will make them to tear their very flesh; yea,
make them to wish, would they had the biggest Millstone in the world hanged
about their necks, and they cast into the midst of the Sea. For friends, let me
tell you, though you can now content your selves, without the holy, harmless,
undefiled, perfect righteousness of Christ; yet there is a day a coming, in
which there is not one of you shall be saved; but those that are, and shall be
found clothed with that righteousness: God will say to ALL the rest, Take them,
bind them hand and foot, and cast them into outer darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth (Mat. 22. 13.) for Christ will not say unto men
in that day, Come, which of you made a profession of me, and walked in
Church Fellowship with my Saints? no, but then it shall be enquired into, who
has the reality of the truth of grace wrought in their hearts: and for
certain, he that misseth of that, shall surely be cast into the lake of fire;
there to burn with the devils and damned men and women; there to undergo the
wrath of the eternal God, and that not for a day, a month, a year; but for
ever, for ever, for ever, and ever, there is that which cutteth to the quick;
therefore look to it, and consider now what you do, and whereon you hang your
souls; for it is not every pin that will hold in the judgment, nor every
foundation that will be able to hold up the house against those, mighty,
terrible, souldrowning floods, and destroying tempests, which then will roar
against the soul and body of a sinner (Luke the 6. the three last verses) and
if the principle be rotten, all will fall, all will come to nothing. Now the
principle is this, not to do things because we would be saved, but to do them
from this, namely, because we do really believe that we are and shall be saved;
but do not mistake me, I do not say we should slight any holy duties (God
forbid) but I say, he that does look for life because he does do good duties,
he is under the Covenant of Works the Law: let his duties be never so eminent,
so often, so fervens, so zealous. I, and I say, as I said before, that if any
man or men, or multitudes of people, do get into never so high, so eminent, and
clear practices, and Gospel Order, as to Church Discipline, if it be done to
this end I have been speaking, from this principle; they must and shall have
these sad things fall to their share, which I have made mention of.

Object. But (you will say) can a man use Gospel Ordinances with a Legal spirit.

Answ. Yes as easily as the Jews could use and practice circumcision, though
not the Moral, or Ten Commandments. For this I shall be bold to affirm, that it
is not the Commands of the New Testament administration, that can keep a man
from using of its self in a legal spirit; for know this for certain, that it is
the principle, not the command, that makes the subjecter to the same, either
Legal or Evangelical, and so his obedience from that command to be from Legal
convictions, or Evangelical principles.

Now herein the devil is wondrous subtle and crafty, in suffering people to
practice the ordinances and commands of the Gospel, if they do but do them in a
Legal spirit, I beseeth you, do not think that because I say this therefore I
am against the Ordinances of the Gospel, for I do honor them in their places:
yet would not that any of them should be idolized, or done in a wrong spirit.
from a spirit of works; for he knows then, that if he can but get the soul to
go on in such a spirit, though they do never so many duties, he shall hold them
sure enough; for he knows full well, that thereby they do set up something in
the room of, or at the least to have some (though but a little) share with the
Lord Jesus Christ in their salvation; and if he can but get thee here, he knows
that he shall cause thee by thy depending a little upon the one, and so thy
whole dependence being not upon the other (that is Christ, and taking of him
upon his own terms) thou will fall short of life by Christ, though thou do very
much busy thyself, in a suitable walking, in an outward conformity to the
several commands of the Lord Jesus Christ. And let me tell you plainly, that I
do verily believe, that as Satan by his Instruments did draw many of the
Galatians by Circumcision (though, I say, it was none of the commands of the
moral Law) to be debtors to do upon pain of eternal damnation, the whole of the
moral Law: So also Satan in the time of the Gospel, does use even the commands
laid down in the Gospel (some of them) to bind the soul over to do the same
Law; the thing being done and walked in, by, and in the same spirit: For as I
said before, it is not the obedience to the command, that makes the subjecter
thereto Evangelical, or of a Gospel Spirit; but contrariwise, the principle
that leads out the soul to the doing of the command, that makes the persons
that do thus practice any command, together with the command by them practiced,
either Legal or Evangelical.

As for instance, prayer it is a Gospel command; yet if he that prays, does it
in a Legal spirit, he does make that which in it self, is a Gospel command, an
occasion of leading him into a Covenant of Works, in as much as he does it by,
and in that old Covenant spirit.

Again, giving of Alms, is a Gospel command; yet if I do give Alms from a Legal
principle, the command to me is not Gospel but Legal, and it binds me over (as
aforesaid) to do the whole Law, For he is not a Jew (not a Christian) that is
one outwardly, that is one, only by an outward subjection to the ordinances of
prayer, hearing, reading, baptism, breaking of bread, etc. But he is a Jew (a
Christian) which is one inwardly, who is rightly principled, and practices the
ordinances of the Lord from the leadings forth of the spirit of the Lord from a
true and saving faith in the Lord; Romans 2. 28, 29.

Those men spoken of in the 7. of Matthew, for certain, for all their great
declaration, did not do what they did from a right Gospel Spirit; for had they,
no question but the Lord would have said, Well done good and faithful servants:
but in that the Lord Jesus does turn them away into Hell, notwithstanding their
great profession of the Lord, and of their doing in his name, it is evident
that notwithstanding all that they did do, they were still under the Law, and
not under that Covenant as true believers are (to wit) the Covenant of Grace,
and if so, then all their duties that they did, of which they boasted before
the Lord, was not in, and by a right Evangelical principle (or Spirit.

Again, says the Apostle, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. but
there are some that do even practice baptism, breaking of bread, together with
other ordinances, and yet are unbelievers; therefore unbelievers doing these
things, they are not done in faith, but sin: now to do these things in sin, or
without the faith, it is not to do things in an Evangelical or Gospel Spirit;
also they that do these things in a Legal spirit the very practicing of them,
renders them not under the Law of Christ, as head of his Church but the works
they do are of so much contradiction to the Gospel of God, or the Covenant of
Grace, that they that do them thus, do even set up against the Covenant of
Grace; and the very performance of them is of such force that it is sufficient
to drown them that are subjecters thereunto, even under the Covenant of Works;
but this poor souls are not aware of, and there is their misery.

Quest. But have you no other way to discover the things of the Gospel, how
they are done with a Legal principle, but those you have already made mention
of?

Answ. That thou might be indeed satisfied herein, I shall show you the very
manner and way that a Legal, or old Covenant converted professor (bear with the
terms) does take, both in the beginning, middle, and the end of his doing of
any duty or command, or whatsoever it be that he does do.

First, He thinking this or that to be his duty, and considering of the same,
he is also presently persuaded in his own conscience, that God will not accept
of him, if he leave it undone; he seeing that he is short of his duty (as he
supposes) while this is undone by him, and also judging that God is angry with
him, until the thing be done* he in the second place sets to the doing of the
duty, to the end he may be able to pacify his conscience by doing of the same,
persuading of himself that now the Lord is pleased with him for doing of it.
Thirdly, Having done it, he contents himself, sits down at his ease until some
further convictions of his duty to be done, which when he sees and knows, he
does do it as aforesaid, from the same principle as he did the former, and so
goes on in his progress of profession. This is to do things from a Legal
principle, and from an old Covenant spirit; for thus runs that Covenant, The
man that does these things shall live in them, or by them, Levit. 18. 5. Ezekiel.
20. 11. Gal. 3. 12. Romans 10. 5. but more of this in the use of this Doctrine.

Object. But (you will say) by these words of yours, you do seem to deny that
there are conditional promises in the Gospel as is clear, in that you strike at
such practices as are conditional, and commanded to be done upon the same.

Answ. The thing that I strike at is this; that a man in, or, with a legal
spirit, should not, ^ay cannot, do any conditional command of the Gospel
acceptable, as to his eternal state; because he does it in an old Covenant
spirit. No man puts new Wine into old Bottles: but new Wine must have new
Bottles; a Gospel command must have a Gospel spirit, or else the Wine will
break the Bottles, or the principle will break the command.

Object. Then you do grant that there are conditional promises in the New
Testament, as in the moral Law, or ten Commands.

Answ. Though this be true; yet the conditional promises in the New Testament,
do not call to the same people in the same state of (...) ^^neracy to fulfill
them, upon the same conditions.

The Law, and the Gospel being two distinct Covana^^s, they are made in div^rs
ways, and the nature of the conditions also being not the same as (...) (...)
Apostle; The (...) (...) of the Law says one thing, and the righteousness of
Faith (...) ^^^ibe^, Rome (...) (...) that is, the great condition in the (...)
is, If you do these things you shall live by them: but the condition, even the
greatest condition* said down for a poor (...) do, as to salvation (for) it
(...) that we speak of) is to believe that my (...) be forgiven me for Jesus
Christ's sake, without the works (...) righteousness of the Law, on my part, to
help forward, Romans 4. 5. To him that works not (such the Apostle) (for
salvation) (...) (...) (...) on him that justifies the ^^godly, his faith;
mark, his faith is counted for righteousness. So that we (says he) (...), that
a man is justified by faith, without; mark again, without the deeds of the Law.
Romans 3. 28.

But again, there is never a condition in the Gospel, that can be fulfilled by
an unbelieve^; and therefore, whether there be conditions, or whether there be
none; it makes no matter to thee, who art without the Faith of Christ* for it
is unpossible for thee in that state to do them, so at to be ever the better*
as to thy eternal state; therefore lest thou should (...) thy soul upon the
conditions laid down in the Gospel, as thou will do, if thou go about to do
them, only with a Legal spirit: but I say, to prevent this, see if thou can
fulfill the first condition; that is, to believe that all thy sins are forgiven
thee; not for any condition that has been, or can be done by thee, but merely
for the man's sake, that did hang on Mount Calvary, between two Thieves, some
sixteen hundred years ago and odd: And I say, see if thou can believe that at
that time, he did (when he hanged on the Cross) give full satisfaction for all
thy sins, before thou in thy person had committed ever a one. I say, see if
thou can believe this, and take heed thou deceive not thy self with an
historical, notional, or traditional acknowledgement of the same. And Secondly,
See if thou can so well fulfill this condition, that the very virtue and
efficacy that it ^hath on thy soul, will engage thee to fulfill those other
conditions; really in love to that man* whom thou should believe, has
frankly, and freely forgiven thee all, without any condition acted by thee, to
move him thereto, according to that saying in the 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. and then
thy doing will arise from a contrary principle, than otherwse it will do; that
is, then thou will not act, and do because thou would be accepted of God;
but because thou have some good hope in thy heart, that thou art accepted of
him already, and not on thine, but wholly and alone upon another man's account;
for here runs the Gospel Spirit of Faith; mark, We believe and therefore speak;
So we believe, and therefore do. 2 Cor. 4. 13. Take heed therefore that you do
not, that you may believe; but rather believe so effectually, that you may do,
even all that Jesus does require of you from a right principle, even out of
love to your dear Lord Jesus Christ, which thing I shall speak to more fully by
and by.

Object. But what do you mean by those expressions, Do not do that you may
believe, but believe so effectually that you may do.

Answ. When I say, do not do that you may believe; I mean, do not think that
any of the things that thou can do, will procure, or purchase faith from God
unto thy soul; for that is still the old Covenant Spirit, the Spirit of the
Law, to think to have it for thy doing. They that are saved, they are saved by
Grace, through faith, and that not of themselves; not for any thing that they
can do, for they are both the free gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. Not of (doing, or
of) works, lest any man should (be proud, and) boast verse 9. Now some people
be so ignorant, as to think that God will give them Christ, and so all the
merits of his, if they will be but vigilant, and do something to please God,
that they may obtain him at his hands; but let me tell them they may lose a
thousand souls quickly, if they had so many, by going this way to work, and yet
be never the better; for the Lord does not give his Christ to (...), upon such
conditions, but he does give him freely, that is, without having respect to any
thing that is in thee, Rev. 22. 17 Isa 55. 1, 2. To him that is a thirst will
give; he does not say I will sell, but I will give him the water of life
freely, Rev. 21. 6.

Fow if Christ does give it, and that freely, then he does not sell it for any
thing that is in the creature; but Christ does give himself, as also does his
Father, and that freely; not because there is any thing in us, or done by us,
that moves him thereunto. If it were by doing, then says Paul, Grace is not
Grace, seeing it is obtained By works; but Grace is Grace, and that is the
reason it is given to men without their works, Romans 11. 6. And if it be by
Grace, that is, if it be a free gift from God, without any thing foreseen, as
done, or to be done by the creature, then it is not of works, which is clear:
therefore it is grace without the works of the Law; but if you say ^ay, it is
of something in the man, done by him, that moves God thereunto; then you must
conclude, that either Grace is no Grace, or else that Works are Grace, and not
Works. Do but read with understanding, Romans 11. 6.

Now before I go any further, it may be necessary to speak a word or two to
some poor souls that are willing to close in with Jesus Christ, and would
willingly take him upon his own terms, only they being muddy in their minds,
and have not yet attained the understanding of the terms and conditions of the
two Covenanss, they are kept off from closing with Christ; and all is, because
they see they can do nothing. As for example, come to some souls, and ask them
how they do, they will tell you presently, that they are so bad that it is not
to be expressed: If you bid them believe in Jesus Christ, they will answer,
that they cannot believe; if you ask them why they cannot believe; they will
answer, because their hearts are so hard, so dead, so dull, so backward to good
duties; and if their hearts were but better, if they were more earnest, if they
could pray better, and keep their hearts more from running after sin, then they
could believe; but should they believe with such vile hearts, and presume to
believe in Christ, and be so filthy: Now all this is, because the Spirit of the
Law still rules in such a soul, and blinds them so that they cannot see the
terms of the Gospel. To clear this, take the substance of the drift of this
poor soul, which is this: If I was better than I think I could believe, but
being so bad as I am, that is the reason that I cannot; this is just to do
something that I may believe, to work that I may have Christ, to do the Law
that I may have the Gospel; or thus to be righteoua that I may come to Christ.
O man! thou must go quite back again, thou must believe, because thou can not
pray, because thou can not do; thou must believe, because there is nothing in
thee (naturally) that is good, or desires after good, or else thou will never
come to Christ as a sinner; and if so, then Christ will not receive thee; and
if so, then thou may see that to keep off from Christ, because thou can
not do, is to keep from Christ by the Law, and to stand of from him because
thou can not buy him. Thus having spoken something by the way, for the
direction of those souls that would come to Christ, I shall return to the
former discourse wherein arises this objection.

Object. But you did but even now put souls upon fulfilling the first condition
of the Gospel, even to believe in Christ, and so be saved; but now you say, it
is alone by Grace, without condition; and therefore by these words, there is
first a contradiction to your former sayings, and also that men may be saved
without the condition of faith, which to me seems a very strange thing. I
desire therefore that you would clear out what you have said, as to my
satisfaction.

Answ. Though there be a condition commanded in the Gospel, yet he that
commands the condition, does not leave his children to their own natural
abilities, that in their own strength they should fulfill them (as the Law
does) but the same God that does command that the condition be fulfilled, even
he, does help his children by his holy Spirit, to fulfill the same condition,
For it is God that works in you, mark, in you (believers) both to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. Thou have wrought all our works in
us, and for us, Isa. 26. 12. So that the condition be fulfilled, it is not done
in the ability of the creature.

But Secondly, Faith as it is a gift of God, or an act of ours, take it which
way you will; If we speak properly of salvation, it is not the first, nor the
second cause of our salvation; but the third, and that but instrumentally
neither; that is, it only lays hold of, and applies to us that which saves
us, which is the love of God, through the merits of Christ, which are the two
main causes of our salvation, without which all other things are nothing,
whether it be faith, hope, love, or whatever can be done by us. And to this,
the great Apostle of the Gentiles speaks fully; for says he, God who is rich
in mercy loved us, even when we were dead in our sins, Ephesians. 2. 4. (that is,
when we were without faith) and that was the cause why we believe; for he
thereby has quickened us together, through the meritorious cause, which is
Christ, and so has saved us by Grace, that is, of his own voluntary love and
good will; the effects of which was this, he gave us faith to believe in
Christ, read soberly that second of the Ephesians, at the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 verses.
Faith as the gift of God is not the Savior, as our act does merit nothing.
Faith was not the cause that God gave Christ at the first, neither is it the
cause why God converts men to Christ: but faith is a gift bestowed upon us, by
the gracious God, the nature of which is to lay hold on Christ, that God before
did give for a Ransom, to redeem sinners; this faith has its nourishment, and
supplies from the same God, that at the first did give it; and is the only
instrument, through the Spirit, that does keep the soul in a comfortable frame,
both to do and suffer for Christ; helps the soul to receive comfort from
Christ, when it can get none from it self, bears up the soul in its progress
heaven-wards: but that it is the first cause of salvation, that I deny; or that
it is the second, I deny: but is only the instrument, or hand, that receives
the benefits that God has prepared for thee before thou had any faith: so
that we do nothing for salvation, as we are men. But if we speak properly, it
was Gods Grace that moved him to give Christ a Ransom for sinners, and the same
God with the same Grace, that does give to the soul says to believe, and so by
believing to close in with him, whom God out of his love and pity, did send
into the world to save sinners; so that all the works of the creature are shut
out, as to justification and life, and men are saved freely by Grace. I shall
speak no more here, but in my discourse upon the second Covenant, I shall
answer a hell-bred Objection or two, to forewarn sinners, how they turn the
Grace of God into wantonness.

And thus you see I have briefly spoken to you something touching the Law.
First, What it is, and when given. Secondly, How sad those men's conditions are
that are under it. Thirdly, Who they are that be under it. Fourthly, How far
they may go, and what they may do, and receive, and yet be under it, which has
been done by way of answers to several questions, for the better satisfaction
of those that may stand in doubt of the truth of what has been delivered.

Now in the next place, I should come to some application of the truth of that
which has been spoken; but I shall in the first place speak something to the
second Doctrine, and then afterward I shall speak something by way of Use and
Application to this first Doctrine.

The second Doctrine now to be spoken to, is to show, that the People of God
are not under the Law but under Grace.
For ye are not under the Law but under Grace,

Rom 6. 14. YOu may well remember that from these words, I did observe these
two great truths of the Lord. First, That there are some in Gospel times, that
are under the Law, or Covenant of Works.

Secondly, That there is (...) a believer under the Law (or Covenant of works)
but under Grace.

I have spoken something to the former of these truths (to wit) that there are
some under the Law, together with who they are, and what their condition is,
that are under it. Now I am to speak to the second, and to show you who they
are, and what their condition is, that are under that.

But before I come to that, I shall I touched upon this in the first Doctrine.
speak a few words, to show you what the word GRACE in this place signifies;
for the word Grace in the Scripture refers sometimes to favor with men
(Esther 2. 7. Genesis 39. 4. Chap. 50. 4, 33, 10.) sometimes to holy
qualifications of Saints (2 Cor. 8. 7.) and sometimes to hold forth the
condescension of Christ, in coming down from the glory which he had with his
Father, before the world was, to be made of no reputation, and a servant to men
(2 Cor. 8. 9. Phil. 2. 7.) Again, sometime it is taken for the free, rich, and
unchangeable love of God to man, through Jesus Christ; that for our cause and
sakes, did make himself poor: and so it is to be understood in these words, For
you are not under the Law (to be cursed, and damned, and sent headlong to hell)
but (you are) under Grace, to be saved, to be pardoned, to be preserved, and
kept by the mighty power of God, through ^aith (which alone is the gift of
Grace) unto eternal glory. This one Scripture alone proves the same, Ephesians. 2. 8.
For by Grace you are saved, by free grace, by rich grace, by unchangeable
grace. And you are saved from the curse of the Law, from the power, guilt, and
filth of sin, from the power, malice, madness, and rage of the devil, from the
wishes, curses, and desires of wicked men, from the hot, scalding, flaming,
fiery furnace of hell, from being arraigned, as malefactors, convinced, judged,
condemned, and fettered with the chains of our sins to the devils, to all
eternity; and all this freely, freely by his grace (Romans 3. 24.) by rich grace,
unchangable grace; for says he, I am God, and change not: therefore ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed, Mal. 3. 6. This is grace indeed.

The word [GRACE] therefore in this Scripture (Rom 6. 14.) is to be understood
of the free love of God in Christ to sinners, by virtue of the new Covenant, in
delwering them from the power of sin, from the curse and condemning power of
the Old Covenant, from the destroying nature of sin, by its continual workings;
as is all evident, if you read with understanding the words as they lie, For
(says he) sin shall not have dominion over you, or it shall not domineer,
reign, or destroy you, though you have transgressed against the Covenant of
works (the Law) and the reason is rendered in these words. For ye are not under
the Law, that is, under that which accuses, charge, condemns, and brings
execution on the soul for sin* But under Grace; that is, under that which frees
you, forgives you, keeps you, and justifies you from all your sins,
adversaries, or whatever may come in to lay any thing to your charge, to damn
you. For that is truly called grace in this sense, that does set a man free
from all his sins, deliver him from all the curses of the Law, and what else
can be laid to his charge, freely without any foresight in God to look at what
good will be done by the party that has offended: and also that does keep the
soul by the same power through faith (which also is his own proper gift) unto
eternal glory.

Again, that is a pardon not conditional but freely given; Consider first, it
is set in opposition to works. You are not under the Law. Secondly, The promise
that is made to them (saying, Sin shall not have dominion over you) does not
run with any condition, as on their part to be done; but merely and alone
because they were (under) or because they had the Grace of God extended to
them. Sin shall not have dominion over you, For (mark the reason) For you are
not under the Law, but under Grace. The words being thus opened, and the truth
thus laid down, how there is never a believer under the Covenant of Works, but
under Grade, the free, rich, unchangeable love of God; it remains that in the
first place we prove the Doctrine, and after that proceed.

Now in the Doctrine there is two things to be considered and proved. First,
that believers are under Grace. Secondly, Not under the Law as a Covenant of
works (for so you must not understand me) For these two, we need go no further
then the very words themselves, the first part of the words proves the first
part of the Doctrine, You are not under the Law; the second part proves the
other, But (ye are) under Grace.

But besides these consider with me a few things for the demonstrating of these
truths; as,

First, They are not under the Law; because their sins are pardoned; which
could not be if they were dealt withal according to the Law, and their being
under it; for the Law allows of no repentance, but accuses, curses, and
condemns every one that is under it. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. But I say,
believers having their sins forgiven them, it is because they are under
another, even a New Covenant, Heb. 8. 8. Behold the days come, says the Lord,
that I will make a new Covenant with them: For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more,
verse 4.

Secondly, They are not under the Law; because their sins and iniquities are
not only forgiven, but they are forgiven them freely: they that stand in the
first Covenant, and continue there, are to have never a sin forgiven them,
unless they can give God a complete satisfaction; for the Law calls for it at
their hands, saying, Pay me that thou owe. O but when God deals with his
Saints by the Covenant of Grace, it is not so, for it is said, And when he saw
they had nothing to pay, he frankly and freely, forgave them all. I will heal
their backslidings and love them freely. I will blot out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, etc, Luke 7. 42. Hosea 14. 4. Isaiah 43. 25.

Thirdly, The Saints are not under the Law, because the righteousness that they
stand justified before God in, is not their own actual righteousness by the
Law, but by imputation; and is really the righteousness of another, namely, of
God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. Even the righteousness of God,
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, which is unto all, and upon all (that is
imputed to) them that believe, Romans 3. 22. But if they were under the Old
Covenant, the Covenant of Works, then their righteousness must be their own But
it is impossible that the righteousness of man by the Law should save him.
or no forgiveness of sins, If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? but if
thou transgress, sin lies at the door, says the Law, Genesis 4. 7.

Fourthly, In a word, whatsoever they do receive, whether it be conversion to
God, whether it be pardon of sin, whether it be faith or hope, whether it be
righteousness, whether it be strength, whether it be the Spirit, or the fruits
thereof, whether it be victory over sin, death or hell, whether it be heaven,
everlasting life, and glory unexpressible, or whatsoever it be, it comes to
them freely, God having no first eye to what they would do, or should do, for
the obtaining of the same. But to take this in pieces. 1. In a word, are they
converted? God finds them first, for says he, I am found of them that sought
me not, Isa. 65. 1.

2. Have they pardon of sin? They have that also freely, I will heal their
backslidings, and love them freely, Hos. 14. 4.

3. Have they faith? It is the gift of God in Christ Jesus, and he is not only
the author (that is the beginner thereof) but he does also perfect the same,
Heb. 12. 2.

4. Have they hope? It is God that is the first cause thereof. Remember thy
word unto thy servaut, wherein THOU have caused me to hope, Psalm. 119. 49.

5 Have they righteousness? It is the free gift of God, Romans 5. 17.

6. Have they strength to do the work of God in their generations? or any other
thing that God would have them do, that also is a free gift from the Lord; for
without him, we neither do, nor can do any thing, John 15. 5.

7. Have we comfort, or consolation? We have it not for what we have done, but
from God through Christ; for he is the God of all our comforts and
consolations, 2 Cor. 1.

8. Have we the spirit, or the fruits thereof? It is the gift of the Father.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him? Luke 11. 13. Thou have wrought all our works for us, Isa. 26. 12.

And so I say, whether it be victory over sin, death, hell, or the devil, it is
given us by the victory of Christ* But thanks be to God which has given us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57. Romans 7. 24, 25. Heaven
and glory it is also the gift of him who gives his richly all things to enjoy,
Mat. 25.

So that these things, if they be duly and soberly considered, will give
satisfaction in this thing. I might have aded many more for the clearing of
these things: At first, when God came to man to convert him, he found him a
dead man, Ephesians 2. 1, 2. he found him an enemy to God, Christ, and the salvation
of his own soul; he found him wallowing in all manner of wickedness, he found
him taking pleasure therein, with all delight and greediness.

2. He was fain to quicken him by putting his Spirit into him, and to translate
him by the mighty operation thereof.

3. He was fain to reveal Christ Jesus unto him, man being altogether
senseless, and ignorant of his blessed Jesus, Mat. 11. 25, 27. 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8,
9, 10.

4. He was fain to break the snare of the devil, and to let poor man, poor
bound and fettered man, out of the chains of the enemy.

Now we are to proceed, and the things that we are to treat upon in the second
place, are these.

First, Besides the reasons already given.
why it is a free and unchangeable grace.

Secondly, Who they are, that are actually brought into his free and
unchangeable Covenant of Grace, and how they are brought in.

Thirdly, What are the privileges of those that are actually brought into this
free and glorious grace of the glorious God of heaven, and glory.

For the first, Why it is a free and unchangeable grace; and for the opening of
this, we must consider, First, How and through whom this grace does come to be,
first free to us, and secondly unchangeable. This grace is free to us, through
conditions in another; that is, by way of Convenant, or Bargain; for this Grace
comes by way of Covenant or Bargain to us, yet made with another, for us.

First, That it comes by way of Covenant, Contract, or Bargain (though not
personally with us) be pleased to consider these Scriptures, where it is said,
Psalm. 89. 3. The word David in this place signifies Christ, as also in these
Scriptures.
I have made a Covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant, And
as for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant (speaking of Christ) have I sent
forth the prisoners out of the pit, wherein was no water, Zech. 9. 9, 10, 11.
Again, You have sold your selves for naught, and you shall be bought without
money. Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24. Chap. 37. 24, 25. Blessed be the Lord (therefore says
Zacharias) for he has visited and (also) REDEEMED his people. And has raised
up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant David. As he spoke
by the mouth I might give you more Scriptures, but pray consider the second
thing.
of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began: that we should be
saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us: To perform his
mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant, or Bargain,
Luke 1, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72. And if any should be offended with the plainness of
these words as some poor souls may be through ignorance, let them be pleased to
read soberly that 49. Chapter of the the Prophet Isaiah, from the 1. verse to
the 12. and there they may see that it runs as plain a Bargain, as if two
should be making of a Bargain between themselves, and concluding upon several
conditions on both sides: But more of this hereafter.

Now secondly, This Covenant (I say) was made with one, not with many; and also
confirmed in the conditions of it with one, not with several, First, That the
Covenant was made with one, see Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and to his seed was
the promises made; he says not to seeds, as of many; but as of one; and to thy
seed, which is Christ, ver. 17. And this I say, the Covenant which was
confirmed before of God in Christ, etc. The Covenant was made with the seed of
Abraham, not the seeds, but the seed, which is the Lord Jesus Christ, our head
and undertaker in the things concerning the Covenant.

3. The condition was made with one, and also accomplished by him alone, and
not by several; yet in the nature, and for the everlasting deliverance of many;
even by one man Jesus Christ, as it is clear from Romans 5. 15, 16, 17, etc. and
in Zech 9. 11. the Lord says to Christ, And as for thee; mark, as for thee
also, by the blood of the Covenant, or as for thee whose Covenant was by blood;
that is, the conditions of the Covenant was, that thou should spill thy
blood; which having been done in the account of God (says he) I according to
my condition, have let go the prisoners, or sent them out of the pit wherein
was no water; those Scriptures in Galatians the 3. at the 16. and 17. verses
that are above cited, are notable to our purpose, the sixteenth verse says, It
was made with Christ; and the seventeenth says, It was also confirmed in, or
with God in him, pray read with understanding. Now (says Paul) the promises
were not made unto seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. -- The Law which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot
disanul, that it should make the promise of none effect. Not that the Covenant
was with Abraham and Christ together, as two persons that were the undertakers
of the same; the promise was made with, or, to Abraham afterward: but the
Covenant with Christ before. Further, that the Covenant was not personally made
with Abraham, no, nor with any of the Fathers, neither so as that they were the
persons that should stand engaged, to be the accomplishers thereof, either in
whole or in part, which is very clear.

First, Because this Covenant was not made with God and the creature; not with
another poor Adam, that only stood upon the strength of natural abilities: but
this Covenant was made with the second person, with the eternal Word of God;
with him that was every ways as holy, as pure, as infinite, as powerful, and as
everlasting as God (Prove. 22. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Zech. 13. 7. Rev.
1. 11, 17, 22, 13, 16. Isa. 9. 6. Phil. 2. 6. Heb. 1.)

Secondly, This Covenant or Bargain was made indeed and in truth, before man
was in being. Oh! God thought of the salvation of man before there was any
transgression of man; for then I say, and not since then, was the Covenant of
Grace made with the undertaker thereof; for all the other sayings are to show
unto us that glorious plot and contrivance that was concluded on before time
between the Father and the Son, which may very well be concluded on for a truth
from the Word of God, if you consider; First, That the Scripture does declare
that the price was agreed on by the Son before time; the promise was made to
him by the Father, that he should have his Bargain before time, and the choice,
who they were that should be saved, was made before time, even before the world
began.

For the First, That the price was agreed upon before the World began; Consider
the word which speaks of the price that was paid for sinners, even The
precious Blood of Christ; It says of him, who verily was foreordained before
the foundation of the world, but was made manifest in these last times for you,
who by him do believe, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Mark, it was foreordained or
concluded on between the Father and his Son, before the world began.

Secondly, The promise from God to the Son was also made in the same manner, as
it is clear, where the Apostle says with comfort to his soul, that he had
hopes of eternal life, which God that cannot lie promised before the World
began, Tit. 1. 2. which could be to none but the Mediator of the New Covenant,
because there was none else to whom it should be made but he.

Thirdly, The choice was also made then, even before man had a being in this
world, as it is evident where he says, Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed US with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places IN Christ, according as he has chosen US in him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians.
1. 3, 4. Nay, did I look upon it here to be necessary, I should show you very
largely and Did I think this would ^^ect with any opposition, I should be in
this more large.
clearly, that God did not only make the Covenant with Christ before the world
began, and the conditions thereof: But I could also show you that the very
Saints qualifications as part of the Covenant, was then concluded on by the
Father and the Son, according to these Scriptures, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Chap. 2. 10.
and Romans 8. 28. which it may be I may touch upon further anon.

But Thirdly, This Covenant was not made with any of the Fathers, neither in
whole, nor in part, as the undertakers thereof; for then it must be also
concluded, that they are Copartners with Christ in our salvation, and so, that
Christ is not Mediator alone: but this would be blasphemy for any one to
surmize. And therefore by the way, when thou read of the New Covenant in
Scripture, as though it was made with Adam, Noah, Abraham, or David, thou art
to consider thus with thy self; First, That God spoke to them in such a way,
for to show, or signify unto us, how he did make the Covenant, that he did
make with Christ, before the world began, they being types of him. Secondly,
That he thereby might let them understand, that he was the same then as he is
now, and now as he was then; and that then it was resolved on between his Son
and He, that in after ages his Son should in their natures, from their loins,
and for their sins be born of a Woman, hanged on the Cross, etc. for them: for
all along you may see that when he speaks to them of the New Covenant, he
mentions their seed, their seed still aiming at Christ; Christ the Seed of the
Woman, was to break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 17. Psalm. 87. 36. Now
to Abraham and his Seed, was the promise made, his seed shall endure for ever,
and his Throne as the days of heaven, etc. still pointing at Christ. And
Thirdly, To stirup their faith and expectations to be constant unto the end, in
waiting for that which he and his Son had concluded on before time, and what he
had since the conclusion declared unto the world by the Prophets. Fourthly, It
appears that the heart of God was much delighted therein also, as is evident,
in that he was always in every age, declaring of that unto them, which before
he had prepared for them. O this good God of Heaven!

Object. But (you will say perhaps) the Scriptures say plainly, that the New
Covenant was, and is made with Believers, saying, The days come, says the
Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House
of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the
day in which I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, etc. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12,
Jer. 31. 33. So that it does not run with Christ alone, but with believers
also. I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel and Judah, etc.

1. Answ. First, It cannot be meant that the New Covenant was made with Christ,
and the House of Israel and Judah as the undertaker thereof: for so it was made
with Christ alone, which is clear in that, it was made long before the House of
Israel and Judah had a being, as I showed before.

2. Answ. But Secondly, These words here are spoken, first to show rather the
end of the Ceremonies, then the beginning or rise or the New Covenant. Mind a
little, The Apostle is laboring to beat the Jews (to whom he wrote this
Epistle) off of the Ceremonies of the Law, of the Priests, Altar, Offerings,
Temple, etc. and to bring them to the right understanding of the thing and
things that they held forth, which was to come, and to put an end to those. If
you do but understand the Epistle to the Hebrews, it is a discourse that
shows, that the Son of God being come, there is an end put to the Ceremonies;
for they were to continue so long and no longer. It, says the Apostle, stood
in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances imposed on them
until the time of reformation; that is, until Christ did come. But Christ being
come an high Priest of good things to come, etc -- puts an end to the things
and ordinances of the Levitical Priesthood, read the 7, 8, 9, 10. Chapters,
and you will find this true. So then, when he says, The days come in which I
will make a New Covenant, it is rather to be meant a changing of the
administration, a taking away the type, the shadow, the Ceremonies from the
House of Israel* and Judah, and revealing, by the Birth of Christ, and the
Death of Christ, and the offering of the Body of him, whom the shaddows and
types did point out, to be indeed he, whom God the Father had given for a
Ransom by Covenant for the souls of the Saints; and also to manifest the truth
of that Covenant, which was made between the Father and the Son before the
world began: for though the New Covenant was made before the world began, and
also every one in all ages was saved by the virtue of that Covenant; yet that
Covenant was never so clearly made manifest, as at the coming, death, and
resurrection of Christ; and therefore says the Scripture, He has brought life
and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to the works of
righteousness which we have done: but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given us in Christ before the world began (there is the Covenant) but
it was made MANIFEST by the APPEARING of our Savior Jesus Christ who has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to LIGHT through the Gospel.
Therefore I say, these words are rather to discover, that the time was come to
change the dispensation, to take away the type and bring in the substance, and
so manifesting that more clearly, which before lay hid in dark sayings and
figures. And this is usual with God to speak in this manner.

Again, if at any time you do find in the Scripture, that the Covenant of Works
is spoken of, as the first Covenant that was manifested, and so before the
second Covenant; yet you must understand that it was so only, as to
manifestation, that is, it was first given to man, yet not made before that
which was made Christ, And indeed it was requisite that it should be given, or
made known first, that thereby there might be a way made for the second by its
discovering of sin, and the sad state that man was in after the fall, by reason
of that. And again, that the other might be made the more welcome to the sons
of men. And in this did Yet the second Adam was before the first, and also the
second Covenant before the first. This is a Riddle.
Christ in time most gloriously answer Adam, who was the figure of Christ (Romans
5.) as well as of other things: for as the first Covenant was made with the
first Adam, so was the second Covenant made with the second; for these are and
were the two great public persons, or representators of the whole world, as to
the first and second Covenants; and therefore you find God speaking on this
wise in Scripture concerning the New Covenant, My Covenant shall stand fast
with HIM, Psalm. 89. 28, 34, 35. My mercy will I keep for HIM for evermore,
says God: my Covenant shall stand fast with HIM (this HIM is Christ, if you
compare this with Luke 1. 3^.) My Covenant will I not break, namely that which
was made with HIM, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth: Once have
I sworn by my Holiness that I will not lie unto DAVID, to whom this was David
here is to be understood Christ.
spoken figuratively in the person of Christ: for that was Gods usual way to
speak of the glorious things of the Gospel in the time of the Law, as I said
before.

Secondly, The conditions also were concluded on, and agreed to be fulfilled by
him; as it is clear, if you understand his saying in the 12. of John at the 27.
verse, where he foretells his death, and says, Now is my soul troubled, and
what shall I say? Father save me from this hour; but for this cause came I
(into the world) unto this hour.: as if he had said, My business is now not to
shrink from my sufferings that are a coming upon me; for these are the things
that are a great part of the conditions contracted in the Covenant which stands
between my Father and I; therefore I shall not pray that this might be
absolutely removed from me. For, for this cause came I into the world; even
this was the very terms of the Covenant. By this you may say we are under Grace.

Now in a Covenant there is these three things to be considered.

First, What it is, that is covenanted for.

Secondly, The conditions, upon which the persons, who are concerned in it, do
agree.

Thirdly, If the conditions on both sides be not according to the agreement
fulfilled: then the Covenant stands not but is made void.

And this New Covenant in these particulars is very exactly fulfilled, and made
out in Christ:

First, The thing or things covenanted for, was the salvation of man, but made
good in Christ. The Son of man is come to seek and save that which was lost.
The Son of Man did not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. I give my
life a ransom for many. And this is the will (or Covenant) of him that sent me,
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it
up again at the day, John 6. 39.

Secondly, As touchsng the conditions agreed on, they run thus.

First, On the Mediators side, that he should come into the world; and then on
the Fathers side, that he should give him a body. This was one of the glorious
conditions between the Father and Christ. Wherefore when he comes into the
world, he says, Sacrifices and Offerings thou would not, that is, the Old
Covenant must not stand, but give way to another Sacrifice which thou have
prepared, which is the giving up my Manhood to the strokes of thy Justice, for
a body have thou prepared me, Heb. 13. 20, 21. This does prove us under Grace.

Secondly, On the Mediators side, that he should be put to death; and on God
the Fathers side, that he should raise him up again; this was concluded on also
to be done between God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. On Christ's side,
that he should die to give the justice of the Father satisfaction, and so to
take away the curse that was due to us wretched sinners, by reason of our
transgressions: and that God his Father being every ways fully and completely
satisfied, should by his mighty power revive and raise him up again. He has
brought again -- our Lord Jesus, that is, from death to life, through (the
virtue or effectual satisfaction that he received from) the blood (that was
shed according to the terms) of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 21, 22.

Thirdly, On the Mediators side, that he should be made a curse; and on the
Fathers side, that through him sinners should be inheritors of the blessing;
what wonderful love does there appear by this in the heart of our Lord Jesus,
in suffering such things for our poor bodies and souls, Gal. 3. 13, 14. This is
Grace.

Fourthly, That on the Mediators side there should be by him a victory over
Hell, Death, and the Devil, and the curse of the Law: and on the Fathers side,
that these should be communicated to sinners, and they set at liberty thereby,
Zech. 9. 12. Turn to the strong hold, says God, ye prisoners of hope, even to
day do I declare that I will render double unto thee: Why so? It is because of
the blood of my Sons Covenant, verse 11. which made Paul (though sensible of a
body of death, and of the sting that death did strike into the souls of all
those that are found in their sins) bold to say, O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, that is true, and the
terrible Law of God does aggravate, and set it home with unsupportable torment
and pain: but shall I be daunted at this? No, I thank my God through Jesus
Christ, he has given me the victory; so that now, though I be a sinner in my
self, yet I can by believing in Jesus Christ the Mediator of this New Covenant,
triumph over the Devil, Sin, Death and Hell; and say, do not fear, my soul,
seeing the victory is obtained over all my enemies through my Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. This is the way to prove our selves under Grace.

Fifthly, that on the Mediators side he should by thus doing bring in
everlasting righteousness for Saints, Dan. 9. 24. and that the Father for this
should give them an everlasting Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy
4. 18. Luke 22. 28, 29. But in the next place, this Christ is put into office
by the Father to do all things contained in the New Covenant.
was not all; that is, the Covenant of Grace, with the conditions thereof, was
not only concluded on by both parties to be done: but Jesus Christ, he must be
authorized to do what was concluded on, touching this Covenant by way of
Office. I shall therefore speak a word or two also, touching the Offices (at
least some of them) that Christ Jesus did, and does still execute as the
Mediator of the New Covenant, which also was typed out by the Levitical Law,
for this is the way to prove that we are not under the Law but under Grace.

And first, His first Office, after His Surtiship.
the Covenant was made and con^^ded upon, was, that Jesus should become bound
as a Surety, and stand engaged upon Oath to see that all the conditions of the
Covenant, that was concluded on between him and his Father, should according to
the agreement, be accomplished by him. And secondly, that after that, he should
be the messenger from God to the world, for to declare the mind of God,
touching the tenor and nature of both the Covenants, especially of the New one;
the Scripture says, that Jesus Christ was not only made a Priest by an Oath,
but also a surety, or bonds-man, as in the 7 of Hebrews, at the 21. 22. verses;
in the 21. verse he speaks of the priesthood of Christ, that it was with an
Oath, faith in the 22. verse. By so much (also) was Jesus made the surety of a
better Testament, or Covenant.

Now the Covenant was not only made on Jesus Christ's side with an Oath: but
also on God the Fathers side, that it might be for the better ground of
stablishment to all those that are, or are to be the children of the Promise.
Methinks it is wonderful to consider, that the God and Father of our souls by
Jesus Christ, should be so bent upon the salvation of sinners, that he would
covenant with his Son Jesus for the security of them; and also that there
should pass an Oath on both sides, for the confirmation of their resolution to
do good: as if the Lord had said, My Son, thou, and I, h^^e here made a
Covenant, that I, on my pa^^, should do thus, and thus; and that thou on thy
part should do so, and so: now that we may give these souls the best ground
of comfort that may be, there shall pass an Oath on both sides, that our
children may see that we do indeed love them. Wherein God willing more
ABUNDANTLY to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel
(in making of the Covenant) confirmed it by an Oath -- That we might have
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us; Heb. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Heb. 7. 21. Mark, the sixth Chapter
says God confirmed his part by an Oath* and the seventh says, Christ was
made, or set on his Office also by an Oath. Again, Once (says God) have I
sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David, Psalm. 89. 34, 35. nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth; as was before cited.

Herein you may see that God and Christ was in good earnest about the salvation
of sinners; for so soon asever the Covenant was made, the next thing was, who
should be bound to see all those things fulfilled which was conditioned on,
between the Father and the Son: The Angels they would have no hand in it; The
world could not do it; The Devils had rather see them damned, then they would
wish them the least good; thus Christ looked, and there was none to help;
though the burden lay never so heavy upon his shoulder he must bear it
himself; for there was none besides himself to uphold, or so much as to step in
to be bound, to see the conditions (before mentioned) fulfilled, neither in
whole, nor in part (Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) So that he must not be only he,
with whom the Covenant was made: but he must also become the bonds-man, or
surety thereof; and so stand bound to see that all, and every particular thing
conditioned for, should be both in manner, and matter, at the time, and place,
according to the agreement, duly, and orderly fulfilled. Is not this grace?

Now as touching the nature of a surety and his work (in some things) it is
well known to most men; therefore I shall be very brief upon it.

First, You know a surety is at the bargains making; and so was Christ. Then
was I by him, Prove. 8. 30.

Secondly, A surety must consent to the terms of the Agreement, or Covenant;
and so did Christ Jesus.

Now that which he did engage, should be done for sinners, according to the
terms of the Covenant, it was this.

First, That there should be a complete satisfaction given to God for the sins
of the world, for that was one great thing that was agreed upon, when the
Covenant was made, Heb. 10. 5.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ should (as aforesaid) bring in an everlasting
righteousness to cloth (his body) the Saints withal, Dan. 9. 24, 25. Here is
grace.

Thirdly, That he should take in charge to see all those forth coming without
spot or wrinkle, at the day of his glorious appearing from heaven to judgment,
and to quit them before the Judgment Seat.

Again, Thirdly in the work of a surety, there is required by the creditor,
that the surety should stand to what he is bound; and on the sureties there is
a consenting thereunto.

First, The creditor looks that in case the debtor proves However it is in
other engagements, yet it is thus in this.
a bankrupt, that then the surety should engage the payment. Is not this grace.

Secondly, The creditor looks that the surety should be an able man: now our
surety was, and is, in this case every way suitable, for he is heir of all
things.

Thirdly, The creditor appoints the day and also looks that the Covenant should
be kept, and the debt paid according to the time appointed; and it is required
of sureties (as well as stewards) that they be found faithful, namely, to pay
the debt according to the bargain: and therefore it is said, When the fullness
of time was come, God sent forth his Son -- made under the Law, to redeem them
that are under the Law (according to his suretiship) Gal. 4. 4, 5. thus comes
grace to Saints.

Fourthly, The creditor looks that his money should be brought into his house,
to his own habitation. Jesus our surety, in this also is faithful; for by his
own blood, which was the payment, he is entered into the holy place, even into
heaven it self which is Gods dwelling place, to render the value and price that
was agreed upon for the salvation of sinners; but I shall speak more of this in
another head, therefore I pass it.

Again fourthly, if the Though the debtor together with the surety is liable to
pay the debt by the Law of man, yet Christ our surety only by the Covenant of
Grace.
surety stands bound, the debtor is at liberty, and if the Law do issue out
any process to take any, it will be the surety; and O! how wonderful true was
this accomplished, in that when Christ our surety came down from heaven, Gods
Law did so seize upon the Lord Jesus, and so cruelly handle him, and so exact
upon him, that it would never let him alone, until it had accused him, and
condemned him, executed him, and scrued his very hearts blood out of his
precious heart, and side; nay, and more than this too, as I shall show
hereafter.

But secondly, in the next place, after that Jesus Christ had stood bound, and
was become our surety in things pertaining to this Covenant, his next office
was to be the messenger of God touching his Mind, and the tenor of the
Covenant, unto the poor world; and this did the Prophet foresee long before,
when he faith, Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare thy way
before thee; (speaking of John the Baptist) And he shall prepare thy way before
thee: (and then he speaks of Christ to the people, saying,) And the Lord whom
ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple, Who is he? even the messenger of
the Covenant, whom ye delight in: (that is Christ) behold he shall come says
the Lord of hosts, Mal. 3. 1.

Now the Covenant being made before between the Father and the Son, and Jesus
Christ becoming bound to see all the conditions fulfilled, this being done, he
comes down from Heaven to Earth, to declare to the world what God the Father
and He, had concluded on before, and what was the mind of the Father toward
the world, concerning the salvation of their souls: and indeed who could better
come of such an errand, then he that stood by when the Covenant was made; then
he that shook hands with the Father in making of the Covenant; then he that was
become a surety in the behalf of poor Sinners, according to the terms of this
Covenant.

Now you know a messenger commonly when he comes, he does bring some errand to
them to whom he is sent, either of what is done for them, or what they would
have them, whom they send unto, do for them, or such like. Now what a glorious
message was that which our Lord Jesus Christ came down from Heaven withal to
declare unto poor sinners, and that from God his Father I say, how glorious was
it, and how sweet is it to you that have seen your selves lost by nature; and
it will also appear a glorious one to you, who are a seeking after Jesus
Christ; if you do but consider these follovving things about what he was sent.

First, Jesus Christ was sent from Heaven, to declare unto the world, from God
the Father, that he was wonderfully filled with love to poor sinners. First, In
that he would forgive their sins. Secondly, In that he would save their souls.
Thirdly, In that he would make them heirs of his glory. For God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son. -- For God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved, John
3. 15, 16, 18.

Secondly, God sent Jesus Christ to tell the poor world, how that he would do
this for poor sinners, and yet be just, and yet do his Justice no wrong; and
that was to be done by Jesus Christ, his dying of a cursed death in the room of
poor sinners, to satisfy justice, and make way for mercy; to take away the
stumbling blocks, and set open Heaven-gates; to overcome Satan, and break off
from sinners his chains; to set Luke 4. 18. open the prison doors, and to let
the prisoners go free, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. And this was the message that Christ
was to deliver to the world by commandment from his Father; and this did he
tell us when he came of his errand, where he says, I lay down my life for my
Sheep. -- No man takes it a way from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have
power to lay it down, and to take it up again: and this commandment have I
reecived of my Father, John 10. 15, 16, 17, 18. even this commandment has my
Father given me, that I should both do this thing, and also tell it unto you.

Thirdly, He was not only sent as a Messenger to declare this hit Fathers love;
but also how dearly he himself loved sinners, what a heart he had to do them
good, where he says, All that the Father has given me, shall come to me (and
let me tell you my heart too, says Christ) He that comes unto me, I will in
no wise cast out. As my Father is willing to give you unto me, even so am I, as
willing to receive you. As my Father is willing to give you Heaven, so am I
willing to make you fit for it, by washing you with my own blood: I lay down my
life, that you might have life; and this I was sent to tell you of my Father.

Fourthly, His Message was further; he came to tell them how, and which way
they should come to enjoy these glorious benefits: also by laying down motives,
to stir them up to accept of the benefits: The way is laid down in John 3. 14,
15. where Christ says, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; even
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, or caused to be hanged on the Cross, and
die the death, That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. The way therefore that thou shall have the benefit and
comfort of that which my Father and I have covenanted for thee, I am come down
from heaven to earth on purpose to give thee intelligence, and to certify thee
of it: know therefore, that as I have been born of a woman, and have taken this
body upon me, it is on purpose that I might offer it up upon the Cross a
Sacrifice to God, to give him satisfaction for thy sins, that his mercy may be
extended to thy soul, without any wrong done to justice; and this thou art to
believe, and not in the notion, but from thy very whole soul. Now the motives
are many. First, If they do not leave their sins, and come to Jesus Christ,
that their sins may be washed away by his blood, they are sure to be damned in
hell; for the Law has condemned them already, John 3. 18, 19. Secondly, But if
they do come, they shall have the bosom of Christ to lie in, the kingdom of
Heaven to dwell in, the Angels and Saints for their companions, shall shine
there like the Sun, shall be there for ever, shall sit upon the Thrones of
Judgment, etc. Here is Grace.

Methinks if I had but time to speak fully to all things that I could speak to
from these two heavenly Truths, and to make application thereof; surely, with
the blessing of God, I think it might persuade some vile and abominable wretch
to lay down his arms that he has taken up in defiance against God (and is
marching hell-wards, post haste with the Devil) I say methinks it should stop
them, and make them willing to look back, and accept of salvation for their
poor condemned fouls, before Gods eternal vengeance is executed upon them. O
therefore! you that are upon this march, I beseech you consider a little. What,
shall Christ become a drudge for you? and will you be drudges for the Devil?
Shall Christ covenant with God for the salvation of sinners? and shall sinners
covenant with Hell, Death, and the Devil, for the damnation of their souls?
Shall Christ come down from Heaven to Earth to declare this to sinners? and
shall sinners stop their ears against this good tidings? Will you not hear the
errand of Christ, although he tells you tidings of peace and salvation? How
if he had came, having taken a command from his Father to damn you, and to send
you to the Devils in Hell? Sinner hear his message, he speaks no harm, his
words are eternal life, all men that give ear unto them, they have eternal
advantage by them. Advantage, I say, that never has an end.

Besides, do but consider these two things, it is like they may have some sway
upon thy soul.

First, When he came on his message, he came with tears in his eyes, and did
even weepingly tender the terms of reconciliation to them; I say with tears in
his eyes. And when he came near the City (i. e.) with his message of peace,
beholding the hardness of their hearts, he wept over it, and took up a
lamentation over it; because he saw they rejected his mercy, which was tidings
of peace. (I say) will thou then slight a weeping Jesus, one that so loves thy
soul, that rather then he will lose thee, he will with tears persuade with thee.

2. Not only so, but also when he came, he came all on a goar blood to proffer
mercy to thee, to show thee still how dearly he did love thee; as if he had
said, sinner, here is mercy for thee; but behold my bloody sweat, my bloody
wounds, my cursed death; behold and see what danger I have gone through to come
unto thy soul: I am come indeed unto thee, and do bring thee tidings of
salvation, but it cost me my heart blood before I could come at thee, to give
thee the fruits of my everlasting love. But more of this anon.

Thus have I spoken something concerning Christ, being the messenger of the New
Covenant; but because I am not willing to cut too short of what shall come
after, I shall pass by these things, not half touched, and come to the other
which I promised even now; which was to show you, that as there was Levitical
Ceremonies, in, or, belonging to the first Covenant, so these Types, or
Levitical Ceremonies, did represent the glorious things of the New Covenant. In
those Ceremonies, you read of a Sacrifice, of a Priest to offer up the
Sacrifice; the place where, and the manner how he was to offer it: of which I
shall speak something.

First, As touching the Sacrifice, you find that it was not to be offered up of
all kind of beasts; as of Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers, Dragons, Serpents, or
such like. To signify, that not all kind of Creatures that had sinned, as
Devils the fallen Angels, should be saved: but the Sacrifice was to be taken
out of some kind of Beasts and Birds: to signify, that some of Gods Creatures
that had sinned, he would be pleased to reconcile them to himself again; as
poor fallen Man and Woman, those miserable Creatures: God, the God of Heaven,
had a good look for after their fall: but not for the cursed Devils; though
more noble Creatures by Creation than We. Here is grace.

Now though these Sacrifices were offered; yet they were not offered to the
end, they should make the comers to, or offerers thereof perfect: but the
things was to represent to the world, what God had in after ages for to do;
which was even the salvation of his Creatures by that offering of the body of
Jesus Christ, of which these were a shadow and a type for the accomplishing of
the second Covenant. For Christ was by Covenant to offer a Sacrifice, and that
an effectual one too, if he intended the salvation of sinners: A body have thou
prepared me; I am come to do thy will, Heb. 10.

I shall therefore show you, First, what was expected of God in the Sacrifice,
in the Type, and then show you how it was answered in the Antitype. Secondly, I
shall show you the manner of the offering of the type; and so answerable
thereto, to show you the fitness of the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ, by way
of answering some questions.

For the first of these.

First, God did expect that Sacrifice which he himself had appointed, and not
another. To signify that none would serve his turn, but the body and soul of
his appointed Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, John 1. 29.

Secondly, This Sacrifice must not be lame nor deformed; it must have no scar,
spot or blemish; to signify, that Jesus Christ was to be a complete Sacrifice
by Covenant, 1 Pet. 1. 29.

Thirdly, This sacrifice was to be taken out of the flock or herd; to signify
that Jesus Christ was to come out of the race of Mankind, according to the
Covenant, Heb. 10. 5.

But Secondly, As to the manner of it: First, the sacrifice, before it was
offered, was to have the sins of the Children of Israel confessed over it: to
signify, that Jesus Christ must Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 2. 24. bear the
sins of all his children by Covenant. As for thee, by the blood of thy
Covenant, in his own body on the tree, Zech. 9. 10, 11.

Secondly, It must be had to the place appointed, namely, without the Camp of
Israel: to signify, that Jesus Christ must be led to the Mount Calvary, Luke
23. 33.

Thirdly, The sacrifice was to be killed there; to signify, that Jesus Christ
must, and did suffer without the City of Jerusalem for our salvation.

Fourthly, the sacrifice must not only have its life taken away, but also some
of its flesh burned upon the Altar: to signify, that Jesus Christ was not only
to dye a natural death, but also that he should undergo the pains and torments
of the damned in hell.

Fifthly, Sometimes there must be a living offering, and a dead offering; as
the goat that was killed and the escape goat; the dead bird, and the living
bird, Levit. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6. To signify, that Jesus Christ must dye, and come
to life again.

Sixthly, The goat that was to dye, was to be the sin-offering; that is, to be
offered as the rest of the sin offerings, to make an atonement as a type; and
the other goat, was to have all the sins of the Children of Israel confessed
over him, Levit. 16. from the 7. verse to the 22. and then to be let go into
the wilderness, never to be catched again, to signify that Christ's death, was
to make satisfaction for sin; and his coming to life again, was to bring in
everlasting Romans 4. 25. justification, from the power, curse, and destroying
nature of sin.

Seventhly, The escape goat was to be carried by a fit man into the wilderness.
To signify that Jesus Christ should be both fit and able, to carry our sins
quite away from us, so as they should never be laid to our charge again. Here
is Grace.

Eighthly, The sacrifices under the Law, commonly part of them must be eaten,
Exodus 12. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. To signify, that they that are saved, should
spiritually feed on the body and blood of Jesus Christ, or else they have no
life by him, John 6. 51, 52, 53.

Ninthly, This sacrifice must be eaten with unleavened bread: To signify, that
they which love their sins, that devilish leaven of wickedness; they do not
feed upon Jesus Christ.

Now of what has been spoken, this is the sum: that there is a sacrifice under
the New Covenant, as there was sacrifices under the Old; and that this
sacrifice did every way answer that, or those: Indeed, they did but suffer for
sin in show, but he in reality; they as the shadow, but he as the substance. O!
when Jesus Christ did come to make himself a sacrifice, or to offer himself for
sin, you may understand that our sins was indeed charged to purpose upon him: O
how they scared his soul, how they brake his body; insomuch that they made the
blood run down his blessed face, and from his precious side; therefore thou
must understand these As Christ did not suffer in his body without suffering in
soul, nor yet in soul without his suffering in body; it was because not the
body without the soul but both the body and soul of the Saints should be for
ever saved.
following things. First, that Jesus Christ by Covenant did dye for sin.
Secondly, that his death was not a mere natural death, but a cursed death; even
such a one as men do undergo from God for their sins (though he himself had
none) even such a death, as to endure the very pains and torments of hell; O
sad pains! and in expressible torments, that this our sacrifice for sin went
under. The pains of his body was not all; no, but the pains of his soul; for
his soul was made an offering, as well as his body; yet all but one sacrifice,
Isa. 53. To signify, that the suffering of Christ was not only a bodily
suffering, but a soul suffering; not only to suffer what man could inflict upon
him: but also to suffer soul torments, that none but God can inflict, or suffer
to be inflicted upon him. O the torments of his soul! they were torment indeed;
his soul was that that felt the wrath of God. My soul says he, is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death, Mat. 26. 38. My soul is troubled, and what shall I
say, John 12. 27. The Rock was not so rent, as was his precious soul: there was
not such a terrible darkness on the face of the earth then, as there was on his
precious soul. O the torments of hell! and the eclipsings of the divine smiles
of God, were both upon him at once; the Devils assailing of him, and God
forsaking of him, and all at once. My God, my God, says he, why have thou
forsaken me, Mat. 27. 46. now in my greatest extremity; now sin is laid upon
me, the curse takes hold on me, the pains of hell are clasped about me, and
thou have forsaken me. O sad! Sinner, this was not done in pretense, but in
reality; not in show, but in very deed; Otherwise Christ had dissembled, and
had not spoken the truth; but the truth of it, his bloody sweat declares, his
mighty cries declares, the things what, and for what he suffered declares. Nay,
I must say thus much, that all the damned souls in hell, with all their
damnations, did never yet feel that torment and pain, that did this blessed
Jesus in a little time. Sinner, can thou read that Jesus Christ was made an
offering for sin, and yet go on in sin? Can thou hear that the lead of thy
sins did break the very heart of Christ, and spill his precious Blood? And
can thou find in thy heart to labor to lay more sins upon his back? Can
thou hear that he suffered the pains, the fiery flames of Hell? and can thou
find in thy heart, to add to his groans, by slighting of his sufferings? O hard
hearted wretch! How can thou deal so unkindly with such a sweet Lord Jesus?

Quest. But why did Christ offer himself in sacrifice?

Answ. That thou should not be thrown to the very Devils.

Quest. But why did he spill his precious blood?

Answ. That thou might enjoy the joys of Heaven.

Quest. But why did he suffer the pains of Hell?

Answ. That thou might not fry with the devil and damned souls.

Quest. But could not we have been saved if Christ had not died?

Answ. No, for without shedding of blood, there is no remission: and besides,
there was no death, that could satisfy Gods justice but his, which is evident;
because there was none in a capacity to dye, or that was able to answer an
infinite God by his so suffering, but he.

Quest. But why did God let him dye?

Answ. He standing in the room of sinners; and that in their names and natures,
Gods justice must fall upon him; for justice takes vengeance for sin
wheresoever it finds it, though it be on his dear Son. Nay, God favored his
Son no more, finding our sins upon him, then he would have favored any of us:
For, should we have died? so did he. Should we have been made a curse? so was
he. Should we have undergone the pains or hell? so did he.

Quest. But did he indeed suffer the torments of hell?

Answ. Yea, and that in such an horrible way too, that it is unspeakable.

Quest. Could he not have suffered without his so suffering? would not his
dying only of a natural death have served the turn?

Answ No, in no wise: The sins, for which he suffered, called for the torments
of hell; the condition in which he died, did call for the torments of hell; for
Christ did not dye the death of a Saint, but the death of a Sinner; of a cursed
and damned sinner (because he stood in their rooms, Gal. 3. 13.) the Law to
which he was subjected, called for the torments of hell; the nature of Gods
justice could not bate him any thing, the death which he was to suffer, had not
lost its sting; all these being put together do irresistibly declare unto us,
that he as a sacrifice, did suffer the torments of hell.

But Secondly, had he not died and suffered the cursed death, the Covenant had
been made void, and his suretiship would have been forfeited; and besides this,
the world damned in the Flames of Hell fire: therefore his being a sacrifice,
was one part of the Covenant; for the terms of the Covenant was, that he should
spill his blood, Zech. 9. 10, 11. O blessed Jesus! O blessed Grace.

Quest. But why then is his death so slighted by some?

Answ. Because they are enemies to him, either through ignorance, or
presumption; either for want of knowledge, or out of malice; for surely, did
they love, or believe him, they could not choose but break, and bleed at heart,
to consider and to think of him, Zech. 12. 10, 11.

Thus, passing this, I shall now speak something to Christ's Priestly Office:
but by the way, if any should think, that I do here spin my thread too long in
distinguishing his Priestly Office, from his being a sacrifice; they supposing
that for Christ to be a Priest and a Sacrifice is all one and the same thing,
and it may be it is; because they have not thought on this so well as they
should: Namely, that as he was a sacrifice, he was passive, Isa. 53. that is,
led, or had away as a lamb to his sufferings: But as a Priest, he was active;
that is, he did willingly, and freely give up his body to be a sacrifice. He
has given his life a ransom for many. This consideration being with some
weight and clearness on my spirit, I was, and am caused to lay them down in two
particular heads. And therefore,

The second thing that I would speak something to, it is this; that as there
were Priests under the first Covenant, so there is a Priest under this,
belonging to this New Covenant, a high Priest, the chief Priest: as it is
clear, where it is said, We having an high Priest over the House of God, Heb.
10. 21. Chap. 3. 1 Chap. 5. 5, 10. and Chap. 7. 24, 25, 26. Chap. 8. 1, 4.

Now the things that I shall treat upon are these. First, I shall show you the
Qualifications required of a Priest under the Law. Secondly, his Office; and
thirdly, how Jesus Christ did according to what was signified by those under
the Law: I say, how he did answer the Types, and where he went beyond them.

For his Qualifications.

First, They must be called thereto of God; No man take this honor upon him,
but he that is called of God, as Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. Now Aarons being called of
God to be a Priest, signifies, that Jesus Christ is a Priest of Gods
appointment, such a one that God has chosen, likes of, and has set on work,
called of God an high Priest, etc. ver. 10.

Secondly, The Priests under the Law, they must be men complete, not deformed;
Speak unto Aaron says God to Moses, saying, Whosoever he be of thy seed in
their generations, that has any bleinish, let him not approach to offer the
bread of his God: for whatsoever man he be that has a blemish, he shall not
approach (if he be) a blind man, or a lame man, or he that has a flat nose, or
any thing superfluous, or a man that is broken footed, or broken handed, or
crookt backed, or a dwarf, or he that has a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy,
or scabbed, or has his stones broken: No man that has a blemish of the seed
of Aaron the Priest, shall come nigh to offer offerings of the Lord made by
fire; he has a blemish, he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God,
Levit. 21. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. What does all this signify, but that, in the
first place, he must not be lame, to signify he must not go haltingly about
the work of our salvation. 2. He must not be blind, to signify, that he must
not go ignorantly to work, but he must be quick of understanding in the things
of God. 3. He must not be scabbed, to signify, that the Priest must not be
corrupt, or filthy in his Office. 4. In a word, he must be every ways complete,
to signify to us, that Jesus Christ was to be, and is most complete, and most
perfect every way, an acceptable high Priest in things pertaining to God, in
reference to this second Covenant.

Thirdly, The Priests under the Law were not to be hard hearted, but pitiful
and compassionate, willing and ready, with abundance of bowels to offer for the
people, and to make an atonement for them, Heb. 5. 1, 2. To signify, that
Jesus Christ should be a tender hearted high Priest, able and willing to
simpathize, and be affected with the infirmities of others, to pray for them,
to offer up for them his precious blood; he must be such an one, who can have
compassion on (a company of poor) ignorant souls, and on them that are out of
the way, to recover them, and to set them in safety, Heb. 4. 15. and that he
might thus do, he must be a man that had experience of the disadvantages that
infirmity and sin did bring unto these poor creatures, Heb. 2. 17.

Fourthly, The high Priests under the Law were not to be shie or squemish, in
case there was any that had the plague or leprosy, scab or blaunches; but must
look on them, go to them, and offer for them (Levit. 13. read that whole
Chapter) all which is to signify, that Jesus Christ should not refuse to take
notice of the several infirmities, of his poorest people, but to teach them,
and to see that none of them be lost, by reason of their infirmity, for want of
looking to, or tending of. This privilege also have we under this second
Covenant. This is the way to make Grace shine.

Fifthly, The high Priests under the Law, they were to be anointed with very
excellent Oil, compounded by art (Exodus 29. 7. Chap. 30. 30.) to signify, that
Jesus the great high Priest of this New Covenant, should be in a most eminent
way anointed to his Priestly Office by the Holy Spirit of the Lord.

Sixthly, The Priests food and livelihood in the time of his Ministry, was to
be the consecrated and holy things, Exodus 29. 33. to signify, that it is the
very meat and drink of Jesus Christ, to do his Priestly Office, and to save and
preserve his poor tempted and afflicted Saints. O what a New Covenant high
Priest have we!

Seventhly, The Priests under the Law, were to be washed with water, Exodus 29.
4. to signify, that Jesus Christ should not go about the work of his Priestly
Office with the silth of sin upon him, but was without sin to appear as our
high Priest in the presence of his Father, to execute his Priestly Office there
for our advantage. For such a high Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens, Heb. 7. 26.

Eighthly, The high Priests under the Law, before they went into the holy
place, they were to be clothed with a curious garment, a breastplace, and an
ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle, and these were
to be made of gold and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen; and in
this garment and glorious ornaments, there must be precious stones, and on
those stones there must be written the names of the children of Israel (read
the 28. of Exodus) and all was to signify what a glorious high Priest Jesus
Christ should be; and how in the righteousness of God, he should appear before
God as our high Priest, to offer up the sacrifice that was to be offered for
our salvation to God his Father: but I pass that.

Now I shall speak to his Office: The Office of the high Priest in general was
twofold. First, To offer the sacrifice without the Camp. Secondly, To bring it
within the vail, that is, into the holiest of all, which did type out Heaven.

First, It was the Office of the Priest to offer the sacrifice, and so did
Jesus Christ, he did offer his own body and soul in sacrifice. I say, HE did
OFFER it, and not another, as it is written, No man takes away my life, but I
lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again, John 10. 17, 18. And again it is said, When he (Jesus) had offered up
one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10. 12.

Secondly, The Priests under the Law must offer up the sacrifice that God had
appointed, and none else, a complete one without any blemish: and so did our
high Priest, where he says, Sacrifice and offerings thou would not, but a
body have thou prepared me, and that will I offer, Heb. 10. 5.

Thirdly, The Priest was to take of the ashes of the sacrifice, and lay them in
a clean place: and this signifies, that the body of Jesus after it had been
offered, should be laid into Joseph's sepulcher, as in a clean place, where
never any man before was laid, Levit. 6. 11. compared with John 19. 41, 42.

This being one part of his office, and when this was done, then in the next
place he was to put on the glorious garment, when he was to go into the
holiest, and take of the blood, and carry it thither, etc. he was to put on the
holy garment, which signifies the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, He was in this holy garment, which has in it the stones, and in the
stones the names of the Twelve Tribes of the children of Israel, to appear in
the holy place, Exodus 28. And thou shall take two Onix stones, and shall grave
on them the names of the children of Israel. Six of their names on one stone,
and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their
birth, ver. 9, 10. And this was to signify, that when Jesus Christ was to
enter into the holiest, then he was there to bear the names of his elect, in
the tables of his heart, before the Throne of God, and the Mercy-seat, Heb. 12.
23.

Thirdly, With this he was to take of the blood of the sacrifices, and carry it
into the holiest of all, which was a type of Heaven, and there was he to
sprinkle the mercy-seat; and this was to be done by the high Priest only. To
signify, that none but Jesus Christ must have this office and privilege, to
be the peoples high Priest to offer for them. Heb. 9. 7. But into the second
went the high priest alone once every year, yet not without blood, which he
offered for himself, and for the errors of the people.

Fourthly, He was there to make an atonement for the people with the blood,
sprinkling of it upon the mercy-seat; but this must be done with much incense,
Levit. 16. And Aaron shall bring the bullock which is for a sin-offering for
himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin-offering,
which is for himself. And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire
from off the Altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten
small, and bring it within the vail: And he shall put the incense upon the fire
before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy-seat, that
is upon the testimony; that he dye not. And he shall take of the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy-seat eastward, and before the
mercy-seat shall he sprinkle the blood with his finger seven times. And then he
shall kill the goat of the sin-offering which is for the people, and bring his
blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy-seat, verse
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Now this was for the priest and the people; all which does
signify, that Jesus Christ was after his death, to go into heaven it self, of
which this holy place was a figure, Heb. 9. and there to carry the sacrifice
that he offered upon the Cross into the presence of God, for to obtain mercy
for the people in a way of justice. And in that he is said to take his hands
full of sweet incense, it signifies, that Jesus Christ was to offer up his
sacrifice in the presence of his Father, in a way of intercession and prayers.

I might have branched these things out into several particulars, but I would
be brief.

I say, therefore the office of the Priests was to carry the blood into the
holy place, and there to present it before the mercy-seat, with his heart full
of intercessions for the people, for whom he was a Priest, Luke 1. 8, 9, 10,
11. This is Jesus Christ's work now in the kingdom of glory to plead his own
blood, the nature and virtue of it, with a perpetual intercession to the God of
mercy, on the behalf of us poor miserable sinners, Heb. 7. 24.

Now in the intercession of this Jesus, which is part of his priestly office,
there is these things to be considered for our comfort.

First, There is a pleading of the virtue of his blood, for them that are
already come in; that they may be kept from the evils of heresies, delusions,
temptations, pleasures, profits, or any thing of this world, which may be too
hard for them. Father, I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world (says Christ) but that thou should keep them from the evil, John 17.
15.

Secondly, in case the devil should aspire up into the presence of God, to
acuse any of the poor Saints, and to plead their backslidings against them, as
he will do if he can; then there is Jesus, our Lord Jesus, ready in the Court
of Heaven, at the right hand of God, to plead the virtue of his blood, not only
for the great and general satisfaction that he did give when he was on the
Cross; but also the virtue that is in it now, for the cleansing, and fresh
purging of his poor Saints, under their several temptations and infirmities; as
says the Apostle, For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by
the death of his Son: much more then being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life; that is, by his intercession, Romans 5. 10.

Thirdly, The maintaining of grace, also, is by Jesus Christ's intercession,
being the second part of his Priestly Office. O! had we not a Jesus at the
right hand of God, making intercession for us, and to convey fresh supplies of
Grace unto us, through the virtue of his blood, being pleaded at Gods right
hand; how soon would it be with us, as it is with those for whom he prays not
at all; John 17. 9. But the reason why thou stand, while others fall, the
reason why thou go through the many temptations of the world, and shakest
them off from thee, while others are ensnared, and entangled therein; it is
because thou have an interceding Jesus. I have prayed (says he) that thy says
fail not, Luke 22. 3, 2.

Fourthly, It is partly by the virtue of Christ's intercession that the elect
are brought in; there is many that are to come to Christ, which are not yet
brought in to Christ: and it is one part of his work to pray for their
salvation too. Neither pray I for these alone, but for all those that shall
believe (though as yet they do not believe) on me (but that they may believe)
through their word, John 17. 20. And let me tell thee soul for thy comfort, who
art a coming in to Christ, panting and sighing, as if thy heart would break; I
tell thee soul, thou would never have come to Christ, if he had not first by
the virtue of his blood and intercession, sent into thy heart an earnest desire
after Christ: and let me tell thee also, that it is his business to make
intercession for thee; not only that thou might come in, but that thou
might be preserved, when thou art come in, Compare Heb. 7. 25. with Romans 8.
33, 34, 35, etc.

Fifthly, It is by the intercession of Christ, that the infirmities of the
Saints in their holy duties are forgiven: Alas, if it was not for the priestly
office of Christ Jesus, the prayers, alms, and other duties of the Saints,
might be rejected, because of the sin that is in them: but Jesus being our high
Priest, he is ready to take away the iniquities of our holy things, perfuming
our prayers with the glory of his own perfections: and therefore it is, that
there is an answer given to the Saints prayers, and also acceptance of their
holy duties, Rev. 8. 3, 4. But Christ being come an high Priest of good things
to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is
to say, not of this building. Neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by
his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God? And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament (or
Covenant) that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first Testament, they which are called (notwithstanding all
their sins) might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15.

The third thing now to be spoken to, it is to show where, and how Jesus Christ
out-went, and goes beyond these priests in all their qualifications and
offices, for the comfort of poor Saints.

First, They that were called to the priesthood under the Law, were but men:
but he is both God and Man, Heb. 7. 28. 3.

2. Their qualifications were in them in a very scanty way: but Jesus was every
way qualified in an infinite and full way.

They were consecrated but for a time, Heb. 7. 23. but he for ever more, ver.
24.

4. They were made without an oath, ver. 20, 21. but he with an oath.

5. They as servants: but he as a Son, Heb. 3. 6.

6. Their garments were but such as could be made with hands, Ez. 28. but his
the very righteousness of God, Romans 3. 22.

7. Their offerings were but the body and blood of beasts, and such like, Phil.
3. 8. but his offering was his own body and soul, Heb. 9. 12, 13. Chap. 10. 4,
5. Isa. 53. 10. Heb. 10. 5.

8. Those were but at best but a shadow or type, verse 1. but he the very
substance and end of all those Ceremonies, Heb. 9. 10. 11.

9. Their holy place was but made by men, Heb. 9. 24. but his, or that which
Jesus is entered, is into Heaven it self, Heb. 5. 2, 3.

10. When they went to offer their sacrifice, they were forced to offer for
themselves as men compassed about with infirmity, Heb. 7. 26. but he holy,
harmless, Heb. 10. 11. who did never commit the least transgression, Heb. 7. 26.

11. They, when they went in to offer, they were fain to do it standing, Heb.
10. to signify, that God had no satisfaction therein: but he, when he had
offered one sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down on the right hand of God, Jer.
12. To signify, that God was very well pleased with his offering.

12. They were fain to offer often times the sacrifice that could never take
away sin; but he by one offering has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 11, 14.

13. Their sacrifices at the best could but serve for the cleansing of the
flesh, Heb. 9. 13. but his for cleansing both body and soul: The blood of Jesus
Christ does purge the conscience from dead works to live a holy life, verse 14.

14. Those high Priests could not offer but once a year in the holiest of all,
ver. 7. but our high Priest, he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb.
7. 24, 25.

15. Those high Priests, notwithstanding they were Priests, they were not
always to were their holy garments; but Jesus never puts them off of him, but
is in them always.

16. Those high Priests death would be too hard for them, Heb. 7. 21, 23. but
our high Priest has vanquished and overcome that cruel enemy of ours, Heb. 2.
15. and brought life and immortality to light, through the glorious Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

17. Those high Priests were not able to save themselves; but this is able to
save himself, and all that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25.

18. Those high Priests blood could not do away sin; but the blood of Jesus
Christ, who is our High Priest, cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7.

19. Those high Priests sometimes by sin, caused God to reject their
sacrifices; but this high Priest does always the things that please him.

20. Those high Priests could never convey the Spirit by virtue of their
sacrifices or office; but this high Priest, our Lord Jesus, he can, and does
give all the gifts and graces that are given to the sons of men.

21. Those high Priests could never by their sacrifices bring the soul of any
sinner to glory, by virtue of it self; but Jesus has by one offering (as I
said before) perfected for ever those that he did die for. Thus in brief I have
showed in some particulars, how and wherein Jesus our high Priest does go
beyond those high Priests: and many more without question might be mentioned,
but I forbear.

A fifth Office of Christ in reference to the second Covenant, it was that he
should be the Forerunner again to heaven before his Saints that were to follow
after. First, he strikes hands in the Covenant. Secondly, he stands bound as a
surety to see every thing in the Covenant accomplished, that was to be done on
his part; then he brings the message from heaven to the world; and before he
goes back, he offers himself for the same sins that he agreed to suffer for:
and so soon as this was done, he goes post haste to heaven again; not only to
exercise the second part of his Priestly Office; but as our Forerunner, to
take possession for us, even into heaven it self, as you may see, Heb. 6. 20.
where it is said, Whither the forerunner is for us entered.

First, He is run before to open heaven gates: Be ye open ye everlasting doors,
that the King of Glory may enter in.

Secondly, He is run before to take possession of glory in our natures for us.

Thirdly, He is run before to prepare us our places against we come after, I go
to prepare a place for you, John 14. 1, 2, 3.

Fourthly, He is run thither to make the way easy, in that he has first
trodden the path himself.

Fifthly, He is run thither to receive gifts for us. All spiritual and heavenly
These things have I spoken to show you, that Saints are under Grace.
gifts had been kept from us, had not Christ so soon as the time appointed was
come, run back to the kingdom of glory to receive them for us. But I cannot
stand to enlarge upon these glorious things, the Lord enlarge them upon your
hearts by meditation.

Here now I might begin to speak of his Prophetical and Kingly Office, and the
privileges that do, and shall come thereby: but that I fear I shall be too
tedious, therefore at this time I shall pass them by. Thus you may see how the
Covenant of Grace does run, and with whom it was made, and also what was the
conditions thereof.

Now then, this Grace, this evenlasting Grace of God comes to be free to us
through the satisfaction (according to the conditions) given by another for us;
for though it be free, and freely given to us, yet the obtaining of it did cost
our Head, our Publick-man a very dear price (1 Cor. 6. 20.) For ye are bought
with a price, even with the precious blood of Christ (1 Pet. 1. 9.) So it is by
another, I say, not by us; yet it is as sure made over to us, even to so many
of us as do, or shall believe, as if we had done it, and obtained the grace of
God ourselves: nay surer; for consider, I say this grace is free to us, and
comes upon a clear score, by virtue or the labor and purchase of another for
us; mark, that which is obtained by another for us, is not obtained for us by
our selves: Now, but Christ has obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.
12. not by the blood of goats and calves (which was things offered by men under
the Law) but by his own blood (meaning Christ's) he entered into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us.

Secondly, It comes to be unchangeable through the perfection of that
satisfaction that was given to God through the Son of Mary for us; for whatever
the divine, infinite, and eternal justice of God did call for at the hands of
man, if ever he intended to be a partaker of the grace of God, this Jesus, this
one man, this public person, did completely give a satisfaction to it, even so
effectually; which caused God not only to say, I am pleased, but I am well
pleased, Mat. 3. 17. Completely and sufficiently satisfied with thee on their
behalf; for so you must understand it: Mark there these following words, And
having made peace (or completely made up the difference) through the blood of
his Cross by him, to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether
they be things in earth, or things in heaven. And you who were sometimes
alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works; yet now has he
reconciled, how, in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you holy;
mark, holy and unblameable and unreprovable in his sight, Colos. 1. 21, 22, 23.
And thus it is Grace, unchangeable Grace, to us; because it was obtained, yea
completely obtained for us, by Jesus Christ God-man.

Object. But some may say, how was it possible that one man Jesus by one
offering, should so completely obtain and bring in unchangeable grace for such
an innumerable company of sinners, as are to be saved.

Answ. First, in that he was every ways fitted for such a work, And secondly,
in that, as I said before, he did every ways completely satisfy that which was
offended by our disobedience to the former Covenant. And for the clearing of
this.

First, Consider, was it man that had offended? He was man that gave the
satisfaction. For as by man came death, even so also by man did come the
resurrection from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 21.

Secondly, Was it God that was offended, he was God that did give a
satisfaction. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given. -- And his name
shall be called the mighty God (Isa. 9. 6.) He thought it no robbery to be
equal with God but (for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8. 9.) he made himself of no
reputation, etc. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, For the further clearing of this, to show you that in every thing he
was rightly qualified for this great work; see what God himself says of him:
he calls him in the first place man; and secondly he owns him to be his fellow,
saying, Awake O sword against my Shepherd, against the man; mark, the man that
is my fellow, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 13. 7.

So that now let divine and infinite Justice turn it self which way it will, it
finds one that can tell how to match it; for if it say, I will require the
satisfaction of man, here is a man to satisfy its cry: and if it say, but I am
an infinite God, and must and will have an infinite satisfaction: here is one
also that is infinite, even fellow with God; Fellow in his essence and being,
Prove. 8. 23. Fellow in his power and strength, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Fellow in his
Wisdom, see again the same verse. Fellow in his mercy and grace, Tit. 2. 10.
compared with ver. 11. together with the rest of the attributes of God; so
that, I say, let justice turn it self which way it will, here is a complete
person to give a complete satisfaction: thus much of the fitness of the person.

Secondly, For the compleatness of the satisfaction given by him for us. And
that is discovered in these particulars.

First, Does justice call for the blood of that nature that sinned. Here is the
heart blood of Jesus Christ. We have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.
14. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Zech. 9. 10, 11.

2. Does justice say, that this blood, if it be not the blood of one that is
really, and naturally God, it will not give satisfaction to infinite justice;
then here is God, purchasing his Church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28.

3. Does justice say, that it must not only have satisfaction for sinners; but
they that are saved must be also washed and sanctified with this blood: Then
here is he that so loved us, that he washed us from our sins in his own blood,
Rev. 1. 5.

4. Is there to be a righteousness to cloth them with, that are to be
presented before divine justice; then here is the righteousness of Christ,
which is, even the righteousness of God by faith, Romans 3. 22. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.

5. Is there any sins now that will fly upon this Savior, like so many Lions,
of raging Devils, if he take in hand to redeem man, he will be content to bear
them all himself alone, even in his own body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

6. Is there any Law now that will curse, and condemn this Savior for standing
in our persons, to give satisfaction to God for the transgression of man; he
will be willing to be cursed, yea, to be made a curse for sinners, rather than
they shall be cursed and damned themselves, Gal. 3. 13.

7. Must the great and glorious God, whose eyes are so pure that he cannot
behold iniquity, I say, must he not only have the blood, but the very life of
him that will take in hand to be the deliverer, and Savior of us poor
miserable sinners; he is willing to lay down his life for his sheep, John 10.
11.

8. Must he not only dye a natural death, but must his soul descend into hell
(though it should not be left there) he will suffer that also. Psalm. 16. 10.
and Acts 2. 3.

9. Must he not only be buried, but rise again from the dead, and overcome
death, that he might be the first fruits to God of them that sleep, which shall
be saved. He will be buried, and also through the strength of his Godhead, he
will raise himself out of the grave, though death hold him never so fast, and
the Jews lay never such a great stone upon the mouth of the Sepulcher, and seal
it never so fast, 1 Cor. 15. 2. Luke 24. 34.

10. Must he carry that body into the presence of his Father, to take
possession of Heaven, Heb. 9. 24. John 14. 2, 3. And must he appear there as a
Priest (Heb. 6. 20.) as forerunner (ver. the same) as an Advocate (1 John 2.
1, 2.) as Prophet, as a Treasure-house, as an Interceder, and Pleader of the
Causes of his people; he will be all these, and much more; to the end, the
grace of God by faith in Jesus Christ, might be made surer to all the seed. Who
then can condemn? it is God that justifies; because Christ has dyed, yea,
rather that is risen again. Who (now seeing all this is so effectually done)
shall lay any thing, the least thing? who can find the least flaw, the least
wrinkle, the least defect or imperfection in this glorious satisfaction.

Object. But is it possible that he should so soon give infinite justice a
satisfaction, a complete satisfaction; for the eternal God does require an
eternal lying under the Curse; to the end, he may be eternally satisfied.

Answ. Indeed that which is infinite, must have an eternity to satisfy God in;
that is, they that fall into the prison and pit of utter darkness, must be
there to all eternity, to the end, the justice of God may have its full blow at
them. But now he that I am speaking of, is God (Isa. 9. 6. 2. Tim. 1. 16. Heb.
1. 8, 9. Phil. 2. 4, 5, 6. and so is infinite: Now le which is true God, is
able to give in as litttle a time an infinite satisfaction, as Adam was in
giving the dissatisfaction. Adam himself might have given satisfaction for
himself as soon as Christ, had he been very God, as Jesus Christ was: For the
reason why the posterity of Adam, even so many of them as fall short of life,
must lie broyling in hell to all eternity, is this; They are not able to give
the justice of Gods satisfaction, they being not infinite, as aforesaid. But
Christ (that is God-man) being come an high Priest (that is to offer and give
satisfaction) of good things to come: by a greater and more perfect tabernacle,
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building: Neither by the blood
of goats and calves, but by his own; mark you that, but by his own blood he
has entered into the holy place, having (already) obtained eternal redemption
for us: But how? For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an
beifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purging of the flesh, how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit (who
through the power and virtue of his infinite Godhead) offered himself without
spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God?
And for this cause (that is, for that he is God as well as man, and so able to
give justice an infinite satisfaction; therefore) he is the Mediator of the New
Covenant, that by the means of his death for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called might
receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. as I
said before.

Object. This is much; but is God contented with this? Is he satisfied now in
the behalf of sinners by this man's thus suffering? If he is, then how does it
appear?

Answ. It is evident, yea, wonderful evident, that this has pleased him to the
full, as appears by these following Demonstrations.

First, In that God did admit him into his presence; yea, receive him with joy
and music, even with the sound of a Trumpet at his ascension into Heaven
(Psalm. 47. 5.) and Christ makes it an argument to his Children, that his
righteousness was sufficient, in that he went to his Father, and they saw him
no more, (John 16. 10.) Of righteousness, says he; because I go to my Father,
(...) ye see me no more: As if he had said, My Spirit shall show to the world,
that I have brought in a sufficient righteousness to justify sinners withal,
in that when I go to appear in the presence of my Father on their behalf, he
shall give me entertainment, and not throw me down from heaven, because I did
not do it sufficiently.

Again, If you consider the high esteem that God the father does set on the
death of his Son, you will find that he has received good content thereby.
When the Lord Jesus by way of complaint told his Father, that he and his merits
were not valued to the worth; his Father answered, It is a light thing that I
should give thee O my servant, to bring Jacob again; I will also give thee for
a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be for salvation unto the ends of the
earth, Isa. 49. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. As if the Lord had said, My Son, I do value
thy death at a higher rate, then that thou should save the Tribes of Israel
only; behold the Gentiles, the barbarous Heathens, they also shall be brought
in as the price of thy blood. It is a light thing that thou should be my
servant (only) to bring or redeem the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel; I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation to the ends of the earth.

Again, You may see it also by the carriage of God the Father to all the great
sinners to whom mercy was proffered. We do not find that God makes any
objection against them that come to him for the pardon of their sins, because
he did want a satisfaction suitable to the greatness of their sins. There was
Manasseth, who was one that burnt his children in the fire to the devil, 2 Chronicles. 33. from 1. to 12. that used witchcraft, that used to worship the host
of heaven, that turned his back on the word that God sent unto him: nay, that
did worse than the very heathen that God cast out before the children of
Israel. Also those that are spoken of Acts 19. 19. that did spend so much time
in conjuration and the like, Acts 8. (for such I judge they were) that when
they came to burn their books, they counted the price thereof to be fifty
thousand pieces of Silver. Simon Magus also that was a Sorcerer, and bewitched
the whole City, yet he had mercy proffered to him once and again: I say, it was
not the greatness of the sins of these sinners; no nor of an innumerable
company of others that made God at all to object against the salvation of their
souls, which justice would have constrained him to, had he not had satisfaction
sufficient, by the blood of the Lord Jesus. Nay, further, I do find that
because God the Father, would not have the merits of his Son to be undervalued,
I say, he does therefore freely by his consent, let mercy be proffered to the
greatest sinners in the first place, for the Jews, that were the worst of men
in that day for blasphemy against the Gospel: yet the Apostle proffered mercy
to them in the first place. It is necessary (says he) that the word of God
should first have been spoken unto you, Acts 13. 46. Acts 3. 26. And Christ
gave them commission so to do: for says he, Let repentance and remission of
sins be preached in my name among all nations, and begin; mark that, begin at
Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. Let them that but the other day had their hands up to
the elbows in my heart blood have the first proffer of my mercy. And says
Paul, For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them that should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting, 1 Timothy 15, 16. As the Apostle says, those
sinners that were dead, possessed with the devil, and the children of wrath, he
has quickened, delivered, and saved, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. that he
might even in the very ages to come show forth the exceeding riches of his
grace in his kindness toward us (and that) through Jesus Christ.

Secondly, It is evident that that which this man did as a common person, he
did it completely and satisfactorily, as appears by the openness (as I may so
call it) which was in the heart of God to him at his resurrection and
ascension. Ask of me (says he) and I will give thee the (very) heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession,
Psalm. 2. 8. And this was at his resurrection, Acts 13. 33. Whereas, though he
had asked, yet if he had not given a full and complete satisfaction, justice
would not have given him any thing; for justice, the justice of God is so pure,
that if it be not completely satisfied in every particular, it gives nothing
but curses, Gal. 3. 10.

Thirdly, It is yet far more evident that he has indeed pleased God in the
behalf of sinners, in that God has given him gifts to distribute to sinners,
yea the worst of sinners, as a fruit of his satisfaction, and that at his
ascension (Psalm. 68. 18.) Christ has so satisfied God, that he has given him
all the treasures both of heaven and earth, to dispose of as he sees good; he
has so pleased God that he has given him a Name, above every Name; a Scepter,
above every Scepter; a Crown, above every Crown; a Kingdom above every Kingdom,
Phil. 29. Rev. 19. 16. he has given him the highest place^n heaven even his
own right hand, he has given him all the power of heaven and earth and under
the earth in his own hand, to bind whom he pleases, and to set free whom he
thinks meet; he has in a word, such an high esteem in the eyes of his Father,
that he has put into his hand, all things that are for the profit of his
people, both in this world, and that which is to come; and all this as the
fruit of his faithfulness in doing of his work, as the Mediator of the New
Covenant. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity Captive, thou
have received gifts; mark, thou have received them, for men, even for the
(worst of men, the) rebellious also: And has sent forth some, being furnished
with these gifts; some I say, For the work of the ministry, to the edifying of
them that are already called, and also for the calling in of all those for whom
he covenanted with his Father, Till all come in the unity of faith; etc. Ephesians.
4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Fourthly, It does still appear far more evident: For will you hear what the
Father himself says for the showing of his well-pleasedness, in these two
particulars. First, In that he bids poor souls to hear, and to do as Christ
would have them, Mat. 3. 17. Luke 9. 35. Secondly, In that he resolves to make
them that turn their backs upon him, that dishonor him, (which is done in a
very great measure by those that lay aside his merits done by himself for
Justification) I say, he that resolved to make them his footstool; where he
says, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Are
they enemies to thee, says God, I will be even with them? Do they slight thy
merits? Do they slight thy groans, thy tears, thy blood thy death, thy
resurrection and intercession, thy second coming again in heavenly glory? I
will tear them, and rend them, I Will make them as mire in the streets; I will
make thy enemies thy footstool (Psalm. 110. 1. Mat. 22. 44. Heb. 1. 13. Chap.
10. 13.) I, says he, And thou shall dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel,
Psalm. 2. 9. look to it you that slight the merits of the blood of Christ.

Fifthly, Again further yet; God will make all the world to know, that he has
been, and is well pleased in his Son, in that God has given (and will make it
appear he has given) the world to come into his hand, Heb. 2. And that he
shall raise the dead, bring them before his judgment seat, execute judgment
upon them which he pleases to execute judgment on to their damnation; and to
receive them to eternal life whom he does favor, even so many as shall be
found to believe in his name and merits (John 5. 26, 27, 28.) For as the Father
has life in himself; so has he given to the Son to have life in himself; And
he has given him authority to execute judgment also; because he is the Son of
man -- For the hour is coming, that all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. I, and
the worst enemy that Christ has now, shall come at that day with a pale face,
with a quaking heart, and bended knees trembling before him, confessing the
glory of his merits, and the virtue there was in them to save, to the glory of
God the Father, Romans 14. 11. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.

Much more might be added to discover the glorious perfection of this man's
satisfaction: but for you that desire to be further satisfied concerning this,
search the Scriptures, and beg of God to give you faith and understanding
therein: and as for you that slight these things, and continue so doing, God
has another way to take with you, even to dash you in pieces like a Potters
vessel; for this has Christ received of his Father to do unto you, Rev. 2. 27.

Thus I have showed you in particular, that the Covenant of the grace of God is
free and unchangeable to men, that is in that it has been obtained for men,
and that perfectly, to the satisfying of justice, and taking all things out of
the way, that were any ways an hinderance to our salvation, Col. 2. 14.

The second thing for the discovering of this freeness, and constancy of the
Covenant of the Grace of God, it is manifest thus.

First, Whatsoever any man has of the grace of God, he has it as a free gift
of God through Christ Jesus the Mediator of this Covenant, even when they are
in a state of enmity to him (mark that, Romans 5. 8, 9. Col. 1. 21, 22.) whether
it be Christ as the foundation stone, or faith to lay hold on him, Ephesians. 2. 8.
For by Grace you are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves (not for
any thing in you, or done by you for the purchasing of it) but it is the free
gift of God. And that bestowed on you, even when you were dead in trespasses
and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Nay if thou have so much as one
desire that is right, it is the gift of God; for of our selves, says the
Apostle, we are not able to speak a good word, or think a good thought, 2 Cor.
3. 5.

Was not grace, absolute grace, that God made promise to Adam after
transgression, Genesis 3. 5.

Was it not free grace in God to save such a wretch as Manasseh was, who used
enchantments, witchcraft, burnt his children in the fire, and wrought much
evil, 2 Chronicles. 33.

Was it not free grace to save such as those were that are spoken of in the 16
of Ezekiel, which no eye pitied.

Was it not free grace for Christ to give Peter a loving look after he had
cursed and swore, and denied him.

Was it not free grace that met Paul when he was a going to Damascus to
persecute, which converted him, and made him a vessel of mercy.

And what shall I say of such that are spoken of in the 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
speaking there of fornicators, idolators, adulterers, effeminates, abusers of
themselves with mankind, thieves, covetous revilers, drunkards, extortioners,
the basest of sinners in the world, and yet were washed, and yet were
justified, was it not freely by grace? O Saints! you that are in Heaven, cry
out, We came hither by grace; and you that are on earth, I am sure you cry, if
ever we do go thither, it must be freely by grace.

Secondly, In the next place, it appears to be unchangeable in this. First,
Because Justice being once satisfied, does not use to call for the debt again:
No, let never such a sinner come to Jesus Christ, and so to God by him; and
Justice instead of speaking against the salvation of that sinner, it will say,
I am just as well as faithful to forgive him his sins, 1 John 1. 9. When
Justice it self is pleased with a man, and speaks on his side, instead of
speaking against him, we may well cry out, Who shall condemn?

2. Because there is no Law to come in against the sinner that believes in
Jesus Christ; for he is not under that, and that by right comes in against
none, but those that are under it: But Believers are not under that, that is
not their Lord, therefore that has nothing to do with them; and besides
Christ's blood has not only taken away the curse thereof, but also he has in
his own person completely fulfilled it as a public person in our stead, Romans
8. 1, 2, 3, 4.

3. The Devil that accused them is destroyed, Heb. 2. 14, 15.

4. Death and the Grave, and Hell are overcome, 1 Cor. 15. 55. H^sea 13. 14.

5. Sin that great enemy of man's salvation, that is washed away, Rev. 1. 5.

6. The righteousness of God is put upon them that believe, and given to them,
and they are found in it, Ph^l. 3. 8, 9, 10. Romans 3. 22.

7. Christ is always in heaven to plead for them, and to prepare a place for
them, Heb. 7. 24. John 14 1, 2, 3, 4.

8. He has not only promised that he will not leave us, nor forsake us; but he
has also sworn to fulfill his promise. O rich grace! free grace, Lord, who
desired thee to promise? Who compelled thee to swear? we use to take honest men
upon their bare words. But God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs
of promise the immutability of his counsel (has) confirmed it by an oath: that
by two immutable things (his promise and his oath) in which it is impossible
for God to lie (or break either of them) we might have strong consolation, who
have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us (Heb. 6. 13, 17,
18.) I Will warrant you God will never break his Oath; therefore we may well have
good ground to hope from such a good Foundation as this, that God will never
leave us indeed.

Again, thirdly, Not only thus: but first, God has begotten. Believers again
to himself, to be his adopted and accepted Children, in and through the Lord
Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 3.

Secondly, God has prepared a Kingdom for them, before the Foundation of the
world, through Jesus Christ, Mat. 25.

Thirdly, He has given These things are more fully laid down in that part of
the book which contains the discourse of the privileges of the New Covenant.
them an earnest of their happiness, while they live here in this world (Ephesians.
1. 13, 14.). After ye believed ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession to the praise of his glory, and that through this Jesus.

Fourthly, If his Children sin through weakness, or by sudden temptation; they
confessing of it, he willingly forgives, and heals all their wounds, renews
his love toward them, waits to do them good, casts their sins into the
depths of the sea, and all this freely, without any work done by men as men.
Not for your sakes do I this, O House of Israel, be it known unto you, says
the Lord, Ezekiel. 36. 22, 32. but wholly and alone by the blood of Jesus.

Fifthly, In a word, if you would see it altogether, Gods love was the cause
why Jesus Christ was sent to bleed for sinners. Jesus Christ's bleeding stops
the cries of divine justice: God looks upon them as complete in him, gives them
to him, as his by right of purchase. Jesus ever lives to pray for them that are
thus given unto him. God sends his holy Spirit into them, to reveal this to
them; sends his Angels to minister for them: and all this by virtue of an
everlasting Covenant between the Father and the Son. Thrice happy are the
people that are in such a case.

Nay, further he has made them Brethren with Jesus Christ, members of his
flesh, and of his bones: the Spouse of this Lord Jesus; and all to show you how
dearly, how really, how constantly he loves us, who by the faith of his
operation, have laid hold upon him.

I shall now lay down a few arguments for the superabundant clearing of it, and
afterward answer two or three objections, as may be made against it, and so I
shall fall upon the next thing.

First, God loves the Saints, as he loves Jesus Christ. And God loves Jesus
Christ with an eternal love; therefore the Saints also with the same. Thou have
loved them, as thou have loved me, John 17. 23.

Secondly, That love which is God himself must needs be everlasting love. And
that is the love, wherewith God has loved his Saints in Christ Jesus;
therefore his love toward his children in Christ must needs be an everlasting
You must not understand that love in God, is a passion as it is in us: but the
love of G^d is the very essence, or nature of God, 1 John 4. 16.
love. There is none dare say, that the love of God is mixed with a created
mixture: if not; then it must needs be himself, 1 John 4. 16.

Thirdly, That love which is always pitched upon us, in an object as holy as
God, must needs be an everlasting love. Now the love of God was, and is pitched
upon us, through an object as holy as God himself, even our Lord Jesus:
Therefore it must needs be unchangeable.

Fourthly, If he with whom the Covenant of Grace was made, did in every thing,
and condition do, even what the Lord could desire or require of him, that his
love might be extended to us, and that for ever; Then his love must needs be an
everlasting love, seeing every thing required of us, was completely
accomplished for us by him: And all this has our Lord Jesus done, and that
most gloriously, even on our behalf: therefore it must needs be a love that
lasts for ever and ever.

Fifthly, If God has declared himself, to be the God that changes not, and
has sworn to be immutable in his promise, then surely he will be unchangeable.
And he has done so: therefore it is impossible for God to lie; and so for his
eternal love to be unchangeable (Heb. 6. 13, 14, 17, 18.) Here is an argument
of the Spirits own making, who can contradict it? If any object, and say, but
still it is upon the condition of believing. I answer, the condition also is
his own free gift, and not a qualification arising from the stock of nature
(Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 28, 29.) So that here is the love unchangeable, here is
also the condition given by him whose love is unchangeable, which may serve yet
further for a strong argument, that God will have his love unchangeable. Sinner
this is better felt and enjoyed, then talked of.

Object. But if this love of God be unchangeable in it self; yet it is not
unchangeably set upon the Saints, unless they behave themselves the better.

Answ. As Gods love at the first was bestowed upon the Saints, without any
thing foreseen by the Lord in them, as done by them (Deuteronomy. 9. 4, 5, 6.) So he
goes on with the same, saying, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb.
13. 5.

Object. But how comes it to pass then that many fall off again, from the
grace of the Gospel, after a profession of it for some time; some ^o delusions,
and some to their open sins again.

Answ. They are fallen away, not from the everlasting love of God to them; but
from the profession of the love of God to them: men may process that God loves
them, when there is no such matter, and that they are the Children of God, when
the Devil is their father; (as it is in John 8. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44) Therefore
they that do finally fall away from a profession of the grace of the Gospel: It
is first, because, they are Bastards and not Sons. Secondly, Because as they
are not Sons, so God suffers them to fall, to make it appear that they are
not Sons, not of the household of God. They went out from us, for they were not
of us; for if they had been of us, no doubt, mark that, no doubt, says he,
they would have continued with us; but they went out from us, that it might be
made man fest that they were not all of us. (1 John 2. 19.) And though Hymeneus
and Philetus, do throw themselves headlong to hell, Nevertheless the Foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18, 19.

Object. But the Scripture says, that there are some that had Faith, yet lost
it, and have made shipwreck of it: Now God loves no longer than they believe,
as is evident; For he that believes not shall be damned. So then, if some may
have Faith, and yet lose it, and so lose the love of God, because they have
lost their Faith, it is evident that Gods love is not so immutable as you say
it is to every one that believes.

Answ. There is more sorts of Faith than one, that is spoken of in Scripture.

First, There is a Faith that men may have, and yet be nothing, none of the
Saints of God (2 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and yet may do great things therewith.

2. There is a Faith that was wrought merely by the operation of the miracles
that was done in those days by Christ and his followers; And many of the people
believed on him. How came they by their Faith? Why, by the operation of the
miracles that be did among them; for said they, When Christ comes, will he do
more miracles than this man has done? The great thing that wrought their Faith
in them, was only by seeing the miracles that he did (John 7. 31. John 2. 23.)
which is not that saving Faith, which is called the Faith of Gods Elect, as is
evident: for there must not be only miracles wrought upon outward objects, to
beget that, that being too weak a thing, but it must be by the same power that
was stretched out in raising Christ from the dead; yea, the exceeding greatness
of that power (Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.) So there is a believing, being taken with some
mavelous work, visible appearing to the outward sense of seeing; and there is
a believing that is wrought in the heart, by an invisible operation of the
Spirit, revealing the certainty of the satisfaction of the merits of Christ to
the soul in a more glorious way, both for certainty and for durableness, both
as to the promise and the constancy of it, Mat. 16. 17, 18.

3. There is a Faith of a man's own, of a man's self also; but the Faith of the
operation of God (in Scripture) is set in opposition to that; for says he, You
are saved by Grace through Faith, and that not of your selves; of your own
making, but that which is the free gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8.

4. We say there is an Historical Faith, that is, such as is begotten merely by
the History of the Word, not by the Cooperation of the Spirit by the Word.

5. We say there is a Traditional Faith, that is, to believe things by
Tradition, because others say they believe them; this is received by Tradition,
not by Revelation; and shall never be able to stand neither at the day of
Death, nor at the day of Judgment; though possibly men, while they live here,
may esteem themselves and states to be very good, because their heads are
filled full of it.

6. There is a Faith that is called (in Scripture) a dead Faith, the Faith of
Devils, or of the Devil; they also that have only this, they are like the
Devil, and as sure to be damned as he, notwithstanding their Faith, if they get
no better into their hearts; for it is far off from enabling of them to lay
effectual hold of Jesus Christ, and so to put him on for eternal life and
sanctification (Jam 2. 19, 26.) which they must do if ever they be saved.

But all these are short of the saving Faith of Gods elect, as is manifest; I
say, First, Because these may be wrought, and not by that power so exceedingly
stretched forth. Secondly, Because these are wrought; partly, first, by the
sense of seeing, namely the miracles (not by hearing) and secondly, the rest is
wrought by a traditional or historical influence of the words in their heads,
not by an heavenly, invisible, almighty, and saving operation of the Spirit of
God in their hearts.

7. I do suppose also, that there is a Faith that is wrought upon men through
the influence of those gifts and abilities that God gives sometimes to those
that are nor his own by election, though by creation: my meaning is some men
finding that God has given them very great gifts and abilities; as to the
gifts of preaching, praying, working miracles, or the like; I say, they
therefore do conclude, that God is their Father, and they his Children; the
ground of which confidence is still begotten, not by the glorious operation of
the spirit, but by a considering of the great gifts that God has bestowed upon
them, as to the things before mentioned.

As thus, First, The poor soul considering how ignorant it was, and now how
knowing it is. Secondly, Considering how vain it formerly was, and also now how
civil it is, presently makes this conclusion, surely God loves me, surely he
has made me one of his, and will save me. This is now a wrong faith, as is
evident, in that it is placed upon a wrong object; for mark, this faith is not
placed assuredly on Gods grace alone, through the blood and merits of Christ,
being discovered effectually to the soul, but upon God through those things
that God has given i^; as of gifts, either to preach or pray, or great works,
or the like, which will assuredly come to naught, as sure as God is in Heaven;
if no better faith and ground of faith be found out for thy soul savingly to
rest upon.

As to the second cause of the Objection, which runs to this effect. God loves
men upon the account of their believing. I answer, that God loves men before
they believe, he loves them, he calls them, and gives them faith to believe.
But God who is rich in grace, with his great love, wherewith he loved us (when?
when we believed or before) even when we were dead in our sins (and so far off
from believers) has quickened us together with Christ, by grace you are saved,
Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

Now also I suppose that thou will say in thy heart, I would you would show us
then, what is saving faith, which thing it may be I may touch upon a while
hence, in the next thing that I am to speak unto. O they that have that are
safe indeed!

The Second Thing.
THe second Thing that I am to speak unto is this: Who they are that are
actually brought into this free and unchangable grace; and also how they are
brought in.

Answ. Indeed now we are come to the pinch of the whole discourse; and if God
do but help me to run rightly through this, as I do verily believe he will, I
may do thee, Reader, good and bring glory to my God.

The Question contains these two branches. First, who are brought in.
Secondly, how they are brought in: the first is quickly answered. Christ Jesus
came into the world ^o save sinners, Jewish sinners, Gentile sinners, Old
sinners, Young sinners, great sinners, the chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 14,
15. Romans 5. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Mat. 21. 31. Publicans and Harlots,
that is, Whores and Cheaters, Exactors, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
For I came not (says Christ) to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
Mark 2. 17.

A sinner in the Scripture is described in general to be a transgressor of the
Law, 1 John 3. 4. Whosoever commits sin transgresses the Law; for sin is
the transgression of the Law.

But particularly, they are described in a more particular way, as first, such
as in whom dwells the devil, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Secondly, such as will do the
service of him, John 8. 44. Thirdly, such as are enemies to God, Col. 1. 21.
Fourthly, such as are 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 33. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, etc. Acts 9. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 1. 14, 15, 16. Acts 19. 19. Acts 2.
36, 37. Drunkards, Whoremasters, Liars, Perjured Persons, Covetous, Revilers,
Extortioners, Fornicators, Swearers, possessed with Devils, Thieves, Idolaters,
Witches, Sorcerers Conjurers, Murderers, and the like; these be sinners, and
such sinners that God has prepared Heaven, Happiness, Pardon of Sin, and an
inheritance of God, with Christ, with Saints, with Angels, if they do come in,
and accept of Grace, as I might prove at large: For Gods grace is so great,
that if they do come to him by Christ, presently all is forgiven them;
therefore never object, that thy sins are too great to be pardoned: but come
taste and see how good the Lord is to any whosoever comes unto him.

The second thing is, How are these brought into this everlasting Covenant of
Grace?

2. Answ. When God does indeed Come to the touchstons sinner.
and in truth bring in a sinner into this most blessed Covenant (for so it is)
he usually goes this way.

First, He slays or kills the party to all things besides himself, and his Son
Jesus Christ, and the comforts of the Spirit.

For the clearing of this, I shall show you, first, with what God kills:
secondly, how God kills; and thirdly, to what God kills those whom he makes
alive in Jesus Christ.

For the first, When God brings sinners into the Covenant of Grace, he does
first kill them with the Covenant of Works, which is the Moral Law, or Ten
Commandments. This is Paul's Doctrine, and also Paul's experience. It is his
Doctrine where he says, The ministration of death engraven in stones, the
ministration of condemnation (which is the Law, in that place called the
Letter) kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Letter (says he) kills, or the Law,
or the ministration of death, which is another place is called a sound of
words, Heb. 12. 19. because they have no life (...) them, but rather death and
damnation, through our inability to fulfill them (Romans 8. 3.) does kill, 2 Cor.
6.

Secondly, It is his experience, where he says, I was alive once (that is, to
my own things, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.) without the Law (that is, before God did
strike him dead by it) but when the commandment came (that is, to do and
exercise its right Office on me, which was to kill me, then) sin revived, and I
died, (and I was killed) and the commandment (or the Law) which was ordained to
be unto life, I found to be unto death: For sin takes occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and thereby slew me, Romans 7. 9, 10, 11. And indeed to
speak my own experience, together with the experience of all the Saints, they
can seal with me to this, more or less.

Quest. But how does God kill with this Law or Covenant?

Answ. First, by opening to the soul the spirituality of it; The Law is
spiritual (says he) but I am carnal, sold under sin, Romans 7. 14. Now the
spirituality of the Law is discovered this way.

First, by showing to the soul, that every sinful thought is a sin against it.
I sinner, when the Law does, come home indeed upon thy soul in the spirituality
of it, it will discover such things to thee to be sins, that now thou look
over, and regardes^^^; that is a remarkable saying of Paul, when he says, Sin
revived, and I died; sin revived, says he, as if he had said, those things
that before I did not value nor regard, but looked upon them to be trifles, to
be dead and forgotten; but when the Law was fastened on my soul, it did so
raise them from the dead, call them to mind, so muster them before my face, and
put such strength into them, that I was over-mastered by them, by the guilt of
them. Sin revived, by the commandment, or my sins had mighty strength, life,
and abundance of force upon me, because of that; insomuch, that it killed me,
Mat. 5. 28.

Secondly, It shows that every such sin deserves eternal damnation (Friends,
I doubt there be but few of you that have seen the spirituality of the Law of
Works, but) this is one thing in which it discovers its Spirituality, and
this is the proper work of the Law.

Thirdly, God with a discovery of this does also discover his own Divine and
Infinite Justice (of which the Law is a description) which backs what is
discovered by the Law; and that by discovering of its Purity and Holiness, to
be so divine, so pure, so upright, and so far off from winking at the least
sin, that he does by that Law, without any favor, condemn the sinner for that
sin, Gal. 3. 10. Now when he has brought the soul into this Praemunire, into
this puzzle: Then,

2. He shows to the soul the nature and condition of the Law, as to its
dealing with, or for bearing of the sinner, that has sinned against it: which
is to pass an eternal curse upon both soul and body, of the party so offending,
saying to him, Cursed be the man, that continues not in every thing that is
written in the book of the Law to do it: for says the Law, this is my proper
work. First, to show thee thy sins, and when I have done that, then in the next
place to condemn thee for them, and that without all remedy, as from me, or any
thing within my bounds; for I am not to save any, to pardon any, nay, not to
favor any in the least thing that have sinned against me: for God did not send
me to make alive, but to discover sin, and to condemn for the same. Now so soon
as this is presented to the conscience, in the next place, the Law also by this
Law does show that now there is no righteous act, according to the tenor of
that Covenant, that can replieve him, or take him off from all this horror and
curse that lies upon him; because that is not an administration of pardon (as I
said before) to forgive the sin; but an administration of damnation, because of
transgression. O the very discovery of this, strikes the soul into a deadly
swoun, even above half dead. But when God does do the work indeed; he does in
the next place show the soul that he is the man that is eternally under this
Covenant by nature, and that it is thee that has sinned against this Law, and
does by right deserve the curse and displeasure of the same; and that all that
ever he can do will not give satisfaction to that glorious justice that did
give this Law; holy actions, tears of blood, selling all, and giving i^ to the
poor, or whatever else can be done by thee, it comes all short, and is all to
no purpose (Phil. 3.) I Will warrant him, he that sees this, it will kill him to
that which he was alive unto before, though he had a thousand lives. Ah
sinners, sinners, were you but sensible indeed of the severity and truth of
this, it would make you look about you to purpose. O how would it make you
strive to stop at that (...) that now you drink down with delight? How many
Oaths would it make you bite asunder? nay, it would make you bite your tongues,
to think that they should be used as instruments of the Devil, to bring your
souls into such an unspeakable misery; then also, we should not have you hang
the salvation of your souls upon such slender pin^, as now you do: no, no, but
you would be in another mind then. O then we should have you cry out, I must
have Christ, what shall I do for Christ? how shall I come at Christ? would I
was sure, truly sure of Christ, my soul is gone, damned, cast away, and must
for ever burn with the Devils; if I do not get precious Jesus Christ.

In the next place, when God has done this, then he the further shows the
soul, that Covenant which it is under by nature, is distinct from the Covenant
of Grace; and also they that are under it, are by nature without any of the
graces, which they have that are under the Covenant of Grace: As First, That it
has no faith, John 16. 9. Secondly, no hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. Thirdly, Nor none of
the spirit to work these things first by nature. Fourthly, Neither will that
Covenant give to them any peace with God. Fifthly, No promise of safeguard from
his revenging Law, by that Covenant. Sixthly, But lies by Nature liable to all
the curses and condemnings, and thunderclaps of this most fiery Covenant.
Seventhly, That it will accept of no sorrow, no repentance, no satisfaction, as
from thee. Eighthly, That it calls for no less than the shedding of thy blood.
Ninthly, The damnation of thy soul and body. Tenthly, And if there be any thing
prossered to it by thee, as to the making of it amends, it throws it back again
as dirt in thy face, slighting all that thou can bring.

Now when the soul is brought into this condition, then it is indeed dead;
killed to that, to which it was once alive.

And therefore in the next place to show you to what it is, killed; and that is
first to sin: O it dares not sin! it sees hell fire is prepared for them that
sin: Gods Justice will not spare it if it live in sin: the Law will damn it, if
it live in sin; the Devil will have it, if it follow its sin: O I say, it
trembles at the very thoughts of sin; I, if sin do but offer to tempt the soul,
to draw away the soul from God, it cries, it sighs, it shunneth the very
appearance of sin, it is odious unto it. If God would but serve you thus that
love your pleasures, you would not make such a trifle of sin, as you do.

Secondly, It is killed to the Law of God, as it is the Covenant of Works: O
says the soul, the Law has killed me to its self, I through the Law am dead
to the Law (Gal. 2. 19.) The Law is another thing then I did think it was; I
thought it would not have been so soul-destroying, so damning a Law; I thought
it would not have been so severe against me for my little sins, ^or my playing,
for my jeasting, for my dissembling, quarrelling, and the like: I had some
thoughts indeed, that it would tew great sinners, but let me pass; and though
it condemned great sinners, yet it would pass me by: but now would I were free
from this Covenant, would I were free from this Law. I will tell thee, that a
soul thus worked upon, is more afraid of the Covenant of Works, then he is of
the Devil; for he sees it is the Law that does give him up into his hands for
sin: and if he was but clear from that, he should not greatly need to fear the
Devil. O now every particular command tears the caul of his heart; now every
command is as a great gun well charged against his soul; now he sees he had as
good run into a fire to keep himself from burning, as to run to the Law to keep
himself from damning; and this he sees really, I, and feels it too, to his own
sorrow and perplexity.

Thirdly, The soul also now is killed to his own righteousness, and counts that
but dung, but dross, not worth the dirt hanging on shoes. O then says he, Thou
filthy righteousness (Isa. 64. 6.) how have thou deceived me? How have thou
beguiled my poor soul? How did I deceive my self with giving of a little alms?
with abstaining from some gross polutions? with walking in some ordinances, as
to the outside of them? How has my good words, good thinkings, good meanings
(as the world calls them) deceived my ignorant soul? I want the righteousness
of faith, the righteousness of God; for I see now there is no less will do me
any good.

Fourthly, It is also killed to its own faith, its notion of the Gospel, its
own hope, its own repentings, its own promises and resolutions to its own
strength, its own virtue, or whatsoever it had before: now says the soul, That
faith I thought I had, it is but fancy; that hope I thought I had, I see it is
but hypocritical, but vain and groundless hope: now the soul sees it has by
nature no saving faith, no saving hope, no grace at all by nature, by the first
Covenant. Now it cries out, How many promises have I broken? and how many
times have I resolved in vain? when I was sick at such a time, and in such a
straight, at such a place. Indeed I thought my self a wise man once, but I see
my self a very fool now: O how ignorant am I of the Gospel now? and of the
blessed experience of the Work of God on a Christians heart? In a word, it sees
it self beset by nature with all evil, and destitute of all good, which is
enough to kill the stoutest, hardest hearted sinner that ever lived on the
earth. O Friends! should you be plainly dealt withal, by this discovery of the
dealing of God with a sinner, when he makes him a Saint, and would seriously
try your selves thereby (as God will try you one day) how few would there be
found of you, to be so much as acquainted with the work of God in the Notion?
much less in the experimental knowledge of the same. And indeed God is fain to
take this way with sinners, thus to kill them, with the Old Covenant, to all
things below a crucified christ.

First, Because otherwise there Six reasons of this discourse.
would be none in the world that would look after this sweet Jesus Christ.
There is but a few that go to Heaven in all (comparatively) and them few, God
is fain to deal with them in this manner, or else his Heaven, his Christ, his
Glory, and everlasting Happiness must abide by themselves for all sinners. Do
you think that Manasseh would have regarded the Lord, had he not suffered his
enemies to have prevailed against him, 2 Chronicles. 33. from the 1. verse to the
16. Jer. 31. 18. Do you think that Ephraim would have looked after salvation,
had not God first confounded him with the guilt of the sins of his youth? What
do you think of Paul, Acts 9. 4, 5, 6. What do you think of the Jailour, Acts
16. 30, 31, 32. What do you think of the Three Thousand, Acts 2. 36, 37. Was
not this the way that the Lord was fain to take to make them close in with
Jesus Christ? Was he not fain to kill them to every thing below a Christ, that
they were driven to their wits ends? insomuch that they were forced to cry out,
Whbat shall we do to be saved? I say, God might keep Heaven and Happiness to
himself, it he should not go this way to work with sinners. O stout hearted
rebels! O tender hearted God!

Secondly, Because then, and not till then, will sinners accept of Jesus Christ
on Gods terms. So long as sinners can make a life out of any thing below
Christ, so long they will not close with Christ without indenting: but when the
God of Heaven has killed them to every thing below himself, and his Son; then
Christ will down on any terms in the world. And indeed this is the very reason,
why sinners when they hear of Christ, yet will not close in with him, there is
something that they can take content in besides him. The prodigal so long as he
could content himself with the husks that the swine did eat, so long he did
keep away from his Fathers House, but when he could get no nourishment any
where on this side of his Fathers House, then (says he) and not till then, I
will arise and go to my Father, etc.

I say, Ths is the reason therefore why men come no faster, and close no
realier with the Son of God, but stand halting and indenting about the terms
they must have Christ upon; for says the drunkard, I look on Christ to be
worth the having; but yet I am not willing to lose ALL for him, all but my pot
says the drunkard, and all but the world says the covetous. I will part with
any thing but lust and pride, says the wanton; but if Christ will not be had
without, I forsake all, cast away all; then it must be with me as it was with
the young man in the Gospel, such news will make me sorry at my very heart.

But now when a man is soundly killed to all his sins, to all his
righteousness, to all his comforts whatsoever, and sees that there is no way
but the Devil must have him, but he must be damned in hell, if he be not
clothed with Jesus Christ; Oh! then (says he) give me Christ on any terms
whatsoever he cost: though he cost me friends, though he cost me comforts,
though he cost me all that ever I have; yet like the wise Merchant in the
Gospel, they will sell all to get that pearl. I tell you when a soul is brought
to see its want of Christ aright, it will not be kept back, Father, Mother,
Husband, Wise, Lands, Livings, nay, life and all shall go, rather then the soul
will miss of Christ. I, and the soul counts Christ a cheap Savior, if it can
get him upon any terms, now the soul indents no longer. Now Lord give me
Christ, upon any terms whatsoever he cost; for I am a dead-man, a damned man, a
cast away, if I have not Christ. What say you, O you wounded sinners? Is not
this true as I have said? would you not give Ten thousand worlds if you had so
many, so be you might be well answered, that your sins shall be pardoned, and
your souls and bodies justified and glorified, at the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, The Lord goes this way for this reason also, that it might make the
soul sensible what it cost Christ to redeem it from death and hell. When a man
comes to feel the sting and guilt of sin, death and hell, upon his conscience,
then, and not till then, can he tell what it cost Christ to redeem sinners. O!
says the soul if a few sins are so terrible, and lay the soul under such wrath
and torment, what did Christ undergo? who bare the sins of Thousands, and
Thousands, and all at once.

This also is one means to make souls tender of sin (it is the burned child
that fears the fire) to make them humble in a sense of their own vileness, to
make them count every thing that God gives them a mercy, to make much of the
least glimpse of the love of God, and to prize it above the whole world. O
sinners were you killed indeed, then Heaven would be Heaven, and Hell would be
Hell indeed; but because you are not wrought upon in this manner, therefore you
count the ways of God, as bad as a good man counts the ways of the devil, and
the ways of the devil and hell as good as a Saint does count the ways of God.

Fourthly, Again, God is fain to go this way, and all to make sinners make sure
of Heaven. So long as souls are senseless of sin, and what a damnable state
they are in by nature, so long they will even dally with the Kingdom of Heaven,
and the Salvation of their own poor souls: but when God comes and shows them
where they are, and what is like to become of them if they miss of the
Crucified Savior; Oh then, says the soul, would I were sure of Jesus; what
shall I do to get assurance of Jesus? And thus is God forced, as I may say, to
whip souls to Jesus Christ, they being so secure, so senseless, and so much
their own enemies as not to look out after their own eternal advantage.

Fifthly, A fifth reason why God does deal thus with sinners, it is because he
would bring Christ and the Soul together in a right way. Christ and Sinners
would never come together in a beloved posture, they would not so suitably suit
each other, if they were not brought together this way, the sinner being killed.

O when the sinner is killed, and indeed struck dead to every thing below a
naked Jesus, how suitably then does the Soul and Christ suit one with another.
Then here is a naked sinner for a righteous Jesus, a poor sinner to a rich
Jesus, a weak sinner to a strong Jesus, a blind sinner to a seeing Jesus, an
ignorant, careless sinner to a wise and careful Jesus. O how wise is God in
dealing thus with the sinner, he strips him of his own knowledge, that he may
fill him with Christ's; he kills him for taking pleasure in sin, that he may
take pleasure in Jesus Christ, etc.

Sixthly, But sixthly, God goes this way with sinners because he would have
the glory of their salvation. Should not men and women be killed to their own
things, they would do sacrifice unto them, and instead of saying to the Lamb,
THOU ART WORTHY, Rev. 5. 9. Job. 40. 14. Romans 3. 27. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Tit. 3. 5.
they woul say their own arm; their own right hand has saved them: but God will
cut off boasting from ever entering within the borders of eternal glory: for he
is resolved to have the glory of the beginning, the middle, and the end, of the
contriving and saving, and giving salvation to them that enter into the joys of
everlasting glory. That they may be called the trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified, Isa. 61. 3. I might have run
through many things as to this: but I shall pass them, and proceed.

Now Secondly, The soul being thus killed to it is self, That soul that has the
right work of God upon its heart, is not only killed to its self: but also made
alive to Christ.
its sins, its righteousness, faith, hope, wisdom, promises, resolutions, and
the rest of its things which it trusted in by nature. In the next place, it
has also given unto it a most glorious, perfect, and never-fading life, which
is first a life imputed to it: yet so really that the very thought of it in the
soul has so much operation and authority, especially when the meditation of it
is mixed with faith, as to make it (though condemned by the Law, to triumph,
and to look its enemies in the face with comfort; notwithstanding the greatness
of the multitude, the fierceness of their anger, and the continuation of their
malice, be never so hot against it.

This imputed life (for so it is) is the obedience of the Son of God, as his
righteousness, in his suffering, arising, ascending, interceding, and so
consequently triumphing over all the enemies of the soul, and given to me, as
being wrought on purpose for me. So that, is is there righteousness in Christ?
that is mine: Is there perfection in that righteousness? that is mine: did he
bleed for sin? it was for mine. Has he overcome the Law, the Devil, and Hell?
the victory is mine, and I am counted the Conqueror; Nay, more than a conqueror
through him that has loved me: and I do count this a most glorious life; for
by this means it is that I am in the first place proclaimed both in Heaven and
Earth guiltless, and such a one, who, as I am in Christ, am not a sinner, and
so not under the Law, to be condemned, but as holy and righteous as the Son of
God himself, because he himself is my holiness and righteousness, and so
likewise having by this all things taken out of the way that would condemn me.

Sometimes I bless the Lord, my soul has had the life that now I am speaking
of, not only imputed to me, but the very glory of it upon my soul: For upon a
time when I was under many condemnings of heart, and feared because of my sins,
my soul would miss of eternal glory; methought I felt in my soul such a secret
motion as this, Thy righteousness is in Heaven, together with the splendor and
shining of the spirit of grace in my soul, which gave me to see clearly, that
my righteousness by which I should be justified (from all that could condemn)
was the Son of God himself in his own person now at the right hand of his
Father, representing me complete before the mercy-seat in his own self: so that
I saw clearly, that night and day, where ever I was, or what ever I was a
doing, still there was my righteousness just before the eyes of divine glory; so
that the Father could never find fault with me for any insufficiency that was
in my righteousness, being it was complete; neither could he say, where is it?
because it was continually at his right hand.

Also at another time having contracted guilt upon my soul, and having some
distemper of body upon me, supposed that death might now so seize upon, as to
take me away from among men: then thought I what shall I do now? is all right
with my soul? have I the right work of God on my soul? Answering my self, No
surely, and that because there were so many weaknesses in me; yea so many
weaknesses in my best duties: for thought I, how can such a one as I find
mercy, whose heart is so ready to evil, and so backward to that which is good
(so far as it is natural) Thus musing, being filled with fear to die, these
words came in upon my soul, Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Christ; as if God had said, Sinner, thou think
because thou have had so many infirmities and weaknesses in thy soul whilst
thou have been professing of me, therefore now there can be no hopes of mercy,
but be it known unto thee, that it was not any thing done by thee at the first,
that moved me to have mercy upon thee; neither is it any thing that is done by
thee now that shall make me either accept or reject thee; behold my Son who
stands by me, he is righteous, he has fulfilled my Law, and given me good
satisfaction; on him therefore do I look, and on thee only as thou art in him,
and according to what he has done, so will I deal with thee: This having
stayed my heart, and taken off the guilt through the strength of its coming on
my soul, anon after came in that word as a second testimony: He has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling, not according to the works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given
us in Christ Jesus before the world began.

And thus is the sinner made alive from the dead, being justified by Grace
through the righteousness of Christ which is unto all and upon all them that
believe according to the Scriptures. And the life that I now live, it is by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. I
lay down my life for my sheep, John 10. 10, 15. I I am come that you might have
life, and that you might have it more abundantly. For if while we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more then being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10, 21. That as sin reigns
unto death, even so might Grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Secondly, This life is not only imputed to him that is wrought on by the
spirit of Grace, that is not only counted his; but also there is put into the
soul an understanding enlightened on purpose to know the things of God, which
is Christ and his imputed righteousness (1 John 5. 20.) which it never thought
of nor understood before (1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11.) which understanding being
enlightened, and made to see such things that the soul cannot be contented
without it lay hold of, and apply Christ unto it self, so effectually; I say
that the soul shall be exceedingly revived in a very heavenly measure, with the
application of this imputed righteousness; for thereby it knows it shall find
God speaking peace to its self, and with a fatherly affection say, Be of good
cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, the righteousness of my Son I bestow upon
thee: For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the (thy)
flesh, I have sent forth my only Son, and have condemned thy sins in his flesh,
Romans 8. 3. 4. And though thou have gone astray list a lost sheep, yet on him I
have laid thine iniquities; and though thou thereby did undo and break thy
self forever, yet by his stripes I have healed thee. Thus I say the Lord
causes the soul by faith to apply that which he does by grace impute unto it
(for thus every soul more or less is dealt withal) the soul being thus
enlightened, thus quickened, thus made alive from that dead state it was in
before (or at least having the beginnings of this life) it has these several
virtuous advantages, which they have not that are dead in their sins and
trespasses, and under the Law.

First, It sees what a sad condition all men by nature are in, they being in
that state which it self was in but a while since: but now by grace it is a
beginning to scrable out of it; now it sees the whole world lies in
wickedness (1 John 5. 19.) and so liable to eternal vengeance* because of their
wickedness. Ah friends, let me tell you, though you may be ignorant of your
state and condition, yet the poor groaning, hungering Saints of God do see what
a sad, woeful, miserable state you are in, which sometimes makes them tremble
to think of your most lamentable latter end (you dying so) and also to Like as
the Children of Israel who fled for fear, when the ground opened its mouth to
swallow up Corah and his company, Ps. 103. 1, 23.
fly the faster to their Lord Jesus, for very fear that they also should be
partakers of that most doleful doom: and this it has by virtue of its own
experience, knowing it self was but a while ago in the same condition, under
the same condemnation. O! there is now a hearty blessing of God that ever he
should show to it its sad condition, and that he should incline its heart to
seek after a better condition. O blessed be the Lord! says the soul, that ever
he should awaken me, stir up me; and bring me out of that sad condition, that I
once with them was in. It makes also the soul to wonder to see how foolishly
and vainly the rest of its neighbors do spend their precious time, that they
should be so void of understanding, so forgetful of their latter end, so
senseless of the damning nature of their sins: O that their eyes was but
enlightened to see whereabouts they are (...) surely they would be of another
mind then they are now in. Now the soul wonders to see what slender pins those
poor creatures do hang the stress of the eternal salvation of their souls upon.
O methinks! says the soul, it makes me mourn to see that some should think
that they were Born Christians, and others that their Baptism makes them so,
others depending barely upon a traditional, historical faith, which will leave
their souls in the midst of plerplexity. O that they should trust to such
fables, fancies, and wicked slights of the Devil, as their good doings, their
good thinkings, their civil walking, and living with the world. O miserable
profession, and the end thereof will be a miserable end.

But now, when the soul is thus wrought upon, it must be sure to look for the
very gates of hell to be set open against it, with all their force and might
to destroy it. Now hell rages, the devil roareth, and all the world resolved
do be the best they can, to bring the soul again into bondage and ruin. Also
the soul shall not want enemies, even in its own hearts lust, as covetousness,
adultery, blasphemy, unbelief, hardness of heart, coldness, half-heartedness,
ignorance, with an innumerable company of attendants, hanging like so many
blocks at its heels, ready to sink it into the fire of hell every moment,
together with strange apprehensions of God and Christ, as if now they were
absolutely turned to be its enemies, which makes it doubt of the certainty of
its salvation: For you must understand, that though a soul may in reality have
the righteousness of the Son of God imputed to it, and also some faith in a
very strong manner to lay hold upon it: yet at another time, through temptation
they may fear and doubt again; insomuch that the soul may be put into a very
great fear, lest it should return again into the condition it once was in, Jer.
32 40. O says the soul when I think of my former state, how miserable it was,
it makes me tremble; and when I think that I may fall into that condition
again, how sad are the thoughts of it to me? I would not be in that condition
again for all the world: and this fear rises still higher and higher, as the
soul is sensible of Satan's temptations, or of its working of its own
corruptions. Ha! these filthy lusts, these filthy corruptions. O that I was rid
of them, that they were consumed in a moment, that I could be quite rid of
them, they do so disturb my soul, dishonor my God, so defile my conscience,
and sometimes so weaken my hands in the way of God, and my comforts in the
Lord; O how glad should I be, if I might be stripped of them, Romans 7. 24. Which
fear puts the soul upon flying* to the Lord by prayer, for the covering of his
imputed righteousness, and for strength against the Devils temptations and its
own corruptions; that God would give down his holy spirit to strengthen it
against the things that do so anoy its soul, and so discourage it in its way,
with a resolution through grace, never to be contented, while it does find in
it self a triumphing over it by faith in the blood of a Crucified Jesus.

Secondly, The soul that has been thus killed by the Law to its things it
formerly delighted in; now, O now it cannot be contented with that slender
groundless faith and hope that once it contented it self withal. No, no, but
now it must be brought into the right saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, now it
must have him discovered to the soul by the spirit, now it cannot be satisfied,
because such and such do tell it is so. No, but now it will cry out, Lord show
me continually in the light of thy Spirit through thy word, that Jesus that was
born in the days of Caesar Augustus (when Mary a Daughter of Judah went with
Joseph to be taxed at Bethel^m) that he is the very Christ. Lord let me see it
in the light of thy spirit, and in the operation thereof, and let me not be
contented without such a faith that is so wrought: even by the discovery of his
birth, crucifying, death, blood, resurrection, ascension, intercession, and
second (which is his personal) coming again, that the very faith of it may fill
my soul with comfort and holiness: and O how afraid the soul is, lest it should
fall short of this faith, and of the hope that is begotten by such discoveries
as these are? For the soul knows, that if it has not this, it will not be
able to stand neither in death nor judgment: and therefore says the soul,
Lord, whatever other poor souls content themselves withal, let me have that
which will stand me instead, and carry me through a dangerous world, that may
help me to resist a cunning Devil, that may help me to suck true soul
satisfying consolation from Jesus Christ through thy promises by the might and
power of thy Spirit. And now when the poor soul at any time has any discovery
of the love of God through a bleeding, dying, risen, interceding Jesus, because
it is not willing to be deceived; O how But this may be its temptation taking
place through the timerousness of the soul.
wary is it of closing with it, for fear it should not be right, for fear it
should not come from God? Says the soul, Cannot the Devil give one such
comfort tro? Cannot he transform himself thus into an Angel of light? So that
the soul (because it would be upon a sure ground) cries out, Lord show me thy
salvation, and that not once or twice: but Lord let me have thy presence
continually upon my heart, to day and to morrow, and every day; for the soul
when it is rightly brought from under the Covenant of Works, and planted into
the Covenant of Grace, then it cannot be (unless it be under some desperate
temptation) contented without the presence of God, teaching, comforting,
stablishing, and helping of the soul to grow in the things of the Lord Jesus
Christ: because it knows, that if God has but withdrawn his presence in any
way from it (as he does do sometimes for a while) that then the Devil will be
sure to be near at hand, working with his temptations, trying all ways to get
the soul into slavery and sin again; also the corrupt principle that will be
joining and combining with the wicked one, and will be willing to be a
Co-partner with him, to bring the soul into mischief, which puts a soul upon an
earnest, continual panting after more of the strengthening, preserving,
comforting, and teaching presence of God, and for strong supplies of faith,
that it may effectually lay hold on him.

Thirdly, The soul is quickened so, that it is not satisfied now without it do
indeed and in truth partake of the peace of Gods Elect; now it is upon the
examination of the reality of its joy and peace: Time was indeed that any thing
would serve its turn, any false conce^ts of its state to be good: but now all
kind of peace will not serve its turn, all kind of joy will not be accepted
with it; now it must joy in God through Jesus Christ, now its peace must come
through the virtue of the blood of Christ, speaking peace to the conscience, by
taking away both the guilt and the filth of sin by that blood, also by showing
the soul its free acceptance with God through Christ, he having completely
fulfilled all the conditions of the first Covenant, and freely placed it into
the safety of what he has done, and so presents the soul complete and spotless
in the sight of God through his obedience. Now I say, he has peace through the
blood of his Cross, and sees himself reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
Col. 1. 20, 21. or else his comfort will be questioned by him. It is not every
promise as comes now upon his heart that will serve his turn: no, but he must
see whether the Babe Jesus be presented to the soul, in and through that
promise; now if the Babe leap in his womb, as I may say, so say, it is because
the Lords promise sounds aloud in his heart, coming to him big with the love
and pardoning grace of God in Jesus Christ; I say, this is the first and
principle joy that the soul has, that is quickened and brought into the
Covenant of Grace.

Fourthly, Now the man finds Heavenly sanctification wrought in his soul,
through the most precious blood of the man whose name is Jesus Christ. Jesus
that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the
gate Now the soul finds a change in the understanding, in the will, in the
mind, in the affections, in the judgment, and also in the conscience; through
the inward man a change, and through the outward man a change, from head to
foot, as we use to say. For he that is in Christ, and so in this Covenant of
Grace, is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. or has been twice made, made, and made
again. O now the soul is resolved for Heaven and Glory, now it cries out, Lord
if there be a right eye that is offensive to thee, pluck it out; or a right
foot, cut it off; or a right hand, take it from me; now the soul does begin to
studdy how it may honor God, and bring praise to him. Now the soul is for a
preparation, for the second coming of Christ, endeavoring to lay aside every
thing that may hinder: And for the closing in with those things that may make
it in a beloved posture against that day.

Fifthly, And all this is from a Gospel Spirit, and not from a Legal natural
principle, for the soul has these things as the fruits and effects of its
being separated unto the Covenant of Grace, and so now possessed with that
spirit that does attend, yea, and dwell in them that are brought into the
Covenant of Grace, from under the Old Covenant; I say, these things do spring
forth in the soul, from another root and stock, then any of the actings as
other men do; for the soul that is thus wrought upon, is as well dead to the
Law and the righteousness thereof (as the first Covenant) as well as to its
sins.

Sixthly, Now the soul begins to have some blessed experience of the things of
God, even of the glorious mysteries of the Gospel.

1. Now it knows the meaning of those words. My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed, John 6. 55. and that by experience; for the soul has
received peace of conscience through that blood, by the effectual application
of it to the soul. First, by feeling the guilt of sin dye off from the
conscience^, by the operation thereof. Secondly, by feeling the power thereof,
to take away the curse of the Law. Thirdly, By finding the very strength of
Hell to fail, when once the blood of the man Jesus Christ is received in
reality upon the soul.

2. Now the soul also knows by experience, the meaning of that Scripture that
says, Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, Romans 6. 6. Now it sees that when the man Jesus did hang on the tree
on Mount Calvary, that then the body of its sins was there hanged up, dead and
buried with him, though it was then unborn, so as never to be laid to its
charge, either here or hereafter; and also, so as never to carry it captive
into perpetual bondage, being it self overcome by him, even Christ the head of
that poor creature. And indeed this is the way for a soul, both to live
comfortably, as touching the guilt of sin; and also, as touching the power of
the filth of sin: for the soul that does, or has received this indeed and in
truth, finds strength against them both, by and through that man that did for
him and the rest of his fellow sinners, so gloriously overcome it, and has
given the victory unto them, so that now they are said to be overcomers, nay,
more than conquer^rs through him, the one man Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 33, 34, 35,
36, 37.

3. Now the soul has received a ^aith indeed, and a lively hope indeed, such a
one as now it can fetch strength from the fullness of Christ, and from the
merits of Christ.

4. Yea, now the soul can look on it self with one eye, and look upon Christ
with another; and say indeed it is true, I am an empty soul, but Christ is a
full Christ; I am a poor sinner, but Christ is a rich Christ; I am a foolish
sinner, but Christ is a wise Christ; I am an unholy, ungodly, unsanctified
creature in my self, But Christ is made of God, unto me, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

5. Now also that fiery Law, that it could not once endure, nor could not once
delight in; I say, now it can delight in it after the inward man, now this Law
is its delighe, it would always be walked in it, and always be delighted in it,
being offended with any sin, or any corruption, that would be any ways an
hinderance to it, Romans 7. 24, 25. And yet it will not edure that, even that
that Law should offer to take the work of its salvation out of Christ's hand:
no, if it once comes to do that, then out of doors it shall go, if it was as
good again. For that soul that has the right work of God indeed upon it,
cries, not my prayers, not my tears, not my works, not my things, do they come
from the work of the spirit of Christ it self within me; yet these shall not
have the glory of my salvation: no, it is none but the blood of Christ, the
death of Christ, of the man Christ Jesus of Nazareth the Carpenters Son (as
they called him) that must have the Crown and Glory of my salvation. None but
Christ, none but Christ; and thus the soul labors to give Christ the
preeminence, Col. 1. 18.

Now before I go any further, I must needs speak a word from my own experience
of the things of Christ; and the rather because we have a company of silly ones
in this day of ignorance, that do either comfort themselves with a notion
without the power, or else do both reject the notion and the power of this most
glorious Gospel: therefore, for the further conviction of the Reader, I shall
tell him (with David) something of what the Lord has done for my soul, and
indeed a little of the experience of the things of Christ, is far more worth
than all the world. It would be too tedious for me to tell thee (here) all from
the first to the last, but something I shall tell thee, that thou may not
think these things are fables.

Reader, when it pleased the Lord to begin to instruct my soul, he found me one
of the black sinners of the world; he found me making a sport of Oaths, and
also of Lies, and many a soul-poysoning meal did I make out of diverse Lusts, as
Drinking, Dancing, Playing, Pleasure with the wicked ones of the world. The
Lord finding of me in this This conviction seized on my soul, one Sabbath day,
when I was at play, being one of the first that I had; which when it came,
though it seared me with its terror, yet through the temptation of the devil,
immediately striking in therewith I did rub it off again and became as vile for
some time as I was before, like a wretch that I was.
condition, did open the glass of his Law unto me, wherein he showed me so
clearly my sins, both the greatness of them, and also how abominable they were
in his sight, that I thought the very clouds were charged with the wrath of
God, and ready to let fall the very fire of his jealousy upon me: yet for all
this I was so wedded to my sins, that thought I with my self, I will have them,
though I lose my soul (O wicked wretch that I was) but God the great, the rich,
the infinite merciful God, did not take this advantage of my soul, to cast me
away, and say, then take him Devil, seeing he cares for me no more: no, but he
followed me still, and won upon my heart, by giving of me some understanding,
not only into my miserable state which I was very sensible of; but also that
there might be hopes of mercy, also taking away that love to lust, and placing
in the room thereof a love to religion; and thus the Lord won over my heart to
some desire after the means, to hear the word, and to grow a stranger to my old
companions, and to accompany the people of God, together with giving of me many
sweet encouragements from several promises in the Scriptures: but after this,
the Lord did wonderfully set my sins upon my conscience, those sins especially
that I had committed since the first convictions, temptations also followed me
very hard, and especially such temptations as did tend to the making of me
question the very way of salvation, viz. whether Jesus Christ was the Savior
or no: and whether I had best to venture my soul upon his blood for salvation,
or take some other course. But being through grace kept close with God (in some
measure) in prayer, and the rest of the ordinances; but went about a year and
upwards, without any sound evidence as from God to my soul, touching the
salvation as comes by Jesus Christ. But at the last, as I may say, when the set
time was come, then the Lord (just before the men called, Quaker's came into
the Country) did set me down (...) blessedly in the truth of the Doctrine of
Jes^s Christ, that it made me marvail, to see first; how Jesus Christ was born
of a Virgin, walked in the world a while with his Disciples, afterward hanged
on the Cross, spilt his Blood, was Buried, Rose again, Ascended above the
Clouds and Heavens, their lives to make intercession; and that he also will
come again at the last day to judge the World, and take his Saints unto
himself. These things, I say, I did see so evidently, even as if I had stood by
when he was in the world, and also when he was caught up. I having such a
change as this upon my soul, it made me wonder; and musing with my self at the
great alteration that was in my spirit, for the Lord did also very gloriously
give me in his precious word to back the discovery of the Son of God unto me,
so that I can say, through grace it was according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.
1, 2, 3, 4.) and as I was musing with my self what these things should mean,
methought I heard such a word in my heart as this; I have set thee down on
purpose, for I have something more than ordinary for thee to do; which made me
the more marvel; saying, What, my Lord, such a poor wretch as I? yet still this
continued, I have set thee down on purpose, and so forth, with more fresh
incomes of the Lord Jesus, and the power of the blood of his Cross upon my
soul, even so evidently, that I saw (through grace) that it was the blood shed
on Mount Calvary that did save and redeem sinners, as clearly and as really
with the eyes of my soul, as ever (methoughts) I had seen a penny-loaf bought
with a penny; which things then discovered, had such operation upon my soul,
that I do hope, they did sweetly season every faculty thereof. Reader, I speak
in the presence of God, and he knows I lie not: much of this, and such like
dealings of his, could I tell thee of; but my business at this time is not so
to do, but only to tell what operation the blood of Christ has had over and
upon my conscience, and that at several times, and also when I have been in
several frames of spirit.

As first, sometimes I have been so laden with my sins, that I could not tell
where to rest, nor what to do; yea, at such times I thought it would have taken
away my senses: yet at that time, God through grace has all of a sudden^* so
effectually applied the blood that was spilt at Mount Calvary, out of the side
of Jesus, unto my poor wounded guilty conscience, that presently I have found
such a sweet, solid, sober, heart comforting peace, that it has made me, as if
it had not been, and withal the same (I may say, and I ought to say, the power
of it) has had such a powerful operation upon my soul, that I have for a time
been in a straight and trouble, to think that I should love and honor him no
more, the virtue of his blood has so constrained me.

Again, sometimes methinks my sins have appeared so big to me, that I thought
one of my sins have been as big as all the sins of all the men in the Nation,
I, and of other Nations too. (Reader, these things be not fancies, for I have
smarted for this experience) but yet the least stream of the heart blood of
this man Jesus, has vanished all away, and has made it to fly, to the
astonishment of such a poor sinner; and as I said before, has delivered me up
into sweet and heavenly peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

Again, sometimes when my heart has been hard, dead, slothful, blind and
senseless (which indeed are sad frames for a poor Christian to be in) yet at
such a time when I have been in such a case, then has the blood of Christ the
precious blood of Christ, the admirable blood of the God of Heaven, that run
out of his body when it did hang on the Cross, so softened, livened, quickened,
and enlightened my soul, that truly (Reader) I can say, O it makes me wonder!

Again, when I have been laden with sin, and p^st^red with several
temptations, and in very sad manner, then have I had the trial of the virtue of
Christ's blood, with the trial of the virtue of other things: and I have found
that when tears would not do, prayers would not do, repentings and all other
things could not reach my heart: O then one touch, one drop, one shining of the
virtue of the blood, of that blood that was let out with a spear; it has in a
very blessed manner delivered me, that it has made me to marvel. O ^methinks
it has come with such life, such power, with such irresistible and mavelous
glory, that it wipes off all the slurs, silences, all the outcries, and
quenches all the fiery darts, and all the flames of hell fire, that are
begotten by the charges of the Law, Satan, and doubtful remembrances of my
sinful life.

Friends, as Peter says to the Church, so I say to you, I have not preached to
you cunningly devised ^ables, in telling you of the blood of Christ, and what
authority it has had upon my Conscience: O no, but as Peter says touching the
coming of the Lord Jesus into the world; so in some measure I can say of the
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, that was shed when he did come into the world.
There is not only my single testimony touching this; no, but there is all the
Prophets do agree, in advancing this in writing, and also all the Saints do now
declare the same, in speaking forth the aimableness, and many powerful virtues
thereof. As for thee, by the blood of thy Covenant (says God to Christ) I have
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein was no water, Zech. 9. 11. We
have redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. Again, Col. 1. 14. We have
redemption through his blood. Our robes are washed, and made white in the blood
of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14. The Devil is overcome through the blood of the Lamb,
Rev. 12. 11. Yea, and conscience is purged too, and that through the blood of
the Lamb, Heb. 9. 14. We have free recourse to the Throne of grace through the
blood of Jesus, Heb. 10. 19. I could bring thee a cloud of witnesses out of all
the types and shadows, and out of the sundry Prophets, and much more out of the
New Testament, but I forbear, because I would not be too tedious to thee
Reader, in making too large a digression, though I have committed here in this
Discourse, no transgression, for the blood of Christ is precious blood, 1 Pet.
1. 18, 19.

In the next place I shall show you the several privileges and advantages the
man or woman has, that is under this Covenant of Grace, over they have that
are under the Covenant of the Law and Works.

As first, the Covenant of Grace is not grounded upon our obedience, but upon
Gods love, even his pardoning love to us through Christ Jesus. The first
Covenant it stood to be broken or kept by us, and Gods love or anger, to be
lost, or enjoyed hereafter, as we, as creatures behaved our selves: but now the
very ground of the Covenant of Grace is Gods love, it is mere love through Jesus
Christ, Deuteronomy. 7. 8, 9. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you;
because you were more in number then other people; for you were the fewest of
all people: but because the Lord loves you, and because he will keep the oath
which he swore to your fathers. Again, Isa. 63. 9. In his love and in his pity
he redeemed them, and the Angel of his presence saved them, that is Jesus
Christ. And again, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us. -- Not according to the
works of righteousness which we have done; but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus, before the world began.

Secondly, This love is not conveyed to us through what we have done (as is
before proved) but through what he has done, with whom the Covenant was made,
which was given us in Christ. According as he hach chosen us in Christ, Who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. God
for Christ's sake has loved you (2 Timothy 1. 9. Ephesians 1. 3, 4. Ephesians. 4. 32.) That is
through Christ's doings, through Christ's sufferings. Now if this be but rightly
understood, it does discover abundance of comfort to them that are within the
bounds of the Covenant of Grace. For

First, Here a believer sees he shall stand, if Christ's doings and sufferings
stand (which is a sure Foundation) for God deals with him through Christ. And
so Secondly, He shall not fall, unless the sufferings and merits of Christ be
thrown over the bar, being found guilty (which will never be) before the eyes
of divine justice. For with him the Covenant was made, and he was the surety of
it, Zech. 9. 11. Heb. 7. 22. That is, as the Covenant was made with him, so he
stood bound to fulfill the same. For you must understand that the Covenant was
made between the Father and the Son, long before it was accomplished, or
manifestly sealed with Christ's blood, it was made before the world began, (Tit.
1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20.) But the conditions thereof was not
fulfilled, until less than Two Thousand Years ago; and all that while did Jesus
stand bound as a surety (as I said before) is used to do, till the time in
which the payment should be made. And it was by virtue of his suretiship
(having bound himself by Covenant to do all things agreed on, by the Father and
him) that all those of the election that were born before he came, that they
might be saved, and did enter into rest. For the forgiveness of sins that was
past, though it was through the blood of Christ; yet it was also through the
for bearance of God, Romans 3. 25. That is, Christ becoming surety for those that
died before his coming, that he would indeed and in truth, at the fullness of
time (or at the time appointed, Gal. 4. 4.) give a complete and full
satisfaction for them according to the tenor, or condition of the Covenant.

Again Secondly, The second Covenant, which Believers are under, as the ground
and foundation if it is safe; so the promises thereof are better, surer, freer
and fuller, etc.

First, They are better, if you compare the excellency of the one with the
excellency of the other. The first has promised nothing but an earthly
paradise, Do this and thou shall live. Namely, here in an earthly paradise. But
the other does bring the promise of an heavenly paradise.

Secondly, As the Covenant of Works does promise an earthly Paradise; yet it is
a Paradise or Blessing, though once obtained, yet might be lost again (for no
longer than thou do well, no longer art thou accepted by that) O but the
Promises in the New Covenant, do bring unto us the benefit of eternal
inheritance, (Heb. 9. 15.) That they which are called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance. O rare! it is an eternal inheritance.

Thirdly, The other, as it is not so good as this, so neither is it so sure as
this, and therefore he calls the one, such a one as might be, and was shaken
(Heb. 12. 27.) but this is said to be such a one that cannot be shaken. And
this word, says he, treating of the two Covenants from verse the 18. to the 24
And this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are
(or may be) shaken, as of things that are made, that those things that cannot
be shaken (which is the second Covenant) may remain; for ^aith he, verse the
28. which cannot be moved. Therefore ye blessed Saints, seeing you have
received a Kingdom which cannot, which cannot be moved: (therefore) Let us have
grace whereby we may serve (our) God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear.
Thus in general, but more particular.

First, They are surer, in that they are founded upon Gods love also, and they
come to us without calling for those things at our hands, that may be a means
of putting of a stop to our certain enjoying of them. The promises under or of
the Law, they might easily be stopped by our disobedience: but the promises
under the Gospel says, If heaven above can be measured, and the foundation of
the earth searched out, then (and not till then) will I cast off all the seed
of Israel for all that they have done. Again, I, even I am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions for my own Names sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa.
43. 25. I will make thee a Partaker of my Promise; and that I may so do, I will
take away that which would hinder; I will cast all your sins into the depths of
the sea, that my promise may be sure to all the seed. And therefore says the
Apostle, when he would show us that the New Covenant promises was more sure
then the Old; he tells us plainly that the Law and Works are set aside, and
they are merely made ours through the righteousness of faith, which is the
righteousness of Christ. For the promise that Abraham should be heir of the
world (says he) was not to him, or to his seed through the Law, (or Works) but
through the righteousness of faith. For if they which are of the Law (or of
Works) be heirs, then ^aith is made void, and the promise made of none effect.
Therefore it is of ^aith -- to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed, Romans 4. 13, 14, 16.

Secondly surer, because that as that is taken away that should hinder, so they
are committed to a faithful friend of ours in keeping: For all the promises of
God are in Christ; not yea yea and nay, but yea and amen; certain and sure;
sure because they are in the hand of our head, our friend, our brother, our
husband, our flesh and bones, even in the heart and hand of our precious Jesus.

Thirdly, Because all the conditions of them are already fulfilled for us by
Jesus Christ, as aforesaid, every promise that is a New Covenant promise, if
there be any condition in it, our undertaker has accomplished that for us, and
also gives us such grace as to receive the sweetness as does spring from them
through his obedience to every thing required in them.

Fourthly, surer, because that as they are grounded upon the love of God; every
thing taken out of the way, in the hand of a sure friend: And as Christ has
fulfilled every condition as to justification that is contained therein; so the
Lord has solemnly sworn with an oath for our better confidence in this
particular, For when God made promise to Abraham (and so to all Saints) because
he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself, saying; Surely, blessing I
will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee: and so after he had
patiently endured, he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the
greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife (that
there might be no more doubt or scruple concerning the certain fulfilling of
the promise) wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, or certain, constant, unchangeable
decree of God in making of the promise, for the comfort of his children)
confirmed it by an Oath that by two immutable things, his promise (backed with
an Oath) wherein it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us,
Heb. 6. 13, 14. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Fifthly, That they are better it appears also, in that they are freer and
fuller; that they are freer, it is evident, in that the one says, no works no
life: Do this, and then thou shall live, if not, thou shall be damned. But the
other says, we are saved by believing in what another has done, without the
works of the Law; Now to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4, 4, 5.
The one says pay me that thou owe; the other says, I do frankly and freely
forgive thee all. The one says, because thou have sinned thou shall die; the
other says, because Christ lives thou shall live also, John 15

Secondly, And as they are freer, so they are fuller; fuller of encouragement,
fuller of comfort; the one (to wit the Law) looks like Pharaohs seven ill
favored k^^e, more ready to eat one up, then to afford us any food. The other
is like the full grape in the cluster, which for certain has a glorious
blessing in it. The one says, if thou have sinned, turn again; the other
says, if thou have sinned, thou shall be damned, for all I have a promise in
me.

Thirdly, They that are of the second, are better then they that are of the
first; and it also appears in this. The promises of the Law, through them we
have neither faith, nor hope, nor the Spirit conveyed: But through the promises
of the Gospel there is all these, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we might be partakers of
the Divine nature. O therefore let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering; for he is faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 23. In hope of
eternal life (who so) because God that cannot lie, promised it before the world
began, Tit. 1. 2.

Fourthly, They that are in this Covenant are in a very happy state; for though
there be several conditions in the Gospel to be done, yet Christ Jesus does not
look that they should be done by man, as man, but by his own Spirit in them, as
it is written, Thou have wrought all our works in us and for us. Is there that
condition, they must believe; why then, he will be both the Author and finisher
of their faith, Heb. 12. 2, 3. Is there also hope to be in his Children, he
also does, and has given them good hope through his grace, 2 These. 2. 26.
Again, are the people of God to behave themselves to the glory of God the
Father? The^ he will work in them both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.

Fifthly, Again, as he works all our works in us and for us, so also by virtue
of this Covenant, we have another nature given unto us. Whereby, or by which we
are made willing to be glorifying of God both in our bodies, and in our
spirits, which are his, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, 2
Cor. 6. 20. Psalm. 110. 3.

Sixthly, In the next place, all those that are under this second Covenant, are
in a wonderful safe condition: For in case they should slip or fall, after
their conversion into some sin or sins, (for who lives and sins not, Prove. 24.
16.) yet through the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus, who is their
undertaker in this Covenant, they shall have their sins pardoned, their wounds
healed, and they raised up again; which privilege the children of the first
Covenant have not, for if they sin, they are never afterward regarded by that
Covenant. They break my Covenant, and I regarded them not, Heb. 8. 9. But when
he comes to speak of the Covenant of Grace, speaking first of the public
person under the name of David, he says thus, Psalm. 89. from the 26. verse to
the 37. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
Salvation. Also I will make him my firstborn: higher then the kings of the
earth. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand
fast with him. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
judgment: If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then will I
visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David, His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me; it
shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven.
My Covenant shall stand fast with him, mark that, As if God had said, I did not
make this Covenant with man, but with my Son, and with him I will perform it;
and seeing he has given me complete satisfaction, though his Children do
through infirmity transgress, yet my Covenant is not therefore broken, seeing
he with whom it was made, stands firm, according to the desire of my heart;
so that my justice that is satisfied, and (...) Law has nothing to say; for
there is no want of perfection in the sacrifice of Christ.

If you love your souls and would have them live in the peace of God, to the
which you are called in one body, even all Believers; then I beseech you
seriously to ponder, and labor to settle in your souls this one thing, that
the New Covenant is not broken by our transgressions, and that because it was
not made with us. The reason why the very Saints of God have so many ups and
downs in this their travel toward heaven; it is because they are so weak in
the faith of this one thing; for they think that if they fail of this or that
particular performance, if their hearts be dead and cold, and their lusts
mighty and strong; therefore now God is angry, and now be will shut them out of
his favor, now the New Covenant is broken, and now Christ Jesus will stand
their friend no longer; now also the devil has power again, and now they must
have their part in the resurrection of damnation; when alas the Covenant is not
for all this never the more broken, and so the Grace of God no more straightned
then it was before. Therefore I say, when thou find that thou art weak here,
and sailing there, backward to this good, and thy heart forward to that evil;
then be sure thou keep a steadfast eye on the Mediator of this New Covenant;
and be persuaded, that it is not only made with him, and his part also
fulfilled, but that he does look upon his fulfilling of it, so as not to lay
thy sins to thy charge, though he may as a father chastise thee for the same.
If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments. If they break my
statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then will I visit their transgressions
with a rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless, mark, nevertheless
my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my mouth. And what was that? why, that his seed shall endure for ever, and his
throne as the days of Heaven, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.

Seventhly, Another privilege that the Saints have by virtue of the New
Covenant, is, that they have part of the possession, or hold of heaven and
glory already: and that two manner of ways. First, the divine nature is
conveyed from heaven into them. And Secondly, the humane nature (i. e.) the
nature of man is received up, and entertained in, and has got possession of
Heaven.

1. We have the first fruits of the spirit (says the man of God) we have the
earnest of the spirit which is instead of the whole. Which is the earnest of
our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory, Romans 8. 8, 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.

2. The nature of man, OUR nature is got into glory as the first fruits of
mankind, as a forerunner to take possession till we all come thither, 1 Cor.
15. 20. For the man born at Bethlem is ascended (which is part of the lump of
mankind) into glory, as a public person, as the first fruits, representing the
whole of the Children of God. So that in some sense it may be said, that the
Saints have already taken possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, by their Jesus,
their public person; he being in their room entered to prepare a place for
them, John 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

I beseech you consider, When Jesus Christ came down from glory, it was that he
might bring us to glory; and that he might be sure not to fail, he clothed
himself with our nature, as if one should take a piece out of the whole lump
instead of the whole, Heb. 2. 14, 15. (until the other comes) and investeth in
that glory which he was in before he came down from Heaven: and thus is that
saying to be understood, speaking of Christ and Saints, which says, And (he)
has raised us up together, and made us fit together in Heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 6.

Eighthly, Again, not only thus, but all the power of God, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
together with the rest of his glorious attributes, are on our side, in that
they dwell in our nature, which is the man Jesus, and does engage for us, poor,
simple, empty, nothing creatures, as to our eternal happiness. For in him (that
is in the man Christ who is our nature, our head, our root, our flesh, our
bone) dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily; Col. 2. 9, 10. Mark how
they are joined together, In whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead. And ye
are complete in him. God dwells completely in him, and you also are
completely implanted in him, which is the head of all principality and power,
and all this by the consent of the Father. For it has pleased the Father, that
in him should all fullness dwell. Now mark, the Godhead does not dwell in
Christ Jesus for himself only, but that it may be in a way of righteousness
conveyed to us, for our comfort and help in all our wants. All power is given
unto me in Heaven and Earth, says he, Mat. 28. 18. And then follows, And lo
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Psalm. 68. 18. 20. He has
received gifts for men, even for the rebellious, John 1. 16. Of his fullness
have we all received, and grace for grace, Col. 1. 9. And this the Saints
cannot be deprived of, because the Covenant made with Christ, in every tittle
of it was so completely fulfilled as to righteousness, both active and passive,
that justice cannot object any thing, holiness now can find fault with nothing;
nay, all the power of God cannot shake any thing that has been done for us by
the Mediator of the New Covenant; so that now there is no Covenant of Works to
a Believer, none of the commands, accusations, condemnations, or the least
tittle of the Old Covenant to be charged on any of those that are the Children
of the Second Covenant, no sin to be charged, because there is no Law to be
pleaded, but all is made up by our middle man Christ Jesus. O blessed Covenant!
O blessed Privilege! Be wise therefore O ye poor drooping souls that are the
sons of this second Covenant. And stand fast in the liberty wherewith CHRIST
has made you free, and be not again entangled (not terrified in your
consciences) with the yoke of bonbondage; neither the commands, accusations, or
condemnations of the Law of the Old Covenant, Gal. 5. 1, 2.

Object. If it be so, then one need not care what they do, they may sin and sin
again, seeing Christ has made satisfaction.

Answ. If I was to point out one that was under the power of the Devil, and
going post haste to hell (for my life) I would look no further for such a man,
then to him that would make such a use as this of the grace of God. What
because Christ is a Savior, thou will be a sinner; because his grace abounds,
therefore thou will abound in in. O wicked wretch! rake hell all over, and
surely I think thy fellow will scarce be found: And let me tell thee this
before I leave thee, as Gods Covenant with Christ for his Children (which are
of faith) stands sure, immutable, unrevokable, and unchangeable; so also has
God taken such a course with thee, that unless thou can make God forswear
himself, it is impossible that thou should go to heaven, dying in that
condition. They tempted me, proved me, and turned the grace of God into
laciviousness (Compare Heb. 3. 9. 10, 11. ver. with the 1 Cor. 10. Chap. from
the 5. verse to the 10.) So I swear, mark that, So I swear (and that in my
wrath too) that they should never enter into my rest. No, says God, if Christ
will not serve their turns, but they must have their sins too, take them devil;
if Heaven will not satisfy them, take them hell, devour them hell, scald them,
fry them, burn them hell; God has more places than one to put sinners into, if
they do not like of Heaven, he will fit them with Hell; if they do not like
Christ, they shall be forced to have the Devil. Therefore we must and will tell
of the truth of the nature of the Covenant of the grace of God to his poor
Saints, for their encouragement, and for their comfort, who would be glad to
leap at Christ upon any terms: yet therewith we can tell how through grace, to
tell the hogs and sons of this world, what a hogsty there is prepared for them,
even such a one that God has prepared to put the Devil and his Angels into, is
fitly prepared for them, Mat. 25. 41.

Object. But if Christ has given God a full and complete satisfaction, then
though I do go on in sin, I need not fear, seeing God has already been
satisfied; it will be injustice in God to punish for those sins, for which he
is already satisfied for by Christ.

Answ. Rebel, rebel, there are some in Christ, and some out of him; they that
are in him have their sins forgiven, and they themselves made new creatures,
and have the spirit of the Son, which is a holy, loving, self-denying spirit.
And they that are thus in Jesus Christ are so far off from delighting in sin,
that sin is the greatest thing that troubles them; and O how willingly would
they be rid of the very thoughts of it, Psalm. 119. 113. It is the grief of
their souls (when they are in a right frame of spirit) that they can live no
more to the honor and glory of God, then they do; and in all their prayers to
God, the breathings of their souls is as much for sanctifying grace as
pardoning grace, that they might live a holy life; they would as willingly live
holy here, as they would be happy in the world to come, Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. they would as willingly be
cleansed from the filth of sin, as to have the guilt of it taken away; they
would as willingly glorify God here, as they would be glorified by him
hereafter.

2. But there are some that are out of Christ, being under the Law, and as for
all those, let them be civil or profane, they are such as God accounts wicked;
and I say, as for those, if all the Angels in Heaven can drag them before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, they shall be brought before it to answer for all
their ungodly deeds, Jude 15. and being condemned for them, if all the fire in
Hell will burn them, they shall be burned there (if they die in that
condition.) And therefore if you love your souls, do not give way to such a
wicked spirit. Let no man deceive yo^ with (such) vain words (as to think,
because Christ has made satisfaction to God for sin: therefore you may live in
your sins. O no, God forbid that any should think so) for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5 6.

Thus have I (Reader) given thee a brief discourse, touching the Covenant of
Works, and the Covenant of Grace, also of the nature of the one, together with
the nature of the other. I have also in this Discourse, endeavored to show you
the condition of them that are under the Law, how sad it is, both from the
nature of the Covenant they are under, and also by the carriage of God unto
them by that Covenant. And, now because I would bring all into as little a
compass as I can, I shall begin with the Use and Application of the whole in as
brief a way as I can, desiring the Lord to bless it to thee.

And first of all, let us here begin to examine a little touching the Covenant
you stand before God in, whether it be the Covenant of Works, or the Covenant
of Grace; and for the right doing of this, I shall lay down this proposition.
Namely, that all men naturally come into the world under the first of these,
which is called the Old Covenant, or the Covenant of Works, which is the Law.
And were all by nature the children of wrath, even as others; which they could
not be, had they not been under the Law; for there are none that are under the
other Covenant, that are still the Children of the wrath but the Children of
faith, the Children of the promise, the accepted Children, the Children not of
the Bondman, but of the free, Gal. 4. the 4. last verses.

Now here lies the question. Which of these two Covenants art thou under, soul?

Answ. I hope I am under the Covenant of Grace.

Quest. But what ground have thou to think that thou art under that blessed
Covenant? and not rather under the Covenant of Works, that strict, that
soul-damning Covenant?

Answ. What ground, Why, I hope I am.

Quest. But what ground have thou for this thy hope? For a hope without a
ground is like a Castle built in the air, that will never be able to do thee
any good, but will prove like unto that spoken of in the eighth of Job, Whose
hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be (like) a spiders web. He shall
lean upon his House but it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast (as thou
would thy hope it is like) but it shall not endure, Job. 8. 13, 14, 15.

Answ. My hope is grounded upon the promises, what else should it be grounded
upon?

Answ. Indeed to build my hope upon Christ Jesus, upon God in Christ, through
the (...), and to have this hope rightly, by the shedding abroad of the love of
God in the heart, it is a right grounded hope, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Quest. But what promises in the Scripture do you find your hope built upon?
And how do you know whether you do build your hope upon the promises in the
Gospel, the promises of the New Covenant: and not rather on the promises of the
Old Covenant, for there are promises in that as well as in the other?

Answ. I hope that if I do well I shall be accepted; because God has said I
shall, Genesis 4. 7.

Rep. O soul, if thy hope be grounded there, thy hope is not grounded upon the
Gospel promises, or the New Covenant, but verily upon the old; for these words
was spoken to Cain, a Son of the Old Covenant; and they themselves are the
tenor and scope of that, for that runs thus. Do this and thou shall live. The
man that does these things shall live by them. If thou do well, thou shall be
accepted, Levit. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 11. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Genesis 4. 7.

Rep. Why, truly if a man's doing well, and living well, and his striving to
serve God as well as he can, will not help him to Christ, I do not know what
will; I am sure sinning against God will not.

Quest, Did you never read that Scripture, which says, Israel which followed
after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness?
Romans 9. 30, 31, 32.

Object. But does not the Scripture say, Blessed are they that keep his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, Rev. 22. 14.

Answ. There is first therefore to be enquired into, whether to keep his
Commandments, be to strive to keep the Law, as it is a Covenant of Works; or
whether it be meant of the great Commandments of the New Testament, which are
cited, 1 John 3. 22, 23. And whatsoever we ask we receive of him, because we
keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. But
what do you mean John? do you mean the Covenant of the Law, or the Covenant of
the Gospel? Why, This is his Commandment (says he) that we should believe on
the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and to love one another (as the fruits of
this faith) as he gave us Commandment. If it be the Old Covenant, as a Covenant
of Works, then the Gospel is but a lost thing. If it were of Works, then no
more of Grace; therefore it is not the Old Covenant, as the Old Covenant.

Quest. But what do you mean by these words, the Gld Covenant, as the Old
Covenant? explain your meaning.

Answ. My meaning is, that the Law is not to be looked upon for life, so as it
was handed out from Mount Sinai, if ever thou would indeed be saved, though
after thou have faith in Christ, thou may and must solace thy self in it,
and take pleasure therein, to express thy love to him, who has already saved
thee by his own blood, without thy obedience to the Law, either from Sinai, or
elsewhere.

Q^^st Do you think that I do mean that my righteousness will save me, without
Christ's? if so, you mistake me, for I think not so: but this I say, I will
labor to do what I can, and what I cannot do Christ will do for me.

Answ. Ah poor soul, this is the wrong way too, for this is to make Christ but
a piece of a Savior, thou will do something, and Christ shall do the rest,
thou will set thy own things in the first place, and if thou want at last,
then thou will borrow of Christ, thou art such a one that do Christ the
greatest injury of all. First, in that thou do undervalue his merits, by
preferring of thy own works before his. And secondly, by mingling of his works,
thy dirty ragged righteousness with his.

Quest. Why, would you have us do nothing? would you have us make Christ such a
drudge as to do all, while we sit idling still?

Answ. Poor soul thou mistakest Jesus Christ, in saying thou make him a
drudge, in letting him do all: I tell thee he counts it a great glory to do all
for thee, and it is a great dishonor unto him, for thee so much as to think
otherwise. And this the Saints of God that have experienced the work of Grace
upon their souls do count it also the same, Rev. 5. 9. Saying, thou art worthy
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof, ver. 12. Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing, And why so? read again the 9. ver. For thou
wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy (own) blood. See also Ephesians. 1.
6, 7. To the praise of the glory of his grace: In whom we have redemption
through his blood.

Rep. All this we confess that Jesus Christ died for us: but he that thinks to
be saved by Christ, and lives in his sins, shall never be saved.

Answ. I grant that. But this I say again, a man must not make his good doings
the lowest round of the ladder, by which he goes to Heaven; that is, he that
will, and shall go to Heaven, must wholly and alone, without any of his own
things, venture his precious soul upon Jesus Christ and his merits.

Quest. What, and come to Christ as a sinner?

Answ. Yea, wit^ all thy sins upon thee, even as filthy as ever thou can.

Quest. But is not this the way to make Christ to loath us? You know when
Children fall down in the dirt, they do usually before they go home, make their
clothes as clean as they can, sor fear their Parents should chide them, and so
I think should we?

Answ. This comparison is wrongly applied, if you bring it to show us how we
must do when we come to Christ. He that can make himself clean, has no need of
Christ; for the whole, the clean, and righteous, have no need of Christ, but
those that are foul and sick Physicians you know if they love to be honored,
they will not bid the Patients first make themselves whole, and then come to
them: no, but bid them come with their sores all running on them, as the woman
with her bloody issue, Mark 5. And as Mary Magdalen with her Belly full of
Devils, and the Leppers all scabbed, and that is the right coming to Jesus
Christ.

Reply. Well, I hope that Christ will save me, for his promises and mercy is
very large, and as long as he has promised to give us life, I fear my state
the less.

Answ. It is very true, Christ's promises are very large, blessed be the Lord
for ever, and also so is his mercy; but notwithstanding all that, there is many
go in at the broad gate; and therefore I say your business is seriously to
enquire whether you are under the first or second Covenant; for unless you are
under the second, you will never be regarded of the Lord, for as much as you
are a sinner, Heb. 89. And the rather, because if God should be so good to you
as to give you a share in the second, you shall have all your sins pardoned;
and for certain have eternal life, though you have been a great sinner.

But do not expect that thou shall have any part or share in the large promises
and mercy of God, for the benefit and comfort of thy poor soul, whilst thou art
under the Old Covenant, because, so long thou art out of Christ, through whom
God conveyeth his mercy, grace, and love to sinners. For all the promises of
God in him are yea, and in him, Amen. Indeed his mercy, grace and love, is very
great, but it is treasured up in him, given forth in him, through him. But God
who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us -- that he might
show the exceeding riches of his grace: But which way? In his kindness toward
us through Christ Jesus. But out of Christ thou shall find God, a just God, a
sin revenging God, a God that will by no means spare the guilty; and be sure,
that every one that is found out of Jesus Christ, will be found guilty in the
Judgment day, upon whom the wrath of God shall smoke to their eternal ruin.

Now therefore consider of it, and take the counsel of the Apostle in 2 Cor.
13. 5. Which is to examine thy self whether thou art in the faith, and to prove
thy own self, whether thou have received the Spirit of Christ in^^ thy soul,
whether thou have been converted, whether thou have been born again, and made a
new creature, whether thou have had thy sins washed away in the blood of
Christ, whether thou have been brought from under the Old Covenant into the
New; and do not make a slight examination, for thou have a precious soul,
either to be saved or damned.

And that thou may not be deceived, consider that it is one thing to be
convinced, and another to be converted; one thing to be wounded, and another to
be killed; and so to be made alive by the faith of Jesus Christ. When men are
killed they are killed to all things they lived to before, both sin and
righteousness, as all their old faith, and supposed grace, that they thought
they had. Indeed the Old Covenant will show thee that thou art a sinner, and
that a great one too; but the Old Covenant, the Law, will not show thee without
the help of the spirit that thou art without all grace by nature: no, but in
the midst of thy troubles thou will keep thy self from coming to Christ, by
persuading thy soul, that thou art come already, and have some grace already. O
therefore be earnest in begging the spirit, that thy soul may be enlightened,
and the wickedness of thy heart discovered, that thou may see the miserable
state that thou art in, by reason of sin and unbelief, which is the great
condemning sin: and so in a sight and sense of thy sad condition (if God should
deal with thee in severity according to thy deservings) do thou cry to God for
faith in a Crucified Christ, that thou may have all thy sins washed away in
his blood, and such a right work of grace wrought in thy soul, that may stand
in the Judgment-day.

Again secondly, In the next place, you know I told you that a man might go a
great way in a profession, and have many excellent gifts, so as to do many
wondrous works, and yet be but under the Law; from hence you may learn, not to
judge your selves to be the children of God, 1 Cor. 1. because you may have
some gifts of knowledge or understanding more than others: no, for thou may
be the knowingest man in all the Country, as to head-knowledge, and yet be but
under the Law, and so consequently under the ^urse, notwithstanding that.

Now seeing it is so, that men may have all this and yet perish; then what will
become of those that do no good at all, and have no understanding, neither of
their own sadness, nor of Christ's mercy. O sad! Read with understanding, Isa.
27. 11. Therefore he that made them will have mercy on them, and he that formed
them, will show them no favor. See also 2 These. 1. 8, 9.

Now there is one thing, which for want of, most people do miscarry in a very
sad manner; and that is because they are not able to distinguish between the
nature of the Law, and the Gospel. O people, people, your being blinded here,
as to the knowledge of this, is one great cause of the ruining of many: As Paul
says, While Moses is read, or while the Law is discovered, the vail is over
their hearts, 2 Cor. 3. 15. that is, the vail of ignorance is still upon their
hearts, so that they cannot discern either the nature of the Law, or the nature
of the Gospel, they being so dark and blind in their minds, as you may see, if
you compare it with Chap. 4. 3, 4. And truly I am confident, that were you but
well examined, I doubt many of you would be found so ignorant, that you would
not be able to give a word of right answer concerning either the Law, or the
Gospel. Nay my Friends, set the case one should ask you what time you spend,
what pains you take, to the end you may understand the nature and difference of
these two Covenants; would you not say (if you should speak the truth) that you
did not so much as regard whether there was two or more? would you not say, I
did not think of Covenants or study the nature of them? I thought that if I had
lived honestly, and did as well as I could, that God would accept of me, and
have mercy upon me, as he had on others. Ah friends, this is the cause of the
ruin of thousands, for if they are blinded to this, both the right use of the
Law, and also of the Gospel, is hid from their eyes; and so for certain they
will be in danger of perishing most miserably, (poor souls that they are)
unless God of his mere mercy and love, does rend the vail from off their
hearts; the vail of ignorance, for that is it which does keep these poor souls
in this besetted and blindfolded condition, in which if they dye, they may be
lamented for, but not helped; they may be pitied, but not preserved from the
stroke of Gods everlasting vengeance.

In the next place, if you would indeed be delivered from the first into the
second Covenant. I do admonish you to the observing of these following
particulars.

First, Have a care that you do not content your selves, though you do good
works (that is, which in themselves are good) in, and with a Legal Spirit,
which are done these ways as follows.

First, If you do any thing commanded in Scripture, and in your doing of it, do
think that God is well pleased therewith, because you, as you are religious men
do do the same: upon this mistake was Paul himself in danger of being
destroyed; for he thought because he was zealous, and one of the strictest sect
for Religion, therefore God would have been good unto him, and have accepted
his doings, as it is clear, for he counted them his gain, Philipians 3. 4, 5,
6, 7, 8.

Now this is done thus. When a man does think, that because he thinks he is
more sincere, more liberal, with more difficulty, or to the weakening of his
estate; I say, if a man because of this, does think that God accepts his
labor, it is done from an Old Covenant Spirit.

Again, Some men they think that they shall be heard, because they have prayer
in their families, because they can pray long, and speak expressions, or
express themselves excellently in prayer, that because they have great
enlargements in prayer: I say, that therefore to think that God does delight in
their doings, and accept their works, this is from a Legal Spirit.

Again, Some men think, that because their Parents have been religious before
them, and have been indeed the people of God, they think if they also do as to
the outward observing of that which they learned from their forerunners, that
therefore God does accept them: but this also is from a wrong spirit; and yet
how many are there in England at this day, that think the better of themselves,
merely upon that account, I, and think the people of God ought to think so too;
not understanding that it is ordinary, for an Eli to have an Hophni and a
Phin^has, both sons of Belial: Also a good Samuel to have a perverse
offspring; likewise David an Absalom. I say, their being ignorant of, or else
negligent in regarding this, they do think that because they do spring from
such and such, as the Jews in their generations did, that therefore they have a
privilege with God more than others, when there is no such thing, John 8 33,
34, 35. Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9. but for certain, if the same faith be not in them,
which was in their forerunners, to lay hold of the Christ of God, in the same
spirit as they did, they must utterly perish, for all their high conceits that
they have of themselves.

Secondly, When People come into the presence of God, without having their eye
upon their Divine Majesty, through the flesh and blood of the Son of Mary, the
Son of God; then also do they come before God, and do whatsoever they do from a
Legal Spirit, an old Covenant Spirit. As for instance, you have some people,
it is true, they will go to Prayer (in appearance very fervently) and will plead
very hard with God, that he would grant them their desires, pleading their
want, and the abundance thereof; they will also plead with God his great mercy,
and also his free promises: but yet they neglecting the aforesaid Body, or
Person of Christ, the righteous Lamb of God, to appear before him in: I say, in
thus doing, they do not appear before the Lord, no otherwise then in an old
Covenant Spirit; for they go to God only as a merciful Creator, and they
themselves as his Creatures: not as he is their Father in the Son, and they his
children by Regeneration through the Lord Jesus. I, and though they may call
God their Father in the Notion (not knowing what they say, only having learned
such things by tradition) as the Pharisees did; yet Christ will have his time
to say to them, even to their faces, as he did once to the Jews, Your father
(for all this your profession) is the Devil, to their own grief and everlasting
misery, John 8. 44.

The third thing that is to be observed, if we would not be under the Law, or
do things in a Legal Spirit is this: to have a care that we do none of the
works of the holy Law of God, for life, or acceptance with him; no, nor of the
Gospel neither. To do the works of the Law, to the end we may be accepted of
God, or that we may please him, and to have our desires of him, is to do things
from a Legal or old Covenant-Spirit, and that is expressly laid down, where it
is said, To him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt;
that is, he appears before God through the Law, and his obedience to it, (Romans
4. 4, 5.) And again, though they be in themselves Gospel Ordinances, as
baptism, breaking of bread, hearing, praying, meditating, or the like: yet, I
say, if they be not done in a right Spirit, they are thereby used as a hand by
the Devil, to pull thee under the Covenant of Works; as in former times he used
circumcision, which was no part of the Covenant of Works, the ten Commands, but
a Seal of the righteousness of Faith; yet, I say, they being done in a Legal
Spirit, the Soul was thereby brought under the Covenant of Works, and so most
miserably destroyed unawares to it self, and that because there was not a right
understanding of the nature and terms of the said Covenants. And so it is now.
Souls being ignorant of the nature of the old Covenant, do even by their
subjecting to several Gospel Ordinances, run themselves under the old Covenant,
and fly off from Christ, even when they think they are a coming closer to him:
(O miserable!) If you would know when or how this is done, whether in one
particular or more, I shall show you as follows.

1. That man does bring himself under the Covenant of Works, by
Gospel Ordinances, when he cannot be persuaded that God will have mercy upon
him, except he do yield obedience to such or such a particular thing commanded
in the Word: this is the very same spirit that was in the false brethren spoken
of, (Asts 15. Gal. the whole Epistle) whose judgment was, that unless such and
such things were done they could not be saved. As now a days we have also some
that say, unless your Infants be baptized, they cannot be saved; and others
say, unless you be rightly baptized, you have no ground to be assured that you
are believers, or members of Churches; which is so far off from being so good
as a Legal Spirit, that it is the Spirit of Blasphemy; as is evident, because
they do reckon that the Spirit, Righteousness, and Faith of Jesus, and the
confession thereof, is not sufficient to declare men to be members of the Lord
Jesus; when on the other side, though they be rank hypocrites, yet if they do
yield an outward subjection to this or that, they are counted presently
communicable members; which does clearly discover, that there is not so much
honor given to the putting on the righteousness of the Son of God, as there is
given to that which a man may do, and yet go to hell within an hour after; nay,
in the very doing of it, does shut himself for ever from Jesus Christ.

2. Men may do things from a Legal or Old Covenant-Spirit, when they content
themselves with their doing of such and such a thing; as prayers, reading,
hearing, baptism, breaking of bread, or the like; I say, when they can content
themselves with the thing done, and sit down at ease and content, because the
the thing is done. As for instance, some men, they being persuaded that such
and such a thing is their duty, and that unless they do do it, God will not be
pleased with them, nor suffer them to be heirs of his kingdom; they from this
spirit do rush into, and do the thing, which being done, they are content, as
being persuaded, that now they are without doubt in a happy condition, because
they have done such things, like unto the Pharisee, who because he had done
this and the other thing, said therefore, in a bragging way, Lord, I thank thee
that I am not as this Publican; for I have done thus and thus: when alas, the
Lord gives him never a good word for his labor, but rather a reproof.

3. That man does act from a Legal Spirit, who makes the strictness of his
walking the ground of his assurance for eternal life. Some men, all the ground
they have to believe that they shall be saved, it is, because they walk not so
loose as their neighbors, they are not so bad as others are, and therefore
they question not but that they shall do well; now this is a false ground, and
a thing that is verily Legal, and savours only of some slight and shallow
apprehensions of the Old Covenant (I call them shallow apprehensions,) because
they are not right and sound, and are such as will do the Soul no good, but
beguile it, in that the knowledge of the nature of this Covenant does not
appear to the Soul, only some commanding power it has on the Soul, which the
Soul endeavoring to give up it self unto, it does find some peace and content,
and especially if it find it self to be pretty willing to yield it self to its
commands; and is not this the very ground of thy hoping that God will save thee
from the wrath to come? If one should ask thee what ground thou have to think
thou shall be saved; would thou not say? truly because I have left my sins
and because I am more inclinable to do good, and to learn, and get more
knowledge, I endeavor to Do not think that I am against the order of the
Gospel.
walk in Church order (as they call it) and therefore I hope God has done a
good work for me, and I hope will save my soul. Alas, alas, this is a very
trick of the Devil, to make Souls build the ground of their salvation upon this
their strictness, and abstaining from the wickedness of their former lives, and
because they desire to be stricter, and stricter. Now if you would know such a
man or woman, you shall find them in this frame; namely, when they think their
hearts are good then they think also that Christ will have mercy upon them: but
when their corruptions work, then they doubt and scruple, until again they
have their hearts more ready to do the things contained in the Law and
Ordinances of the Gospel. Again, such men do commonly cheer up their hearts,
and encourage themselves still to hope all shall be well, and that because they
are not so bad as the rest, but more inclinable than they, saying, I am glad I
am not as this Publican, but better than he, more righteous than he, Luke 18.
11.

4. That is a Legal and Old Covenant-Spirit, that secretly persuades the Soul,
that if ever it will be saved by Christ, it must first be ^itted for Christ, by
its getting of a good heart and good intentions to do this and that for Christ:
I say, that the Soul when it comes to Christ may not be rejected, or turned
off, when indeed and in truth, this is the very way for the Soul to turn it
self from Jesus Christ, instead of turning to him; for such a Soul looks upon
Christ, rather to be a painted Savior or a Cipher, then a very, and real
Savior. Friend, if thou can fit thy self, what need have thou of Christ? If
thou can get qualifications to carry to Christ, that thou might be
accepted, thou do not look to be accepted in the beloved. Shall I tell thee?
thou art as if a man should say, I will make my self clean, and then I will go
to Christ that he may wash me; or like to a man possessed, that will first cast
the Devils out of himself, and then come to Christ for cure for him. Thou must
therefore, if thou will so lay hold of Christ, as not to be rejected by him, I
say thou must come to him as the basest in the world, more fitter to be damned,
if thou had thy right, then to have the least smile, hope, or comfort from
him: come with the fire of hell in thy conscience; come with thy heart hard,
dead, cold, full of wickedness and madness against thy own Salvation; come as
renouncing all thy tears, prayers, watchings, fastings; come as a blood-red
sinner; do not stay from Christ, till thou have a greater sense of thy own
misery, nor of the reality of Gods mercy; do not stay while thy heart is
softer, and thy spirit in a better frame, but go against thy mind, and against
the mind of the Devil and Sin, throw thy self down at the foot of Christ, with
a halter about thy neck, and say, Lord Jesus, hear a sinner, a hard-hearted
sinner, a sinner that deserves to be damned, to be cast to hell; and resolve
never to return, or to give over crying unto him, till thou do find that he
has washed thy Conscience from dead works with his blood vertually, and
clothed thee with his own righteousness, and made thee complete in himself;
this is the way to come to Christ.

The Use for the second Doctrine.
Now a few words to the second Doctrine, and so I shall draw toward a
conclusion; The Doctrine does contain in it very much comfort to thy Soul, who
art a new Covenant man, or one of those who art under the New Covenant.

There is first pardon of sin. And secondly, the manifestation of the same. And
thirdly, a power to cause thee to persevere through Faith to the very end of
thy life.

There is first pardon of sin, which is not in the Old Covenant; for in that
there is nothing but commands, and if not obeyed, condemned. O, but there is
pardon of sin, even of all thy sins, against the first and second Covenant,
under which thou art, and that freely, upon the account of Jesus Christ the
righteous, he having in thy name, nature, and in the room of thy person,
fulfilled all the whole Law in himself for thee, and freely gives it unto
thee: O, though the Law be a ministration of death and condemnation, yet the
Gospel, under which thou art, is the ministration of life and salvation, 2 Cor.
3. 6, 7, 8 9. Though they that live and dye under the first Covenant, God
regards them not, Heb. 8. 9. Yet they that are under the second are as the
apple of his Eye, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Psalm. 17. 8. Zech. 2. 8. Though they that are
under the first, the Law, are called to blackness, and darkness, and tempest,
the sound of a Trumpet, and a burning Mountain, which sight was so terrible,
that Moses said, I exceedingly fear, and quake, Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. Yet
you are come unto Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, to the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels. To the general assembly and
Church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven, and to God the
judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; And to Jesus (to
blessed Jesus) the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling* which speaks betten things than that of Abel. Heb. 12. 22, 23,
24. even forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7.

2. The Covenant that thou art under does allow of Repentance, in case thou
chance to slip or fall, by sudden Temptation, (Rev. 2. 5.) but the Law allows
of none, (Gal. 3. 10.) The Covenant that thou art under allows thee strength
also: but the Law is only a sound of words, commanding Words, but no Power is
given by them to fulfill the things commanded, Heb. 12. 19. Thou that art under
this second, art made a Son; but they that are under that first, are Slaves and
Vagabonds, Genesis 4. 12. Thou that art under this have a Mediator, that is to
stand between Justice and thee, 1 Timothy 2. 5. But they under the other, their
Mediator is turned an Accuser, and speaks most bitter things against their
Souls, John 5. 45. Again, the way that thou have into Paradise, is a new and
living way; mark, a living way, Heb. 10. 20. But they that are under the Old
Covenant, their way into Paradise is a killing and destroying way, Genesis 3. 24.
Again, thou have the Righteousness of God to appear before God withal, Phil.
3. 9. But they under the Old Covenant have nothing but the Righteousness of the
Law, which Paul counts dirt and dung, Phil. 3. 7, 8. Thou have that which will
make thee perfect; but the other will not do so, Heb. 7. 19. The Law makes
nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better Hope (which is the Son of God)
did, by which we draw nigh to God.

3. The New Covenant promises thee a new Heart, (as I said before) Ezekiel. 36.
26. but the Old Covenant promises none; and a new Spirit, but the Old Covenant
promises none. The New Covenant conveyeth Faith, Gal. 3. but the Old one
conveyeth none. Through the New Covenant the Love of God is conveyed into the
Heart, Romans 5. but through the Old Covenant there is conveyed none of it
savingly through Jesus Christ. The New Covenant does not only give a Promise of
Life, but also with that, the assurance of Life; but the old one gives none.
The old Covenant wrought Wrath in us, and to us, Romans 4. 15. but the new one
works Love, Gal. 5. 6. Thus much for the first use.

Secondly, As all these, and many more Privileges, do come to thee through, or
by the New Covenant; and that thou might not doubt of the Certainty of these
glorious Privileges, God has so ordered it, that they do all come to thee by
way of Purchase being obtained for thee, ready to thy hand, by that one Man
Jesus, who is the Mediator, or the Person that has principally to do, both
with God and thy Soul, in the things pertaining to this Covenant: so that now
thou may look on all the glorious things that are spoken of in the New
Covenant, and say, all these must be mine; I must have a share in them; Christ
has purchased them for me, and given them to me. Now I need not to say, O! but
how shall I come by them? God is holy, I am a sinner; God is just, and I have
offended: no, but thou may say, though I am vile and deserve nothing, yet
Christ is holy, and he deserves all things; though I have so provoked God by
breaking his Law, that he could not in justice look upon me, yet Christ has so
gloriously paid the debt, that now God can say, Welcome Soul, I will give thee
grace, I will give thee glory, thou shall lie in my bosom, and go no more out;
my Son ha^^ ^leased me, he has satisfied the loud cries o^ ^he Law and
Justice, that called for speedy vengeance on thee. He has fulfilled the whole
Law, he Dan. 9. 24, 25.
has brought in everlasting righteousness, he has overcome the Devil, he has
washed away thy sins with his most precious blood, he has destroyed the power
of death, and triumphs 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57.
over all the Enemies. This he did in his own person, as a common Jesus, for
all persons, in their stead, even for so many as shall come in to him; for his
victory I give to them, his righteousness I give to them, his merits I bestow
on them, and look upon them holy, harmless, undefiled, and for ever comely in
my Eye, through the victory of the Captain of their Salvation.

And that thou may indeed and in truth, not only hear and read this glorious
Doctrine, but be found one that has the life of it in thy heart, thou must be
much in studying of the two Covenants; the nature of the one and the nature of
the other, and the conditions of them that are under them both. Also thou must
be well grounded in the manner of the Victory and Merits of Christ, how they
are made thine. And here thou must in the first place believe, that the Babe
that was Born of Mary, lay in a Manger at Bethlehem, in the time of Caesar
Augustus; that he, that Babe, that Child, was the very Christ. Secondly, thou
must believe that in the days of Tibereas Caesar, when Herod was Tetrarch of
Galilee, and Pontius Pilate Governor of Judea, that in those days he was
crucified, or hanged on a tree between two Thieves, which by computation, or
according to the best account, is above sixteen hundred years since. Thirdly,
thou must also believe, that when he did hang upon that Cross of Wood, on the
Mount Calvary, that then he did dye there This is the Doctrine that I will live
and dye by, and be willing to be damned if it saves me not. I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to Salvation; therefore I
preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness. Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1.
for the sins of those that did dye before he was Crucified, also for their
sins that were alive at the time of his Crucifying, and also, that he did by
that one death give satisfaction to God for all those that should be born and
believe in him after his death, even unto the Worlds end. I say, this thou must
believe upon pain of eternal Damnation, that by that one death, that when he
did dye, he did put an end to the curse of the Law and Sin, and at that time by
his death on the Cross, and by his Resurrection out of Joseph's Sepulcher, he
did bring in a sufficient Righteousness to clothe thee withal completely. For
by one offering he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified, not that
he should often offer himself; for then must he often have suffered since the
foundation of the World: but now ONCE in the end of the World has he appeared
to put (or do) away Sin by the sacrifice of himself. Namely, when he hanged on
the Cross. For it is by the offering up of the Body of (this blessed) Jesus
Christ ONCE for all. Indeed, other Priests may offer oftentimes Sacrifices and
Offerings which can never take away Sins; but this Man (this Jesus, this Heb.
10. 14. Heb. 9. 24, 25.
anointed and appointed sacrifice) when he had offered ONE sacrifice for sins,
for ever sat down on the right hand of God.

But because thou in thy pursuit after the faith of the Gospel wilt be sure to
meet with devils, heretics, particular corruptions, as unbelief, ignorance,
the spirit works, animated on by suggestions, false conclusions, with damnable
doctrines, I shall therefore briefly, besides what has been already said,
speak a word or two more before I leave thee, of further advice, especially
concerning these two things.

First, How thou art to conceive of the Savior.

Secondly, How thou art to make application of him.

First, For the Savior, thou must look upon him to be very God and very Man;
not man only, nor God only, but God and Man in one Person, both natures joined
together, for the putting of him in a capacity to be a suitable Savior:
suitable, I say, to answer both sides and parties with whom he has to do in
the office of his Mediatorship, and being as a Savior.

Secondly, Thou must not only do this, but thou must also consider and believe,
that even what was done by Jesus Christ, it was not done by one nature without
the other: but thou must consider that both natures, both the Godhead and the
manhood did gloriously concur and join together in the undertaking of the
Salvation of our Bodies and Souls; not that the Godhead undertook any thing
without the Manhood, neither did the Manhood do any thing without the Virtue
and Union of the God head; and thou must of Necessity do this, otherwise thou
can not find any sound ground and footing for thy Soul to rest upon.

For if thou look upon any of these asunder, that is to say, the Godhead
without the Manhood, or the Manhood without the Godhead, thou will conclude
that what was done by the Godhead, was not done for man, being done without
the Manhood; or else, that that which was done with the Manhood could not
answer Divine Justice, in not doing what it did, by the Virtue and in Union
with the Godhead; for it was the Godhead that gave Virtue and Value to the
suffering of the Manhood, and the Manhood being joined therewith, that gives
us an interest into the heavenly glory and comforts of the Godhead.

What ground can a man have to believe that Christ is his Savior, if he do not
believe that he suffered for Sin in his Nature. And what ground also can a man
have to think that God the Father is satisfied, being infinite, if he believe
not also that he who gave the satisfaction was equal to him who was offended.

Therefore, Beloved, when you read of the offering of the Body of the Son of
Man for our Sins, then Consider, that he did it in Union with, and by the help
of the eternal Godhead. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who, through
the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences
from dead Works, etc.

And when thou read of the glorious Works and ^plendour of the Godhead in
Christ, the^^ consider that all that was done by the Godhead, it was done as
it had union and communion with the Manhood. And then thou shall see that the
Devil is overcome by God-man, Sin, Death, Hell, the Grave, and all overcome by
Jesus, God-man, and then thou shall find them overcome indeed. They must need^
^e overcome when God does overcome them; and we have good ground to hope the
Victory is ours, when in our Nature they are overcome.

2. The second thing is, how to apply, or to make application of this Christ to
the Soul. And for this there is to be considered the following particulars.

First, that when Jesus Christ did thus appear, being born of Mary, he was
looked upon by the Father, as if the sin of the whole World was upon him; ^ay
further, God did look upon him, and account him the Sin of Man. He has made
him to be Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. That ^^is God made his Son Jesus Christ our
Sin, or reckoned him to be, not only a Sinner; but the very bulk of Sin of the
whole World, and condemned him so severely as if he had been nothing but Sin.
For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent
forth his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for Sin condemned Sin in the
flesh. That is, for our Sins condemned his Son Jesus Christ: as if he had
indeed and in truth been our very Sin, and yet altogether without Sin, 2 Cor.
5. 21. Romans 8. 3. Therefore, as to the taking away of thy Curse, thou must
reckon him to be made Sin for thee. And as to his being thy Justification, thou
must reckon him to be thy Righteousness for, says the Scripture, He (that is
God) has made HIM to be SIN for us, though he knew no Sin, that WE might be
made the RIGHTEOUSNESS of God in HIM.

Secondly, Consider for whose sake^ all this glorious design of the Father and
the Son was brought to pass, and that you shall find to be for Man, for sinful
Man, 2 Cor. 8. 9.

Thirdly, The terms on which it is made ours; and that you will find to be a
free gift, merely arising from the tender-heartedness of God. You are justified
freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in Christ, whom God has set
forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, etc.

Fourthly, How men are to reckon it theirs, and that is upon the same terms
which God does offer it, which is freely, as they are worthless and undeserving
Creatures, as they are without all good, and also unable to do any good. This,
I say, is the right way of applying the merits of Christ to thy Soul, for they
are freely given to thee a poor Sinner, nor for any thing that is in thee, or
done by thee; but freely, as thou art a Sinner, and so stand in absolute
need thereof.

And Christian, thou art not in this thing to follow thy sense and feeling: but
the very Word of God. The thing that does do the People of God the greatest
injury, it is their too little harkening to what the Gospel says, and their
too much giving credit to what the Law, Sin, the Devil, and Conscience says:
and upon this very ground to conclude, that because there is the certainty of
guilt upon the Soul, therefore there is also for certain, by Sin. Damnation to
be brought upon the Soul. This is now to set the Word of God aside and to give
credit to what is sormed by the contrary: but thou must give more credit to one
syllable of the written Word of the Gospel, than thou must give to all the
Saints and Angels in Heaven and Earth; much more than to the Devil and thy own
guilty Conscience.

Let me give you a Parable. There was a certain man that had committed Treason
against his King; but, for as much as the King had Compassion upon him, he sent
him by the hand of a faithful Messenger, a Pardon under his own Hand and Seal:
but in the Country where this poor man dwelt, there was also many that sought
to trouble him, by often putting of him in mind of his Treason, and the Law
that was to be executed on the Offender. Now which way should this man so
honor his King, but as believing his Handwriting, which was the Pardon:
certainly he would honor him more by so doing, than to regard all the Clamours
of his Enemies continually against him.

Just thus it is here, thou having committed Treason against the King of
Heaven, he, through Compassion for Christ's sake, has sent thee a Pardon: but
the Devil, the Law, and thy Conscience, do continually seek to disturb thee; by
bringing thy Sins afresh into thy remembrance: But now, would thou honor
thy King, why then, He that believes the RECORD that God has given of his
Son, has set to his SEAL that God is true. And this is the Record, that God
has given to US eternal Life: and this Life is in his Son. 1 John 5. 11, 12.
And therefore, my Brethren, seeing God our Father has sent us damnable
Traitors a Pardon from Heaven (even all the Promises of the Gospel) and also
has sealed to the certainty of it with the heart-blood of his dear Son: let us
not be daunted, though our Enemies with terrible Voices do bring our former
life never so often into our Remembrance.

Object. But, says the Soul, how if after I have received a Pardon I should
commit Treason again? What should I do then?

Answ. Set the case thou have committed abundance of Treason, he has by him
abundance of Pardons. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Sometimes I my self have been in such a straight, that I have been (almost)
driven to my Wits ends with a sight and sense of the greatness of my sins: but
calling to mind that God was God in his Mercy, Pity, and Love, as well as in
his Holiness, Justice, etc. And again, considering the ability of the
satisfaction that was given to Holiness and Justice, to the end there might be
way made for Sinners to lay hold of this Mercy; I say, I considering this, when
tempted to doubt and despair, I have answered in this manner.

Lord, here is one of the greatest Sinners that ever the the ground bare. A
Sinner against the Law, and a Sinner against the Gospel. I have sinned against
Light, and I have sinned against Mercy; and now Lord, the guilt of them breaks
my heart, the Devil also he would have me despair, telling of me that thou art
so far from hearing my Prayers in this my distress, that I cannot anger thee
worse, then to call upon thee; for, says he, thou art resolved for ever to
damn and not to grant me the least of thy favor: yet Lord. I would fain have
forgiveness. And thy word, though much may be inferred from it against me; yet
it says, If I come unto thee thou will in no wise cast me out. Lord, shall I
honor thee most by believing thou can pardon my Sins, or by believing thou
can not? Shall I honor thee most by believing thou will pardon my Sins, or
by believing thou will not? Shall I honor the Blood of thy Son also by
despairing, that the virtue thereof is not sufficient, or by believing that it
is sufficient to purge me from all my blood-red and crimson Sins surely, thou
that could find so much Mercy as to pardon Manasseh, Mary Magdalen, the
three thousand Murderers, persecuting Paul, Murderous and Adulterous David, and
blaspheming Peter, thou that offeredst Mercy to Simon Magus, a Witch, and did
receive the Astrologers and Conjurers in the nineteenth of Acts, thou have
Mercy enough for one poor sinner. Lord, set the case my Sins were bigger than
all these, and I less deserved Mercy than any of these: yet thou have said in
thy word, that he that comes to thee, thou will, in no wise cast out. And God
has given comfort to my Soul, even to such a Sinner as I am: and I tell you,
there is no way so to honor God, and to beat out the Devil, as to stick to the
truth of Gods Word, and the merits of Christ's Blood by believing. When Abraham
believed (even against hope and reason) he gave Glory to God, Romans 4. And this
is our Victory, even our Faith. Believe, and all things are possible to you. He
that believes shall be saved. He that believes on the Son has everlasting
Life, and shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
Fathers Hands 1. Joh. 5. 4.

And if thou do indeed believe this, thou will not only confess him as the
Quakers do; That is, that he was born at Bethlehem of Mary, suffered on Mount
Calvary under Pontius Pilate, was Dead and Buried, Rose again, and Ascended,
(...). For all this they confess, and in the midst of their confession they do
verily deny that his Death on that Mount Calvary did give satisfaction to God
for the Sins of the World; and that his Resurrection out of Joseph's Sepulcher,
is the cause of our Justification in the sight of God, Angels, and Devils: But,
I say, if thou do believe these things indeed, thou do believe that then,
so long ago, even before thou wast born, he did bear thy Sins in his own Body,
which then was Hanged on the Tree, (and never before nor since) that thy old
Man was then Crucified with him, namely, in the same Body then Crucified, (see
1 Pet. 2. 24. and Romans 6. 6.) This is nonsense to them that believe not: but
if thou do indeed believe, thou see it so plain, and yet such a Mystery, that
it makes thee wonder.

But in the third Place, this glorious Doctrine of the New Covenant, and the
Mediator thereof, will serve for the comforting, and the maintaining of the
comfort of the Children of the New Covenant this way also; that is, that he did
not only dye and rise again, but that he did ascend in his own Person into
Heaven, to take possession thereof for me, to prepare a Place there for me,
stands there in the second part of his (...) (...) bring me safe in my coming
thither and to present me in a glorious manner, without spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; that he is there exercising of his Priestly Office for me, pleading
the (...) of his own Righteousness for me, and the virtue of his Blood for me.
That he is there ready to answer the Accusations of the Law, Devil, and Sin for
me. Here thou may through Faith look the very Devil in the Face and Rejoice,
saying, O Satan! I have a precious Jesus, a Soul comforting Jesus, a
Sin-pardoning Jesus. Here thou may hear the biggest thunder-crack that the
Law can give, and yet not be daunted. Here thou may say, O Law! thou may
roar against Sin, but thou can not reach me, thou may Curse and Condemn,
but not my Soul; for I have a righteous Jesus, a holy Jesus, a Soul-saving
Jesus: and he has delivered me from thy Threats, from thy Curses, from thy
Condemnatious, I am out of thy reach, and out of thy bounds, I am brought into
another Covenant, under better promises, promises of Life and Salvation, free
promises to comfort me without my Merit, even through the Blood of Jesus, the
satisfaction given to God for me by him; therefore, though thou lay'st my Sins
to my charge, and say thou will prove me Guilty: yet so long as Christ is
above ground, and has brought in everlasting righteousness, and given that to
me, I shall not fear thy threats, thy charges, thy Soul-searing Denunciations;
my Christ is all, has done all, and will deliver me from all that thou, and
whatsoever else can bring an Accusation against me. Thus also thou may say,
when Death assaulteth thee, O Death, where is thy sting? Thou may bite
indeed, but thou can not devour; I have comfort by, and through the one Man
Jesus; Jesus Christ, he has taken thee Captive, and taken away thy strength,
he has pierced thy Heart, and let out all thy Soul destroying Poison;
therefore, though I see thee, I am not afraid of thee; though I feel thee, I am
not daunted, thou have lost thy sting in the side of the Lord Jesus; through
him I overcome thee, and set foot upon thee. Also, O Satan! though I hear thee
grumble, and make a hellish Noise, and tho thou threaten me very highly; yet my
Soul shall Triumph over thee, so long as Christ is alive, and can be heard in
Heaven; so long as he has broken thy Head, and won the field of thee; so long
as thou art in Prison, and can not have thy desire. I therefore, when I hear
thy Voice, do pitch my Thoughts on Christ my Savior, and do hearken what he
will say, for he will speak comfort; he says, he has got the Victory, and
does give to me the Crown and causes me to Triumph through his most glorious
Conquest.

Nay, my Brethren, the Saints under the Levitical Law, who had not the New
Covenant sealed, or confirmed any further than by promise that it should be;
Shall not we then that see all things already done before us, make it a strong
Argument to increase out Faith.
I say, they, when they thought of the glorious Privileges that God had
promised should come, though at that time they were not come; but seen afar
off, how confidently were they persuaded of them, and embraced them, and were
so fully satisfied as touching the certainty of them, that they did not stick
at the parting with all for the enjoying of them. Heb. 11. How many times does
David in the Psalms admire, triumph, and persuade others to do so also, through
the Faith that he had in the thing that was to be done. Also Job. in what Faith
does he say he should see his Redeemer, though he had not then shed one drop of
Blood for him: yet because he had promised so to do; and this was signified For
they were (...) so many sure promises with a remembrance in them, also for the
better satisfaction of them that believed them.
by the blood of Bulls and Goats. Also Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Zechariah,
etc. how gloriously in confidence did they speak of Christ and his Death,
Blood, Conquest, and everlasting Priesthood, even before he did manifest
himself in the flesh which he took of the Virgin. We that have lived since
Christ, have more ground to hope than they under the Old Covenant had, (though
they had the Word of the Just God for the ground of their Faith:) Mark, They
had only the Promise that he should and would come; but we have the assured
fulfilling of those Promises, because he is come: they were told that he should
spill his Blood, but we do see he has spilt his Blood: They ventured all upon
his standing Surety for them, but we see he has fulfilled, and that faithfully
too, the Office of his Suretiship, in that, according to the engagement, he
has redeemed us poor Sinners. They ventured on the New Covenant, though not
actually Sealed, only because they judged him faithful that had promised, Heb.
11. 11. but we have the Covenant Sealed, all things are completely done, even
as sure as the Heart-Blood of a crucified Jesus can make it.

There is as great a difference between their Dispensation and ours for
comfort, even as much as there is between the making of a Bond with a promise
to Seal it, and the sealing of the same. It was made indeed in their time, but
it was not sealed until the time the Blood was shed on the Mount Calvary; and
that we might have our Faith mount up with Wings like an Eagle, he shows us
what encouragement, and ground of Faith we have to conclude we shall be
everlastingly delivered; saying, Heb. 9. 16, 17, 18. For where a Testament (or
Covenant) is, there must of necessity be the Death of the Testatour; for a
Testament is of force after men are dead, otherwise it is of no strength at all
while the Testatour lives; whereupon neither the first Testament was dedicated
without Blood. As Christ's Blood was the Confirmation of the New Covenant, yet
it was not sealed in Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob's days, to confirm the Covenant
that God did tell them of, and yet they believed; therefore we ought to give
the more ear^est heed to (believe) the things that we have heard, and not in
any wise to let them be questioned; and the rather, because you see the
Testament is not only now made but confirmed: not only spoken of and promised,
but verily sealed by the death and blood of Jesus, which is the Testatour
thereof.

My Brethren, I would not have you ignorant of this one thing, that though the
Jews had the promise of a sacrifice, of an everlasting high Priest that should
deliver them, yet they had but the Promise; for Christ was not sacrificed, and
was not then come an High Priest of good things to come: only the Type, the
Shadow, the Figure, the Ceremonies they had, together with Christ's engaging as
Surety to bring all things to pass that was promised should come, and upon that
account received and saved.

It was with them and their dispensation as this similitude gives you to
understand. Set the case that there be two men who make a covenant, that the
one should give the other ten thousand Sheep, on condition the other give him
two thousand pound: but for as much as the Money is not to be paid down
presently; therefore if he that buyeth the Sheep will have any of them before
the day of payment, the Creditor requesteth a Surety, and upon the engagement
of the Surety there is part of the Sheep given to the Debtor, even before the
day of payment, but the other at and after. So it is here, Christ covenanted
with his Father for his Sheep, (I lay down my Life for my Sheep, says he) but
the Money was not to be paid down so soon as the bargain was made, (as I have
already said I yet some of the Sheep were saved, even before the Money was
paid, and that because of the suretiship of Christ* as it is written, Being
justified (or saved) freely by his Grace, through the Redemption (or purchase)
of Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in
his Blood to declare himself righteous, in his forgiving the Sins that are
past, (or the Sinners who died in the Faith, before Christ was crucified)
through Gods forbearing till the payment was paid; to declare I say, at this
time his Righteousness, that he might be Just, and the Justifier of him that
believes in Jesus. Romans 3. 24. 25. 26.

The end of my speaking of this, is to show you that it is not wisdom now to
doubt whether God will save you or no, but to believe, because all things are
finished as to our Justification. The Covenant not only made, but also sealed;
the Debt paid, the Prison Doors ^lung off of the Hooks, with a Proclamation
from Heaven of Deliverance to the Prisoners of Hope; saying, Return to the
strong hold, ye Prisoners of Hope, even to day do I declare (says God) that I
will render unto thee double, Zech. 9. 12. And, says Christ, when he was come,
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because be has anointed me to preach the
Gospel; (that is, good Tidings to the Poor, that their Sins shall be pardoned,
that their Souls shall be saved) He has sant me to bind up the broken hearted,
to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of the Sight, of the
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, and to comfort them that mourn,
to preach the acceptable Year of the Lord. Luke 4. 18, 19.

Therefore, here Soul thou may come to Jesus Christ for any thing thou
want, as to a common Treasure house, being the principal Man for the
distributing of the things made mention of in the New Covenant, he having them
all in his own custody by right of Purchase: for he has bought them all, paid
for them all. Do thou want Faith, then come for it to the Man Christ Jesus?
Heb. 12. 2. Do thou want the Spirit, then ask it of Jesus? Do thou want
Wisdom? Do thou want Grace of any ^ort? Do thou want a new Heart? Do thou
want strength against thy Lusts, against the Devils Temptations? Do thou want
strength to carry thee through afflictions of Body, and afflictions o^ Spirit,
through Persecutions? Would thou willingly hold out, stand to the last, and
be more than a Conqueror, then be sure thou meditate enough on the Merits of
the Blood of Jesus, how he has undertaken for thee, that he has done the work
of thy Salvation in thy room, that he is filled of God on purpose to fill thee,
and is willing to communicate whatsoever is in him, or about him, to thee.
Consider this, I say, and Triumph in it.

Again, This may inform us of the safe state of the Saints, as touching their
Perseverance, that they shall stand though Hell rages, though the Devil roareth,
and all the World endeavors the ruin of the Saints of God; though some,
through ignorance of the virtue of the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ, do
say, a man may be a child of God to day, and a child of the Devil to morrow,
which is gross ignorance; for what is the Blood of Christ, the Death, the
Resurrection of Christ, of no more virtue than to bring in for us an uncertain
Salvation; or must the effectualness of Christ's merits, as touching our
Perseverance, be helped on by the doings of Man: surely they that are
predestined, are also justified, and they that are justified, they shall be
glorified, Romans 8. 30. Saints, do not doubt of the salvation of your Souls,
unless you do intend to undervalue Christ's Blood; and do not think but that he
that has begun the good work of his grace in you, will perfect it, to the
second coming of our Lord Jesus, Phil. 1. 6. Should not we as well as Paul,
say, I am persuaded that nothing shall separate us from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus; Romans 8. O let the Saints know! that unless the Devil can
pluck Christ out of Heaven, he cannot pull a true Believer out of Christ. When
I say a true Believer, I do mean such a one as has the Faith of the Operation
of God in his Soul.

Lastly, Is there such Mercy as this? such Privileges as these? is there so
much ground of Comfort? and so much cause to be Glad? Is there so much store in
Christ? And such a ready heart in him to give it to me? Has his bleeding
Wounds so much in them, as that the Fruits thereof should be the Salvation of
my Soul? Of my sinful Soul? As to save me sinful, me rebellious, me desperate,
me, what then? Shall not I now be holy? Shall not I now study, strive, and lay
out my self for him that has laid out himself Soul and Body for me? Shall I
now love ever a Lust or Sin? Shall I now be ashamed of the Cause, Ways,
People, or Saints of Jesus Christ? Shall I not now yield my Members as
Instruments of Righteousness, seeing my end is everlasting Life? Romans 6. Shall
Christ think nothing too dear for me? And shall I count any thing too dear for
him? Shall I grieve him with my foolish Carriage? Shall I slight his Counsel by
following of my own Will? Thus therefore the Doctrine of the New Covenant does
call for Holiness, engage to Holiness, and makes the Children of that Covenant
to take Pleasure therein. Let no man therefore conclude on this, that the
Doctrine of the Gospel is a licentious Doctrine: but if they do, it is because
they are Fools, and such as have not tasted of the Virtue of the Blood of Jesus
Christ; neither did they ever feel the Nature, and Sway that the Love of Christ
has in the Hearts of his. And thus also you may see that the Doctrine of the
Gospel is of great Advantage to the People of God, that are already come in, or
to them that shall at the consideration hereof be willing to come in to partake
of the glorious Benefits of this glorious Covenant. But says the poor Soul.

Object. Alas I doubt this is too good for me.

Inquir. Why so I pray you?

Object. Alas, because I am a Sinner.

Reply. Why, all this is bestowed upon none but Sinners, as it is written.
While we were ungodly, Christ died for us, Romans 5. 6. 8. He came into the World
to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 14, 15.

Object. O, but I am one of the chief of Sinners.

Reply. Why, this is for the chief of Sinners, (1 Timothy 1. 14, 15.) Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, (says Paul.)

Object. O, but my Sins are so big, that I cannot conceive how I should have
Mercy.

Reply. Why Soul? Did thou ever kill any Body? You that are resolved to go on
in your Sins, meddle not with this.
Did thou ever burn any of thy Children in the Fire to Idols? Have thou been
a Witch? Did thou ever use Enchantments and Conjuration? Did thou ever
curse and swear, and deny Christ? And yet if thou have, there is yet hopes of
Pardon; yea, such Sinners as these have been pardoned, as appears by these and
the like Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 33. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Verses, compared
with the 12, 13. Again, Acts 19. 19, 20. Acts 8. 22. compared with Verse 9.
Matthew. 26. 74, 75.

Ob. But though I have not sinned such kind of Sins; yet it may be I have
sinned as bad.

Answ. That cannot likely be; yet though thou have, still there is ground of
Mercy for thee, for as much as thou art under the Promise, John 6. 37.

Object. Alas man, I am afraid that I have sinned the unpardonable Sin, and
therefore there is no hope for me.

Answ. Do thou know what the unpardonable Sin (the Sin against the Holy
Ghost) is? And when it is committed?

Reply. It is a Sin against Light.

Answ. That is true: yet every Sin against Light, is not the Sin against the
Holy Ghost.

Reply. Say you so.

Answ. Yea, and I prove it thus. If every Sin against Light, had been the Sin
that is unpardonable, then had David and Peter and others sinned that Sin: but
though they did sin against Light, yet they did not sin that sin; therefore
every Sin against Light is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, the unpardonable
Sin.

Object. But the Scripture says, If we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for Sin: but a
certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall
devour the Adversaries.

Answ. Do you know what that wilful Sin is?

Reply. Why, What is it? Is it not for a man to sin willingly after enlightening?

1 Answ. Yes, yet doubtless every willing Sin is not that; for then David had
sinned it, when he lay with Bathsheba, and Jonah when he fled from the Presence
of the Lord, and Solomon also when he had so many Concubines.

2 Answ. But that Sin is a Sin that is of another nature, which is this; For a
man after he has made some Profession of Salvation to come alone by the Blood
of Jesus, together with some Light and Power of the same upon his Spirit: I
say, for him after this, knowingly, wilfully, and despitefully, to trample upon
the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross, and to count it an unholy thing or no
better then the Blood of another man; and rather to venture his Soul any other
way, then to be saved by this precious Blood. And this must be done I say,
after some light, (Heb. 6. 4, 5.) Despitefully, (Heb. 10. 29.) Knowingly (2
Pet. 2. 21.) and wilfully (Heb. 10. 26. compared with ver. 29.) and that not in
a hurry and sudden sit, as Peter's was: but with some time beforehand to pause
upon it first, with Judas, and also with a continued Resolution never to turn
or be converted again. For it is impossible to renew such again to Repentance,
they are so resolved, and so desperate, Heb. 6.

Quest. And how say thou now; Did thou ever after thou had received some
blessed Light from Christ, wilfully, despitefully, and knowingly, stamp, or
trample the Blood of the man Christ Jesus under thy Feet (...) and art thou for
ever resolved so to do?

Answ. O no, I would not do that wilfully, despitefully, and knowingly, not for
all the World.

Inqui. But yet I must tell you now you put me in mind of it, surely sometimes
I have most horrible blasphemous Thoughts in me against God Christ, and the
Spirit: May not th^se be that Sin too?

Answ. Do thou delight in them? are they such things as thou take Pleasure
in?

Reply. O no, neither would I do it for a thousand Worlds, O, methinks they
make me sometimes tremble to think of them: But how and if I should delight in
them before I am aware?

Answ. Beg of God for strength against them, and if at any time thou find
thy wicked Heart to give way in the least thereto, (for that is likely enough)
and though thou find it may on a sudden give way to that hell-bred Wickedness
that is in it: yet do not despair, for as much as Christ has said, All manner
of Sins and Blasphemies shall be forgiven to the Sons of Men. And whosoever
shall speak a word against the Son of Man, (that is Christ) as he may do with
Peter, through Temptation, yet upon Repentance, it shall be forgiven him. Mat.
12. 32.

Object. But I thought it might have been committed all on a sudden, either by
some blasphemous Thought, or else by committing some other horrible Sin.

Answ. For certain this Sin and the commission of it, does lie in a knowing,
wilful, malicious, or despiteful, together with a final trampling the Blood of
sweet Jesus under foot, Heb. 10.

Object. But it seems to be rather a resisting of the Spirit, and the motions
thereof, than this which you say; for first, its proper Title is the Sin
against the Holy Ghost. And again, They have done despite unto the Spirit of
Grace. So that it rather seems to be, I say, that a resisting of the Spirit,
and the movings thereof is that Sin.

1 Answ. For certain the Sin is committed by them that do as before I have
said, that is, by a final, knowing, wilful, malicious trampling under foot the
Blood of Christ, which was shed on Mount Calvary, when Jesus was there
crucified. And though it be called the Sin against the Spirit, yet (as I said
before) every Sin against the Spirit is not that: for if it was, then every Sin
against the Light and Convictions of the Spirit would be unpardonable: but that
is an evident untruth, for these Reasons. First, because there be those who
have sinned against the movings of the Spirit, and that knowingly too, and yet
did not commit that. As Jonah, who when God had expressly by his Spirit bid him
go to Nineveh, he runs thereupon quite another way. Secondly, because the very
People that have sinned against the movings of the Spirit, are yet, if they do
return, received to Mercy. Witness also Jonah, who though he had sinned against
the movings of the Spirit of the Lord, in doing contrary thereunto, Yet when he
called (as he says) to the Lord, (out of the Belly of Hell) the Lord heard
him, and gave him deliverance, and set him again about his work. (Read the
whole story of that Prophet.)

2 Answ. But secondly, I shall show you that it must needs be wilfully,
knowingly, and a malicious rejecting of the man Christ Jesus as the Savior:
That is, counting his Blood, his Righteousness, his Intercession in his own
Person (for he that rejects one rejects all) to be of no value, as to
salvation. I say, this I shall show you is the unpardonable Sin. And then
afterward in brief show you why it is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

First, That man that does reject, as aforesaid, the Blood, Death,
Righteousness, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of the man Christ,
does reject that Sacrifice, that Blood, that Righteousness, that Victory, that
Rest, that God alone has appointed for Salvation, (John 1. 29.) Behold the
Lamb (or sacrifice) of God. We have Redemption through his Blood, (Ephesians. 1.
7.) That I may be found in him, (to wit) in Christ's Righteousness, with Christ's
own personal obedience to his Fathers Will, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. By his
Resurrection comes Justification, Romans 4. 25. His Intercession now in his own
Person in the Heavens, now absent from his Saints, is the cause of the Saints
Perseverance, 2 Cor. 6, 7, 8. also Romans 8. 33, 34, 35, 36, etc.

Secondly, They that reject this Sacrifice, and the Merits of this Christ,
which he by himself has brought in for Sinners, has rejected him through whom
alone all the Promises of the New Testament, together with all the Mercy
discovered thereby, does come unto poor Creatures; For all the promises in him
are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And all
spiritual Blessings are made over to us through him, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. That is,
through, and in this Man (which is Christ) we have all our spiritual, Heavenly,
and eternal Mercies.

Thirdly, He that does knowingly, wilfully, and despitefully reject this man
for Salvation, does sin the unpardonable Sin; because there is never another
sacrifice to be offered, Heb. 10. 26. There is no more offering for Sin; there
remains no more sacrifice for Sin, Heb. 10. 18. (namely, than the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ a Sacrifice once for all, Heb. 10. ver. 10. and 14.
compared with ver. 18. and 26.) No, but they that shall after light, and clear
conviction, reject the first offering of his Body for Salvation, do Crucify
him the second time, which irrecoverably merits their own Damnation: For it is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly
Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost; and have tasted the good Word
of God, and the powers of the World to come: If they shall fall away to renew
them again unto Repentance, seeing they Gru^^fi^ to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open Shame. If they fall away to renew them again
unto Repentance: And why so? seeing, says the Apostle, they do crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and do put him to open shame. O then! how
miserably has the Devil deceived some? In that he has got them to reject the
merits of the first offering of the Body of Christ; (which was for Salvation)
and got them to trust in a fresh Crucifying of Christ, which unavoidably brings
their speedy Damnation.

Fourthly, they that do reject this Man, as aforesaid, do sin the unpardonable
Sin; because in rejecting him, they do make way for the Justice of God to break
out upon them, and to handle them as it shall find them: which will be in the
first place, Sinners against the first Covenant, which is the Soul-damning
Covenant; and also despising of (even the Life, and Glory, and Consolations,
Pardon, Grace, and Love, that is discovered in) the second Covenant, forasmuch
as they reject the Mediator and Priest of the same, which is the Man Jesus. And
the Man that does so, I would fain see how his Sins should be pardoned, and his
Soul saved, seeing the means (which is the Son of Man, the Son of Mary, and his
Merits) is rejected. For says he, If you believe not that I am he, you shall,
mark, you shall, do what you can, you shall, appear where you can, you shall,
follow Moses, Law or any holiness whatsoever, you shall dye in your Sins, Joh.
8. 24. So that, I say, the Sin that is called the unpardonable Sin, is a
knowing, wilful, and despiteful rejecting of the sacrificing of the Son of Man
the first time for Sin. And now to show you why it is called the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, as in these Scriptures, Mat. 12. Heb. 10. Mark 3.

First, Because they Sin against the manifest light of the Spirit, (as I said
before) it is a Sin against the light of the Spirit: That is, they have been
formerly enlightened into the nature of the Gospel, and the Merits of the Man
Christ, and his Blood, Righteousness, Intercession, etc. And also professed and
confessed the same, with some life and comfort in, and through the profession
of him: Yet now against all that Light, maliciously, and with despite to all
their former Profession, turn their backs, and trample upon the same.

Secondly, It is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost, because such a Person
does (as I may say) lay violent hands on it; one that sets himself in
opposition to, and is resolved to resist all the motions that do come in from
the Spirit to persuade the contrary. For I do verily believe, that men, in this
very rejecting of the Son of God, after some knowledge of him, especially at
their first resisting and refusing of him, they have certain motions of the
Spirit of God to dissuade them from so great a Soul-damning Act. But they,
being filled with an over-powering measure of the Spirit of the Devil, do do
despite unto these Convictions and Motions, by studying and contriving how they
may answer them, and get from under the convincing nature of them; and
therefore it is called a doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29.
And so,

Thirdly, In that they do reject the beseechings of the Spirit, and all its
gentle intreatings of the Soul, to tarry still in the same Doctrine.

Fourthly, In that they do reject the very Testimony of the Prophets and
Apostles, with Christ himself: I say, their Testimony through the Spirit, of
the Power, Virtue, Sufficiency, and Prevalency, of the Blood, Sacrifice, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of the man Christ Jesus, of which the
Scriptures are full both in the Old and New Testament, as the Apostle says,
For all the Prophets from Samuel, with them that follow after, have showed of
these days. That is, in which Christ should be a Sacrifice for Sin, Acts 3. 24.
compared with Ver. 6. 13, 14, 15, 18, 26. Again, says he, He therefore that
despises, despises not man, but God, who has also given unto us his Holy
Spirit, 1 These. 4. 8. That is, he rejects or despises the very Testimony of
the Spirit.

Fifthly, It is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost, because he that does
reject and disown the Doctrine of Salvation by the man Christ Jesus, through
believing in him, does despise, resist, and reject the Wisdom of the Spirit;
for the Wisdom of Gods Spirit did never more appear, than in its finding out a
way for Sinners to be reconciled to God, by the death of this man; and
therefore Christ, as he is a Sacrifice, is called the Wisdom of God. And again,
when it does reveal the Lord Jesus, it is called the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the Knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1. 17.

Object. But (some may say) the slighting, or rejecting of the Son of Man,
(Jesus of Nazareth the Son of Mary) cannot be the Sin that is unpardonable, as
is clear from that Scripture in the twelfth of Matthew, where he himself says,
He that shall speak a Word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him:
but he that shall sin against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come, Ver. 32. Now by this it is
clear that the Sin that is unpardonable is one thing, and the sin against the
Son of Man another; that Sin that is against the Son of Man is pardonable: but
if that was the Sin against the Holy Ghost it would not be pardonable;
therefore the Sin against the Son of Man is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
the unpardonable Sin:

Answ. First, I do know full well that there are several Persons that have been
pardoned, yet have sinned against the Son of Man: and that have for a time
rejected him, as Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Also the Jews, Acts 2. 36, 37. But
there was an ignorant rejecting of him without the Enlightening, and Taste, and
Feeling of the Power of the things of God, made mention of in the sixth of the
Hebrews, the 3, 4, 5, 6, Verses.

Secondly, There is, and has been a higher manner of sinning against the Son
of Man, which also has been, and is still pardonable; as in the case of Peter,
who in a violent temptation, in a mighty hurry, upon a sudden denied him, and
that after the Revelation of the Spirit of God from Heaven to him, that he
(Jesus) was the Son of God, Matthew. 16. 16, 17, 18. This also is pardonable, if
there be a coming up again to repentance: (O rich Grace! O wonderful Grace!
that God should be so full of Love to his poor Creatures, that though they do
sin against the Son of God, either through ignorance, or some sudden violent
charge breaking loose from Hell upon them) but yet take it for certain, that if
a Man do slight and reject the Son of God, and the Spirit, in that manner as I
have before hinted, that is, for a Man after some great measure of the
enlightening by the Spirit of God, and some Profession of Jesus Christ to be the
Savior, and his (...) that was shed on the Mount without the Gates of
Jerusalem to be the Atonement; I say, he that shall after this, knowingly,
wilfully, and out of malice and despite, reject, speak against, and trample
that Doctrine under foot, resolving for ever so to do: And if he there
continue, I will pawn my Soul upon it, he has sinned the unpardonable Sin, and
shall never be forgiven neither in this World nor in the World to come; or else
those Scriptures that testify the Truth of this must be scrabled out, and must
be looked upon for mere Fables; which are these following. For if after they
have escaped the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, (which is the Son of Man, Matthew. 16. 13.) and are again
entangled therein, and overcome; (which must be by denying this Lord that
bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1.) the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. For it is impossible for those who were once
enlightened and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift. -- And have tasted the good
Word of God, and the powers of the World to come: If they shall fall away (not
only fall, but fall away; that is, finally, Heb. 10. 19.) it is impossible to
renew them again unto Repentance; and the Reason is rendered, seeing they have
crucified to themselves the Son of God (which is the Son of Man) afresh, and
put him to an open shame, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. Now if you would further know what
it is to Crucify the Son of God afresh: it is this. For to undervalue and
trample under foot the Merits and Virtue of his Blood for Remission of Sins, as
is clearly manifested in the tenth of the Hebrews, 26, 27, 28, Verses, where
it is said, For if we Sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; But a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment, and the fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries. He that despised Moses Law died without Mercy; of how much sorer
Punishment suppose ye shall be thought worthy, that have trodden under foot the
Son of God, (there is the second Crucifying of Christ which the Quakers think
to be saved by) and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing. And then follows, And has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace, Verse the twenty ninth. All that Paul had to keep him from
this Sin, it was his ignorance in persecuting the Man, and Merits of Jesus
Christ, Acts 9. But I obtained Mercy (says he) because I did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 14. And Peter, though he did deny him knowingly, yet he did it
unwillingly, and in a sudden and fearful Temptation, and so by the Intercession
of Jesus escaped that Danger. So, I say, they that commit this Sin, they do it
after Light, knowingly, wilfully, and despitefully, and in the open view of the
whole World, reject the Son of Man for being their Lord and Savior, and in
that it is called the Sin against the holy Ghost. It is a Name most fit for
this Sin to be called the Sin against the Holy Ghost, for these Reasons but now
laid down; for this Sin is immediately committed against the Motions and
Convictions, and Light of that Holy Spirit of God, that makes it its business
to hand forth, and manifest the Truth and Reality of the Merits and Virtues of
the Lord Jesus, the Son of Man. And therefore beware Ranters and Quakers, for I
am sure you are the nearest that Sin by profession (which is indeed the right
committing of it) of any Persons that I do know at this day under the whole
Heavens; for as much as you will not venture the Salvation of your Souls on the
Blood shed on Mount Calvary, Luke 23. 33. out of the side of that Man that was
offered up in Sacrifice for all that did believe, in that his offering up of
his Body at that time (either before he offered it, or that have, do, or shall
believe on it for the time since, together with that time that he offered it)
though formerly you did profess that Salvation was wrought out that way, by
that Sacrifice then offered, and also seemed to have some comfort thereby; yea,
insomuch that some of you declared the same in the hearing of many, professing
your selves to be believers of the same. O therefore! it is sad for you that
were once thus enlightened, and have tasted these good things; and yet
notwithstanding all your Profession, you are now turned from the simplicity
that is in Christ to another Doctrine which will be to your destruction, if you
continue in it; for without Blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22.

Many other Reasons might be given, but that I would not be too tedious: yet I
would put in this Caution, that if there be any Souls that be but now willing
to venture their Salvation upon the Merits of a Naked Jesus, I do verily for
the present believe, they have not sinned that Sin; because there is still a
promise holds forth it self to such a Soul, where Christ says, He that comes
to me, I will in no wise (for nothing that he has done) cast him out, John 6.
36. That promise is worthy to be written in Letters of Gold.

Object. But alas, though I should never sin that Sin, yet I have other sins
enough to Damn me?

Answ. What though thou had the sins of a thousand Sinners; yet if thou come
to Christ he will save thee, Joh. 6. 36. see also Heb. 7. 25.

Object. Alas! but how should I come? I doubt I do not come as I should do; my
Heart is naught and dead; and alas, then how should I come?

Answ. Why, bethink thy self of all the sins that ever thou did commit, and
lay the weight of them all upon thy Heart, till thou art down laden with the
same, and come to him in such a Case as this, and he will give thee rest for
thy Soul, Mat. 11. the three last Verses.

And again, if thou would know how thou should come, come as much
undervaluing thy self as ever thou can, saying, Lord, here is a Sinner, the
basest in all the Country, if I had my deserts I had been damned in Hell Fire
long ago: Lord, I am not worthy to have the least corner in the Kingdom of
Heaven: and yet, O that thou would have Mercy! Come like Benhadad's Servants
to the King of Israel, 1 Kin. 20. 31, 32. with a Rope about thy Neck, and fling
thy self down at Christ's feet, and lie there a while, striving with him by thy
Prayers, and I Will warrant thee speed, Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30. John 6. 37.

Object. O! but I am not sanctified.

Answ. He will sanctify thee, and be made thy Sanctification also, 1 Cor. 6.
10, 11. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Object. O! but I cannot Pray.

Answ. To Pray, is not for thee to down on thy Knees, and say over a many
Scripture words only; for that thou may do, and yet do nothing but babble:
But if thou from a sense of thy baseness can groan out thy Hearts desire
before the Lord, he will hear thee, and grant thy desire; for he can tell what
is the meaning of the groanings of the Spirit, Romans 8. 26, 27.

Object. O, but I am afraid to Pray, for fear my Prayers should be counted as
sin in the sight of the great God.

Answ. That is a good sign that thy Prayers are more than bare words, and have
some prevalence at the Throne of Grace through Christ Jesus, or else the Devil
would never seek to labor to beat thee off from Prayer, by undervaluing thy
Prayers, telling thee they are Sin; for the best Prayers he will call the
worst, and the worst he will call the best, or else how should he be a Liar.

Object. But, I am afraid the day of Grace is past, and if it should be so,
what should I do then?

Answ. Truly, with some men indeed it does fare thus, that the day of Grace is
at an end before their Lives are at an end. Or thus, the day of Grace is past
before the day of Death is come, (as Christ says) If thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy Peace, (that
is, the word of Grace or Reconciliation) but now it is hid from thine Eyes,
Luke 19. 41, 42. But for the better satisfying of thee, as touching this thing,
Consider these following things.

First, does the Lord knock still at the door of thy Heart by his Word and
Spirit? If so, then the day of Grace is not past with thy Soul; for where he
does so knock, there he does also proffer, and promise to come in and Sup,
(that is, to Communicate of his things unto them) which he would not do, was
the day of Grace past with the Soul, Rev. 3. 20.

But how should I know whether Christ do so knock at my heart, as to be
desirous to come in? That I may know also whether the day of Grace be past with
me or no?

Consider these things.

First, does the Lord make thee sensible of thy miserable state, without an
interest in Jesus Christ? and that naturally thou have no share in him, no
faith in him, no communion with him, no delight in him, or love in the least to
him? If he has, and is doing of this, he has, and is knocking at thy Heart.

Secondly, does he, together with this, put into thy Heart an earnest desire
after communion with him, together with holy Resolutions not to be satisfied
without real communion with him.

Thirdly, does he sometimes give thee some secret persuasions (though not
scarcely discernable) that thou may attain, and get an interest in him?

Fourthly, does he now and then glance in some of the promises into thy Heart,
causing them to leave some heavenly savor (though but for a very short time)
on thy Spirit?

Fifthly, do thou at some time see some little Excellency in Christ? and does
all this stir up in thy Heart some breathings after him? If so, then fear not,
the Day of Grace is not past with thy poor Soul; for if the day of Grace should
be past with such a Soul as this, then that Scripture must be broken, where
Christ says, He that comes unto me, I will in no wise (for no thing, by no
means, upon no terms whatsoever) cast out, John 6. 37.

Object. But surely if the day of Grace was not past with me, I should not be
so long without an answer of Gods love to my Soul; that therefore does make me
mistrust my state the more, is, that I wait and wait, and yet am not delivered.

Answ. Have thou waited on the Lord so long as the Lord has waited on thee; it
may be the Lord has waited on thee this twenty or thirty, yea forty years, or
more, and thou have not waited on him seven years; cast this into thy Mind
therefore when Satan tells thee, that God does not love thee, because thou have
waited so long without an assurance; (for it is his temptation) for God did
wait longer upon thee, and was fain to send to thee by his Ambassadors, time
after time: And therefore say thou, I will wait to see what the Lord will say
unto me; and the rather, because he will speak Peace, for he is the Lord
thereof.

But secondly, Know that it is not thy being under trouble a long time, that
will be an Argument sufficient to prove that thou art past hopes; Nay
contrariwise; for Jesus Christ did take our Nature upon him, and also did
undertake deliverance for those, and bring it in for them who were all their
Life Time subject to Bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15.

Object. But alas, I am not able to wait, all my Strength is gone, I have
waited so long I can wait no longer.

Answ. It may be thou have concluded on this long ago, thinking thou should
not be able to hold out any longer; no not a year, a month, or a week, nay, it
may be not so long. It may be in the morning thou have thought thou should
not hold out till night, and at night till morning again: yet the Lord has
supported thee, and kept thee in waiting upon him many Weeks, and Years;
therefore that is but the Temptation of the Devil to make thee think so, that
he might drive thee to despair of Gods Mercy, and so to leave off following the
ways of God, and to close in with thy Sins again. O therefore do not give way
unto it; but believe that thou shall see the Goodness of the Lord in the Land
of the Living. Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen
thine Heart; wait, I say, on the Lord, Psalm. 27. 23, 24. And that thou may
so do, consider these things.

First, If thou, after thou have waited thus long, should now give over, and
wait no longer, thou would lose all thy time and pains that thou have taken
in the way of God hitherto, and wilt be like to a man that because he sought
long for Gold, and did not find it; therefore turned back from seeking after
it, though he was hard by it, and had almost found it: and all because he was
loath to look and seek a little further.

Secondly, Thou will not only lose thy time, but also lose thy own Soul; for
Salvation is no where else but in Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12.

Thirdly, Thou will sin the highest sin that ever thou did sin before, in
drawing (finally) back, insomuch, that God may say, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38.

But secondly, consider, thou say all my strength is gone, and therefore how
should I wait? why at that time when thou feel, and find thy strength
quite gone, even that is the time when the Lord will renew, and give thee fresh
strength. The youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly
fall: but they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not be faint, Isa. 40. 30, 31.

Object. But though I do wait, yet if I be not elected to eternal Life, what
good will all my waiting do me? For it is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but of God that shows Mercy. Therefore I say, if I should not
be elected, all is in vain.

1 Answ. Why, in the first place, to be sure thy backsliding from God will not
prove thy election, neither thy growing weary of waiting upon God.

2 Answ. But secondly, Thou art it may be troubled to know whether thou art
elected: And say thou; if I did but know that, that would encourage me in my
waiting on God.

Answ. I believe thee; but mark, thou shall not know thy election in the first
place, but in the second. That is to say, thou must first get acquaintance with
God in Christ, which does come by thy giving credit to his Promises, and
Records which he has given of Jesus Christ, his Blood and Righttousness,
together with the rest of his Merits.

That is, before thou can know whether thou art elected, thou must believe in
Jesus Christ so really, that thy faith laying hold of, and drinking and eating
the Flesh and Blood of Christ, even so, that there shall be life begotten in
thy Soul by the same. Life from the condemnings of the Law, Life from the guilt
of Sin. Life over the filth of the same. Life also to walk with God in his Son
and ways; the Life of Love to God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son,
Saints, and Ways; and that because they are Holy, Harmless, and such that are
altogether contrary to Iniquity.

For these things must be in thy Soul as a forerunner of thy being made
acquainted with the other. God has these two ways to show to his Children
their election.

First, by Testimony of the Spirit. That is, the Soul being under trouble of
Conscience, and grieved for Sin, the Spirit does seal up the Soul by its
comfortable Testimony; persuading of the Soul, that God for Christ's sake has
forgiven all those Sins that lie so heavy on the Conscience, and that do so
much perplex the Soul, by showing it that that Law which does utter such
horrible curses against it, is by Christ's Blood satisfied, and fulfilled, Ephesians.
1. 13, 14.

Secondly, By consequence; that is, the Soul finding that God has been good
unto it, in that he has showed it its lost state and miserable condition: and
also that he has given it some comfortable hope that he will save it from the
same: I say, the Soul, from a right sight thereof, does, or may, draw this
conclusion, that if God had not been minded to have saved it, he would not have
done for it such things as these. But for the more surer dealing with thy Soul,
it is not good to take any of these apart; that is, it is not good to take the
Testimony of the Spirit, (as thou supposest thou have) from the fruits thereof,
so as to conclude the Testimony thou have received, to be a sufficient ground
without the other; (not that it is not, if it be the Testimony of the Spirit)
but because the Devil does also deceive Souls by the workings of his Spirit in
them, pretending that it is the Spirit of God. And again, thou should not
satisfy thy self, though thou do find some seekings in thee after that which
is good, without the testimony of the other, that is to say, of the Spirit; for
it is the Testimony of two that is to be taken for truth: Therefore say I, as
thou should be much in praying for the Spirit to testify assurance to thee,
so also thou should look to the end of it when thou think thou have it;
which is this, to show thee that it is alone for Christ's sake that thy sins are
forgiven thee, and also thereby a constraining of thee to advance him, both by
Words, and Works, in Holiness and righteousness all the Days of thy Life. From
hence thou may boldly conclude thy Election, 1 These. 3: 4, 5, 6. Remembering
without ceasing your Work of Faith, and Labor of Love, and Patience of hope in
our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God our Father: Knowing, Brethren (says
the Apostle) beloved, your Election of God. But how? why by this, For our
Gospel came not to you in word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance. -- And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord,
having received the Word in much affliction, with Joy of the Holy Ghost: So
that you were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. And to
wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus which
(has) delivered us from the wrath to come, ver. 10.

Object. But alas, for my part, instead of finding in me any thing that is
good, I find in me all manner of Wickedness, Hard-heartedness, Hypocrisy,
coldness of Affection to Christ, very great unbelief, together with every thing
that is Base, and of an ill Savor. What hope therefore can I have?

Answ. If thou wast not such a one, thou had no need of Mercy. If thou wast
whole, thou had no need of the Physician; do thou therefore see thy self
in such a sad Condition as this? Thou have the more need to come to Christ,
that thou may be not only cleansed from these Evils, but also that thou
may be delivered from that Wrath they will bring upon thee (if thou do not
get rid of them) to all Eternity.

Quest. But how should I do? and what course should I take to be delivered from
this sad and troublesome Condition?

Answ. Do thou see in thee all manner of Wickedness? The best way that I can
direct a Soul in such a case, is, to pitch a steadfast Eye on him that is full,
and to look so steadfastly upon him by Faith, that thereby thou may even draw
down of his fullness into thy Heart; for that is the right way, and the way that
was typed out (before Christ came in the Flesh) in the time of Moses, when the
Lord said unto him, Make thee a Serpent of Brass (which was a Type of Christ)
and set it upon a Pole; and it shall come to pass that when a Serpent has
bitten any Man, that he may look thereon and live, Numb. 21. 8.

Even so now in Gospel times, when any Soul is bitten with the fiery Serpents
(their Sins) that then the next way to be healed, is, for the Soul to look upon
the Son of Man, who, as the Serpent was, was hanged on a Pole, (or Tree) that
whosoever shall indeed look on him by Faith, may be healed of all their
Distempers whatsoever, John 3. 14, 15.

As now to instance in some things. First, is thy Heart hard? why then, behold
how full of Bowels and Compassion is the Heart of Christ toward thee, which
may be seen in his coming down from Heaven to spill his Heart-Blood for thee.

2. Is thy Heart slothful and idle? then see how active the Lord Jesus is for
thee, in that he did not only die for thee: but also in that he has been ever
since his Ascension into Heaven, making Intercession for thee, Heb. 7. 25.

3. Do thou see and find in thee Iniquity and Unrighteousness? Then look up
to Heaven, and see there a Righteous Person, even thy righteous Jesus Christ,
now presenting thee in his own Perfections before the Throne of his Fathers
Glory, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

4. Do thou see that thou art very much void of right Sanctification? then
look up and thou shall see that thy Sanctification is in the presence of God a
complete Sanctification, representing all the Saints as (Righteous, so)
sanctified ones in the Presence of the great God of Heaven. And so whatsoever
thou want, be sure to strive to pitch thy Faith upon the Son of God, and
behold him steadfastly, and thou shall by so doing find a mighty change in thy
Soul. For when we behold him, as in a Glass, even the Glory of the Lord, we are
changed (namely by beholding) from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. This is the true way to get both Comfort to thy Soul, and
also Sanctification, and right Holiness into thy Soul.

Poor Souls that are under the Distemper of a guilty Conscience, and under the
workings of much Corruption, do not go the nearest way to Heaven, if they do
not in the first place look upon themselves as cursed Sinners by the Law; and
yet at that time they are blessed, for ever blessed Saints, by the Merits of
Jesus Christ. O wretched Man that I am, says Paul, and yet O blessed Man that
I am through my Lord Jesus Christ: for that is the Scope of the Scripture, Romans
7. 24, 25.

Object. But alas, I am blind and cannot see, what shall I do now?

Answ. Why truly thou must go to him that can make the Eyes that are blind to
see (even to our Lord Jesus) by Prayer, saying as the poor blind Man did, Lord,
that I might receive my Sight, and so continue begging with him, till thou do
receive Sight, even a sight of Jesus Christ, his Death, Blood, Resurrection,
Ascension, Intercession, and that for thee, even for thee.

And the rather, because first, he has invited thee to come and buy such
Eye Salve of him that may make thee see. Rev. 3: 18. Secondly, because thou
shall never have any true comfort till thou do thus come to see, and behold
the Lamb of God that has taken away thy Sins. John 1. 29. Thirdly, because
that thereby thou will be able (through Grace) to step over, and turn aside
from the several stumbling blocks that Satan, together with his Instruments
has laid in our way, which otherwise thou will not be able to shun, but wilt
certainly fall when others stand, and grope and stumble, when others go
upright, to the great Prejudice of thy poor Soul.

Object. But alas I have nothing to carry with me, how then should I go?

Answ. Have thou no Sins? If thou have, carry them, and exchange them for his
Righteousness; because he has said, Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he
will sustain thee; Psalm. 55. 22. and again, because he has said, Though thou
be heavy laden, yet if thou do but come to him, he will give thee rest, Mat.
11. 28.

Object. But (you will say) Satan tells me that I am so cold in Prayers, so
weak in believing, so great a Sinner, that I do go so slothfully on in the way
of God, that I am so apt to slip at every Temptation, and to be entangled
therewith, together with other things, so that I shall never be able to attain
those blessed things that are held forth to sinners by Jesus Christ: and
therefore my trouble is much upon this account also, and many times I fear that
will come upon me which Satan suggesteth to me; that is, I shall miss of
eternal Life.

1. Answ. As to the latter part of the Objection, that thou shall never attain
to everlasting Life. That is obtained for thee already, without thy doing,
either thy praying, striving, or wrestling against sin. If we speak properly,
it is Christ that has in his own Body abolished Death on the Cross, and
brought Light, Life, and Glory to us, through this his thus doing. But this is
the thing that thou aimest at, that thou shall never have a share in this Life
already obtained for so many as do come by Faith to Jesus Christ: and all
because thou art so slothful, so cold, so weak, so great a Sinner, so subject
to slip and commit Infirmities.

2. Answ. I answer, Did thou never learn for to out-shoot the Devil in his
own Bow, and to cut off his Head with his own Sword, as David served Goliath,
who was a Type of him.

Quest. O how should a poor Soul do this? this is rare indeed.

Answ. Why truly thus, Does Satan tell thee thou prayest but faintly, and with
very cold Devotion; answer him thus, and say. I am glad you told me, for this
will make me trust the more to Christ's Prayers, and the less to my own; also I
will endeavor henceforward to groan, to sigh, and to be so fervent in my
crying at the Throne of Grace, that I will, If I can, make the Heavens rattle
again, with the mighty Groans thereof. And whereas thou say that I am so
weak in believing, I am glad you mind me of it, I hope it will hence forward
stir me up to cry the more heartily to God for strong Faith, and make me the
more restless till I have it. And seeing thou tellest me that I run so softly,
and that I shall go near to miss of Glory; this also shall be through Grace to
my advantage, and cause me to press the more earnestly toward the mark, for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And seeing thou do
tell me that my Sins are wondrous great; hereby thou bring the remembrance
of the unsupportable Vengeance of God into my mind, if I dye out of Jesus
Christ, and also the necessity of the Blood, Death, and Merits of Christ to
help me; I hope it will make me fly the faster, and press the harder after an
interest in him; and the rather because (as thou tellest me) my state will be
unspeakable miserable without him. And so all along, if he tell thee of thy
Deadness, Dullness, Coldness, or Unbelief, or the greatness of thy Sins; answer
him, and say, I am glad you told me, I hope it will be a means to make me run
faster, seek earnestlier, and to be the more restless after Jesus Christ. If
thou did but get this art, as to out run him in his own Shoes, (as I may
say) and to make his own Darts to pierce himself, then thou might also say,
now does Satan's Temptations, as well as all other things, work together for my
Good, for my Advantage, Romans 8. 28.

Object. But I do find so many weaknesses in every Duty that I do perform, as
when I pray, when I read, when I hear, or any other Duty, that it makes me out
of conceit with my self, it makes me think that my Duties are nothing worth.

Answ. I answer, It may be it is thy Mercy that thou art sensible of
Infirmities in thy best things thou do, I, a greater Mercy then thou art
aware of.

Quest. Can it be a Mercy for me to be troubled with my Corruptions? Can it be
a Privilege for me to be annoyed with Infirmities, and to have my best Duties
infected with it? How can it possibly be?

Answ. Verily thy Sins appearing in thy best Duties, do work for thy Advantage
these ways. First, in that thou find ground enough thereby to make thee
humble; and when thou have done all, yet to count thy self but an unprofitable
Servant. And secondly, thou by this means art taken off from leaning on any
thing below a naked Jesus for eternal Life. It is like, if thou wast not
sensible of many by-Thoughts and Wickednesses in thy best Performances, thou
would go near to be some proud, abominable Hypocrite, or a silly, proud,
dissembling Wretch at the best, such a one as would send thy Soul to the Devil
in a bundle of thy own Righteousness: but now thou, through Grace, see that
all and every thing thou do, there is sin enough in it to condemn thee. This
in the first place makes thee have a care of trusting in thy own doings. And
secondly, shows thee that there is nothing in thy self which will do thee any
good, by working in thee, as to the meritorious cause of thy Salvation: No, but
thou must have a share in the Birth of Jesus, in the Death of Jesus, in the
Blood, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of a crucified Jesus? And how
say thou? does not thy finding of this in thee, cause thee to fly from a
depending on thy own doings? And does it not also make thee the more earnestly
to groan after the Lord Jesus? Yea, and let me tell thee also, it will be a
cause to make thee admire the freeness and tender-heartedness of Christ to
thee, when he shall lift up the light of his Countenance upon thee, because he
has regarded such a one as thou, sinful thou: And therefore in this sense it
will be a mercy to the Saints, that they do find the relics of sin still
struggling in their Hearts; But this is not simply the nature of sin, but the
Mercy and Wisdom of God, who causes all things to work together for the good
of those that love and fear God, Romans 8. And therefore whatever thou find in
thy Soul, though it be sin of never so black a Soul-scaring nature, let it move
thee to run the faster to the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall not be ashamed,
that is, of thy running to him.

But secondly, When thou do apprehend that thou art defiled, and also thy
best Duties annoyed with many Weaknesses, let that Scripture come into thy
Thoughts, which says, Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. And if thou shall
understand that, what thou can not find in thy self, thou shall find in
Christ. Art thou a Fool in thy self, then Christ is made of God thy Wisdom. Art
thou Unrighteous in thy self, Christ is made of God thy Righteousness? Do
thou find that there is but very little sanctifying Grace in thy Soul? still
here is Christ made thy Sanctification; and all this in his own Person without
thee, without thy Wisdom, without thy Righteousness, without thy
Sanctification, without in his own Person in thy Fathers presence, appearing
there perfect Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification in his own Person, I
say, as a public Person for thee: So that thou may believe and say to thy
Soul, My Soul, though thou do find innumerable Infirmities in thy self, and
in thy Actions; yet look upon thy Jesus, the man Jesus, he is Wisdom, and that
for thee, to govern thee, to take care for thee, and to order all things for
the best for thee. He is also thy Righteousness now at Gods right Hand always
shining before the Eyes of his Glory: So that there it is unmovable, though
thou art in never such a sad Condition, yet thy Righteousness, which is the Son
of God, God-man, shines as bright as ever, and is as much accepted of God as
ever: (O this sometimes has been Life to me) And so, whatever thou, O my Soul,
find wanting in thy self, through Faith, thou shall see all laid up for thee
in Jesus Christ, whether it be Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, or
Redemption. Nay, not only so: but as I said before, he is all these in his own
Person without thee in the presence of his Father for thee.

Object. But now, if any should say in their Hearts, O, but I am one of the Old
Covenant-men I doubt; that is, I doubt I am not within this glorious Covenant
of Grace. And how if I should not?

Answ. Well, thou fear that thou art one of the Old Covenant, a Son of the
Bondwoman. In the first place, know that thou wast one of them by Nature; for
all by Nature are under that Covenant: but set the case that thou art to this
day under that, yet let me tell thee in the first place, there is hopes for
thee; for there is a gap open, a way made for Souls to come from under the
Covenant of Works, by Christ, For he has broken down the middle Wall of
Partition between us and you. Ephesians. 2. 14. And therefore if thou would be
saved thou may come to Christ. If thou want a righteousness (as I said
before) there is one in Christ. If thou would be washed, thou may come to
Christ, and if thou would be justified, there is justification enough in the
Lord Jesus Christ. That Is the first.

Ans. 2. And secondly, thou can not be so willing to come to Christ, as he is
willing thou should come to him; witness his coming down from Heaven, his
Humiliation, his spilling of his Blood from both his Cheeks, Luke 23. 44. by
sweat, under the burden of sin, and his shedding of it by the Spear, when he
hanged on the Cross. It appears also by his Promises, by his Invitations, by
his sending forth his Messengers to preach the same to poor Sinners, and
threatens Damnation upon this very account, namely, the neglect of him; and
declares that all the thousands, and ten thousands of sins in the World, should
not be able to damn those that believed in him; that he would pardon all,
forgive and pass by all if they would but come unto him: moreover, promises to
cast out none, no, not the poorest, vilest, contemptiblest Creature in the
whole World. Come unto me all (every one, though you be never so many, never so
vile, though your Load be never so heavy and intolerable, though you deserve
no help, not the least help, no Mercy, not the least compassion) yet cast your
Burden upon me, and you shall find rest for your Souls. Come unto me, and I
will heal you, love you, teach you, and tell you the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven: Come unto me and I will succor you, help you, and keep you from all
Devils and their Temptations, from the Law and its Curses, and from being for
ever overcome with any evil whatsoever. Come unto me for what you need, and
tell me what you would have, or what you would have me do for you, and all my
Strength, Love, Wisdom, and Interest that I have with my Father shall be laid
out for you. Come unto me, your sweet Jesus, your loving and tenderhearted
Jesus, your everlasting and sin-pardoning Jesus. Come unto me, and I will wash
you, and put my Righteousness upon you, pray to my Father for you, and send my
Spirit into you that you might be saved. Therefore,

Consider besides this, what a privilege thou shall have at the day of
Judgment above thousands, if thou do indeed and in truth close in with this
Jesus and accept of him; for thou shall not only have a Privilege in this Life
only, but in the Life Everlasting, even at the time of Christ's second coming
from Heaven; for then when there shall be the whole World gathered together,
and all the good Angels, bad Angels, Saints, and Reprobates, when all thy
Friends and Kindred with thy Neighbors on thy Right Hand and on the left shall
be with thee, beholding of the wonderful Glory and Majesty of the Son of God;
then shall the Son of Glory, even Jesus, in the very view and sight of them
all, smile and look kindly upon thee; when a smile or a kind look from Christ
shall be worth more then ten thousand Worlds, then thou shall have it. You know
it is counted an honor for a poor man to be favorably looked upon by a Judge,
or a King in the sight of Lords, Earls, Dukes, and Princes; why thus it will be
with thee in the sight of all the Princely Saints, Angels, and Devils, in the
sight of all the great Nobles in the World: then even thou that closest in with
Christ, be thou rich or poor, be thou bond or free, wise or foolish, if thou
close in with him, he will say unto thee, Well done good and faithful Servant,
even in the midst of the whole World; they that love thee shall see it, and
they that hate thee shall all to their shame behold it; for if thou fear him
here in secret, he will make it manifest even at that day upon the House top.

Secondly, not only thus; but thou shall also be lovingly received, and
tenderly embraced of him at that day, when Christ has thousands of gallant
Saints, as old Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, together with
all the Prophets and Apostles, and Martyrs, attending on him; together with
many thousands of glittering Angels ministering before him: besides, when the
ungodly shall appear there with their pale Faces, with their guilty
Consciences, and trembling Souls, that would then give thousands and ten
thousands of Worlds, (if they had so many) if they could enjoy but one loving
look from Christ. I say then, then shall thou have the hand of Christ reached
to thee kindly to receive thee, saying, Come thou blessed, step up hither; thou
wast willing to leave all for me, and now will I give all to thee; here is a
Throne, a Crown, a Kingdom, take them; thou wast not ashamed of me when thou
wast in the World among my Enemies, and now will not I be ashamed of thee
before thine Enemies, but will in the view of all these Devils and damned
Reprobates promote thee to Honor and Dignity. Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World: Thou
shall see that those who have served me in truth, shall lose nothing by the
means: No, but ye shall be as Pillars in my Temple, and Inheritours of my
Glory, and shall have a place to walk in among my Saints and Angels, Zech. 3.
7. O! Who would not be in this Condition? Who would not be in this Glory? It
will be such a Soulravishing Glory, that I am ready to think the whole
reprobate World will be ready to run mad, Deuteronomy. 28. 34. to think that they
should miss of it; then will the vilest Drunkard, Swearer, Liar, and unclean
Person willingly cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; yet be denied of entrance, and
thou in the mean time embraced, entertained, made welcome, have a fair Mitre
set upon thy Head, and clothed with immortal Glory, Zech. 3. 5. O therefore let
all this move thee, and be of weight upon thy Soul to close in with Jesus, this
tenderhearted Jesus. And if yet for all what I have said, thy Sins do still
stick with thee, and thou find thy hellish Heart loath to let them go, think
with thy self in this manner. Shall I have my Sins, and lose my Soul? Will they
do me any good when Christ comes? Would not Heaven be better to me then my
Sins? And the Company of God, Christ, Saints, and Angels be better then the
Company of Cain, Judas, Balaam, with the Devils in the Furnace of Fire. Can
thou now that read or hear these Lines, turn thy Back, and go on in thy
Sins? Can thou set so light of Heaven, of God, of Christ, and the Salvation
of thy poor, yet precious Soul? Can thou hear of Christ, his bloody Sweat and
Death, and not be taken with it, and not be grieved for it, and also converted
by it? If so, I might lay thee down several Considerations to stir thee up to
mend thy pace toward Heaven; but I shall not, there is enough written already
to leave thy Soul without excuse, and to bring thee down with a Vengeance into
Hellfire, devouring Fire, the Lake of Fire, eternal, everlasting Fire; O! to
make thee swim and roll up and down in the Flames of the Furnace of Fire.

The End.

