INSTRUCTION FOR THE IGNORANT: Being a Salve to cure that great want of
Knowledge which so much reigns both in young and old. Prepared, and presented to
them in a plain and easy Dialogue, fitted to the Capacity of the weakest. By
JOHN BUNYAN.

Hos. 4.6. My People perish for lack of Knowledge. LONDON, Printed for Francis
Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1675.

To the Church of Christ in and about Bedford, walking in the Faith and
Fellowship of the Gospel, your affectionate Brother and Companion in the
Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, wishes all Grace and Mercy by Jesus
Christ. Amen.
HOly and beloved, Although I have designed this little Treatise for public
and common benefit, yet considering that I am to you a debtor not only in
common Charity, but by reason of special Bonds which the Lord has laid upon me
to you-ward, I could do no less, (being driven from you in presence, not
affection) but first present you with this little Book; not for that you are
wanting in the things contained herein, but to put you again in remembrance of
first things, and to give you occasion to present something to your carnal
relations that may be (if God will) for their awakening and conversion; accept
it therefore as a token of my Christian Remembrance of you.

Next, I present it to all those unconverted, old and young, who have been at
any time under my Preaching, and yet remain in their sins: And I entreat them
also that they receive it as a token of my love to their immortal Souls; yea, I
charge them as they will answer it in the day of the terrible judgment, that
they read, ponder, and receive this wholesome Medicine prepared for them. Now the
God of Blessing bless it to the awakening of many sinners, and the salvation of
their souls by faith in Jesus Christ. Amen.

Yours, to serve you by my Ministry (when I can) to your Edification and
Consolation, J. B.

Instruction for the Ignorant, etc.
Quest.

HOw many Gods are there?

Answ.

To the Christians there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we of him, 1 Cor. 8.9.

Q. Why? is not the God of the Christians the God of them that are no
Christians?

A. He is their Maker and Preserver; but they have not chosen him to be their
God, Acts 17.24. Psalm. 36.6. Judge. 10.14.

Q. Is there then other gods besides the God of the Christians?

A. There is none other true God but He: but because they want the grace of
Christians, therefore they choose not Him, but such gods as will suit with, and
countenance their lusts, Joh. 8.44.

Q. What gods are they that countenance the lusts of wicked men?

A. The Devil, who is the god of this World; the Belly, that god of Gluttons,
Drunkards, and riotous persons; and idle pleasures and vanities, which are for
the most part the gods of the youth, Job 8.44. 2 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.19. Exodus
32.6. 1 Cor. 10.7. 2 Timothy 2.22. 1 John 5.21.

Q. Who is a Christian?

A. One that is born again, a new creature; one that sits at Jesus feet to hear
his Word; one that has his heart purified and sanctified by Faith which is in
Christ, John 3.3, 5, 7. Act. 11.26. Act. 15.9. chap. 26.18. 2 Cor. 5.17.

Q. How do you distinguish the God of the Christians, from the gods of other
people?

A. He is a Spirit, John 4.24.

Q. Is there no other Spirit but the true God?

A. Yes, there are many spirits, 1 John 4.1.

Q. What spirits are they?

A. The good Angels, are Spirits; the bad Angels are Spirits; and the Souls of
Men are Spirits, Heb. 1.7.14. 1 King. 22.21, 22. Rev. 16.13, 14. Act. 7.59.
Heb. 12.23.

Q. How then is the true God distinguished from other Spirits?

A. Thus; No Spirit is Eternal but he, no Spirit is Almighty but he, no Spirit
is Incomprehensible and Unsearchable but he; He is also most Merciful, most
Just, most Holy, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Genesis 17.1. Psalm. 145.3. Mich. 7.18. Job 34.17. 1 Samuel 2.2.

Q. Is this God, being a Spirit, to be known?

A. Yes, and that by his Works of Creation, by his Providence, by the
Judgments that he executes, and by his Word.

Q. Do you understand him by the Works of Creation?

A. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handiwork: so that the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World,
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead, Psalm. 19.1, 2. Romans 1.20.

Q. Does his Works of Providence also declare him?

A. They must needs do it, since through his Providence the whole Creation is
kept in such harmony as it is, and that in despite of Sin and Devils: also if
you consider that from an Angel to a Sparrow, nothing falls to the ground
without the Providence of our Heavenly Father, Mat. 10.29.

Q. Is he known by his Judgments?

A. God is known by his Judgments which he executes; the wicked is shared in
the work of his own hands, Psalm. 9.16.

Q. Is he known by his Word?

A. Yes, most clearly: for by that he reveals his Attributes, his Decrees,
his Promises, his way of Worship, and how he is to be pleased by us.

Q. Of what did God make the World?

A. Things that are seen, were not made of things that do appear, Heb. 11.3.

Q. How long was he in making the World?

A. In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is in
them, and on the seventh day God ended all his works which he had made, Exodus
20.11. Genesis 2.2.

Q. Of what did God make Man?

A. The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the Ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of Life, and Man became a living soul, Genesis 2.7.

Q. Why does it say God breathed into him the breath of Life, is Man's Soul of
the very nature of the Godhead?

A. This does not teach that the Soul is of the nature of the Godhead, but
shows that it is not of the same matter as his body, which is dust, Genesis
18.27.

Q. Is not the Soul then of the nature of the Godhead?

A. No, for God cannot sin, but the Soul does; God cannot be destroyed in Hell,
but the Souls of the Impenitent shall, Ezekiel. 18.4. Mat. 10.28.

Q. How did God make man in the day of his first Creation?

A. God made Man upright. In the Image of God created he him, Eccl. 7.29. Genesis
1.27.

Q. Did God when he made Man, leave him with^^ (...)

A. No: He gave him a Law in his nature, and imposed upon him a positive
Precept, but he offered violence to them, and brake them both, Genesis 3.3, 6.

Q. What was the due desert of that Transgression?

A. Spiritual death in the day he did it, Temporal Death afterward, and
everlasting Death last of all, Genesis 2.17. chap. 3.19. Mat. 25.46.

Q What is it to be spiritually dead?

A. To be alienate from God, and to live without him in the World, through the
Ignorance that is in Man, and through the Power of their Sins, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.

Q. Wherein does this alienation from God appear?

A. In the love they have to their sins, in their being loath to come to him, in
their pleading idle excuses for their sins, and in their ignorance of the
excellent mysteries of his blessed Gospel, Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 11, 12. Romans 1.28.
Ephesians. 4.18, 19.

Q. What is temporal death?

A. To have Body and Soul separate asunder, the Body returning to the Dust as
it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it, Genesis 3.19. Eccles. 12.7.

Q. What is Everlasting Death?

A. For Body and Soul to be separate for ever from God, and to be cast into
Hellfire, Luke 13.

Q. Do Men go Body and Soul to Hell so soon as they die?

A. The Body abides in the Grave till the sound of the last Trump; but the
Soul, if the Man dies wicked, goes presently from the face of God into Hell, as
into a Prison, there to be kept till the day of Judgment, 1 Cor. 15.52. Isa.
24.22. Luke 12.20.

Q. Do we come into the World as upright as did our first Parent?

A. No; He came into the World sinless, being made so of God Almighty; but we
came into the World sinners, being made so by his Pollution.

Q. How does it appear that we came into the World polluted?

A. We are the fruit of an unclean thing, are defiled in our very conception,
and are by nature the Children of wrath, Job. 14.4. Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3.

Q. Can you make further proof of this?

A. Yes, It is said that by one Man came Sin, Death, Judgment, and Condemnation
upon all Men, Romans 5.12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Q. Do we then come sinners into the World?

A. Yes, we are Transgressors from the Womb, and go astray as soon as we are
born, speaking lies, Isa. 48.8. Psalm. 58.3.

Q. But as Adam fell with us in him, so did he not by faith rise with us in
him? for he had no (...)

A. He fell as a public person, but believed the Promise as a single person.
Adam's faith saved not the World, though Adam's sin overthrew it.

Q. But do not some hold that we are sinners only by imitation?

A. Yes, being themselves deceived. But God's Word says, we are Children of
Wrath by Nature, that is, by Birth and Generation.

Q. Can you bring further proof of this?

A. Yes; In that day that we were born, we were polluted in our own Blood, and
cast out to the loathing of our persons. Again, the Children of old that were
dedicated unto the Lord, a Sacrifice was offered for them at a month old, which
was before they were sinners by imitation, Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Number.
18.14, 15, 16.

Q. Can you make this appear by experience?

A. Yes; The first things that bloom and put forth themselves in Children, show
their Ignorance of God, their disobedience to Parents, and their innate enmity
to Holiness of life; their inclinations naturally run to vanity. Besides,
little Children die, but that they could not, were they not of God counted
sinners; for death is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23.

Q. What is sin?

A. It is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.

Q. A transgression of what Law?

A. Of the Law of our Nature, and of the Law of the Ten Commandments as written
in the holy Scriptures, Romans 2.12, 14, 15. Exodus 20.

Q. When does one sin against the Law of Nature?

A. When you do any thing that your Conscience tells you is a transgression
against God or Man, Romans 2.14, 15.

Q. When do we sin against the Law as written in the ten Commandments?

A. When you do any thing that they forbid, although you be ignorant of it,
Psalm. 19.12.

Q. How many ways are there to sin against this Law?

A. Three: By sinful thoughts, by sinful words, and also by sinful actions,
Romans 7.7. Mat. 5.28. chap. 12.37. Romans 2.6.

Q. What if we sin against but one of the Ten Commandments?

A. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all: for he that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not
kill; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art a transgressor
of the Law, Jam. 2.10, 11.

Q. Where will God punish sinners for their sins?

A. Both in this World and in that which is to come, Gen 3.24. chap. 4.10, 11,
12. Job 21.30.

Q. How are Men punished in this World for sin?

A. Many ways, as with sickness, losses, crosses, disappointments and the like:
sometimes also God gives them up to their own hearts lusts, to blindness of
mind also, and hardness of heart; yea, and sometimes to strong delusions that
they might believe lies, and be damned, Lev. 26.15, 16. Amos. 4.7, 10. Romans
1.24, 28. Exodus 4.21. chap. 9.12, 13, 14. Zeph. 1.17. Romans 11.7, 8. 2 These.
2.11, 12.

Q How are sinners punished in the World to come?

A. With a Worm that never dies, and with a Fire that never shall be quenched,
Mar. 9.44.

Q. Whither do sinners go to receive this punishment?

A. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God,
Psalm. 9.27.

Q. What is Hell?

A. It is a place, and a state most fearful, Luke 16.28. Act. 1.25. Luke 16.21.

Q. Why do you call it a place?

A. Because in Hell shall all the damned be confined as in a Prison, in their
chains of darkness for ever, Luke 12.5, 58. chap. 16.26. Jud. 6.

Q What a place is Hell?

A. It is a dark bottomless burning lake of Fire, large enough to hold all that
perish, Mat. 22.13. Rev. 20.1, 15. Isa. 30.33. Pro. 27.20.

Q. What do you mean when you say it is a fearful state?

A. I mean, that it is the lot of those that are cast in thither to be
tormented in most fearful manner, to wit, with wrath and fiery indignation,
Romans 2.9. Heb. 10.26, 27.

Q. In what parts shall they be thus fearfully tormented?

A. In Body and Soul: for Hellfire shall kindle upon both beyond what now can
be thought Mat. 10.28. Luke 16.24. Jam. 5.3.

Q. How long shall they be in this condition?

A. These shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the smoke of their
torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night;
for they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his Power, Mat. 25.46. Rev. 14.11. 2 These. 1.9.

Q. But why might not the ungodly be punished with this punishment in this
world, that we might have seen it and believe?

A. If the ungodly should with punishment have been rewarded in this World, it
would in all probability have overthrown the whole order that God has settled
here among Men. For who could have endured here to have seen the flames of
Fire, to have heard the groans, and to have seen the tears perhaps of damned
relations, as Parents or Children. Therefore as Tophet of old was without the
City, and as the Gallows and Gibbets are builded without the Towns; so Christ
has ordered that they who are to be punished with this kind of Torment, shall
be taken away; Take hm away, says he (out of this World) and cast him into
utter darkness and let him have his punishment there) there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Besides, Faith is not to be wrought by looking into
Hell, and seeing the damned tormented before our Eyes; but by hearing the Word
of God: for he that shall not believe Moses and the Prophets, will not be
persuaded should one come from the dead; yea should one come to them in flames
to persuade them, Mat. 22.13. Romans 10.17. Luke 16.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

Q. Are there degrees of torment in Hell?

A. Yes, for God will reward every one according to their works: Woe to the
wicked it shall go ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him, Isa. 3.11.

Q. Who are like to be most punished there, Men or Children?

A. The punishment in Hell comes not upon sinners, according to age, but sin:
so that whether they be Men or Children, the greater sin, the greater
punishment; for there is no respect of persons with God, Romans 2.11.

Q. How do you distinguish between great sins, and little ones?

A. By their Nature, and by the Circumstances that attend them.

Q. What do you mean by their Nature?

A. I mean when they are very gross in themselves, 2 Chronicles. 33.2. Ezekiel. 16.42.

Q. What kind of sins are the greatest?

A. Adultery, Fornication, Murder, Theft, Swearing, Lying, Covetousness,
Witchcraft, Sedition, Heresies, or any the like, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.3, 4,
5, 6. Col. 3.5, 6. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Rev. 21.8.

Q. What do you mean by Circumstances that attend sin?

A. I mean Light, Knowledge, the Preaching of the Word, Godly Acquaintance,
timely Cautions, etc.

Q. Will these make an alteration in the sin?

A. These things attending sinners, will make little sins great, yea greater
than greater sins that are committed in grossest Ignorance.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Sodom and Gomorrah wallowed in all, or most of those gross Transgressions
abovementioned: yea, they were said to be sinners exceedingly, they lived in
such sins as may not be spoken of without blushing, and yet God swears that
Israel, his Church, had done worse than they; and the Lord Jesus also seconds
it in that Threatening of his, I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable
in that day for Sodom than for thee, Ezekiel. 16.48. Mat. 11.24. Luke 10.12.

Q. And was this the reason, namely, because they had such circumstances
attending them as Sodom had not?

A. Yes, as will plainly appear, if you read the three Chapters above mentioned.

Q. When do I sin against Light and Knowledge?

A. When you sin against convictions of Conscience, when you sin against a
known Law of God, when you sin against Counsels and disswasion of Friends, then
you sin against Light and Knowledge, Romans 1.32.

Q. When do I sin against Preaching of the Word?

A. When you refuse to hear God's Ministers, or hearing them, refuse to follow
their wholesome Doctrine, 2 Chronicles 36.16. Jer. 25.4, 7. chap. 35.15.

Q. When else do I sin against the Preaching of the Word?

A. When you mock, or despise or reproach the Ministers; also when you raise
lies and scandals of them, or receive such lies or scandals raised: you then
also sin against the preaching of the Word, when you Persecute them that Preach
it, or are secretly glad to see them so used, 2 Chronicles. 30.1, 10. Romans 3.8. Jer.
20.10. 1 These. 2.15, 16.

Q. How will godly acquaintance greaten my sin?

A. When you sin against their Counsels, Warnings, or Persuasions to the
contrary; also when their lives and conversations are reproof to you, and yet
against all you will sin. Thus sinned Ishmael, Esau, Eli's sons, Absalom and
Judas, they had good Company, good Counsels, and a good life set before them by
their godly Acquaintance, but they sinned against all, and their Judgment was
the greater. Ishmael was cast away, Esau hated, Eli's sons died suddenly,
Absalom and Judas were both strangely hanged; Genesis 21.10. Gal. 4.30. Mal. 1.2.
1 Samuel 2.20, 25. 2 Samuel 16.

Q. Are sins thus heightened, distinguished from others by any special name?

A. Yes; they are called Rebellion, and are compared to the sin of Witchcraft;
they are called wilful sin, they are called Briers and Thorns, and they that
bring them forth are nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned, 1 Samuel
15.23. Heb. 10.26. chap 6.7, 8.

Q. Are there any other things that can make little sins great ones?

A. Yes; As when you sin against the Judgments of God: As for example, you see
the Judgments of God come upon some for their transgressions, and you go on in
their iniquities: also when you sin against the Patience, Long-suffering, and
Forbearance of God, this will make little sins great ones, Dan. 5.

Q. Did ever God punish little Children for sin against him?

A. Yes: When the Flood came, he drowned all the little Children that were in
the old World; he also burned up all the little Children which were in Sodom:
and because upon a time the little Children at Bethel mocked the Prophet as he
was a-going to worship God, God let loose two she-Bears upon them which tore
forty and two of them to pieces, 2 King. 2.22, 23.

Q. Alas! What shall we little Children do?

A. Either go on in your sins: or remember now your Creator in the days of your
Youth, before the evil days come, Eccles. 12.1.

Q. Why do you mock us, to bid us go on in our sins? you had need pray for us
that God would save us.

A. I do not mock you, but as the wiseman does; and besides I pray for you and
wish your Salvation.

Q. How does the wiseman mock us?

A. Thus; Rejoice, O young man, in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine Eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment, Eccles. 11.9.

Q. What a kind of mocking is this?

A. Such an one, as is mixed with the greatest seriousness; as if he should
say, I, do, sinners, go on in your sins if you dare; do, live in your vanities,
but God will have a time to judge you for them.

Q. Is not this just as when my Father bids me be naught if I will, but if I be
naught, he will beat me for it?

A. Yes; or like that saying of Joshua, If it seem evil to you to serve the
Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve; serve your sins at your peril,
Josh. 24.15.

Q. Is it not best then for me to serve God?

A. Yes; for they that serve the Devil must be where he is, and they that serve
God and Christ, must be where they are, Joh. 12.16. Mat. 25.41.

Q. But when had I best begin to serve God?

A. Just now: Remember now thy Creator, now thou have the Gospel before thee,
now thy heart is tender and will be soonest broken.

Q. But if I follow my play and sports a little longer, may I not come time
enough?

A. I cannot promise thee that, for there be little Graves in the Churchyard;
and who can tell but that thy young life is short: or if thou do live,
perhaps thy day of Grace may be as short, as was Ishmael's of old: read also,
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.

Q. But if I stay a little longer before I turn, I may have more wit to serve
God than now I have, (...)

A. If thou stayest longer, thou will have more sin, and perhaps less wit: for
the bigger sinner, the bigger fool, Prove. 1.22.

Q. If I serve God sometimes and my sins sometimes, how then?

A. No Man can serve two Masters: Thou can not serve God and thy Sins. God
says, My Son, give me thy heart. Also thy Soul and Body are his; but the
double minded Man is forbidden to think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord, Mat. 6.24. Prove. 23.26. 1 Cor. 6.20. Jam. 1.7, 8.

Q. Do you find many such little Children as I am serve God?

A. Not many; yet some I do, Samuel served him being a Child; when Josias was
young he began to seek after the God of his Father David: And how kindly did
our Lord Jesus take it, to see the little Children run tripping before him, and
crying Hosannah to the Son of David! 1 Samuel 3.1. 2 Chronicles. 34.3. Mat. 21.15, 16.

Q. Then I am not like to have many Companions, if I thus young begin to serve
God, am I?

A. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. Yet some Companions thou will have David counted himself
a Companion of all them that love God's Testimonies; all the Godly, though
Gray Headed, will be thy Companions; yea, and thou shall have either one or
more of the Angels of God in Heaven to attend on, and minister for thee, Mat.
7.13, 14. Psalm. 119.63. Mat. 18.10.

Q. But I am like to be slighted, and despised by other little Children if I
begin already to serve God, am I not?

A. If Children be so rude as to mock the Prophets and Ministers of God, no
marvel if they also mock thee: but it is a poor Heaven that is not worth
enduring worse things than to be mocked for the seeking and obtaining of, 2
Kings 2.23, 24.

Q. But how should I serve God? I do not know how to worship him.

A. The true Worshippers, worship God in Spirit and Truth, Joh. 4.24. Phil. 3.3.

Q. What is meant by worshipping him in the Spirit?

A. To worship him in God's Spirit and in mine own; that is, to worship him,
being wrought over in my very heart by the good Spirit of God, to an hearty
Compliance with his will, Romans 1.9. Chap. 6.17. Psalm. 101.3.

Q. What is it to worship him in truth?

A. To do all that we do in his Worship according to his Word, for his Word is
truth, and to do it without dissimulation. Heb. 8.5. Joh. 17.17. Psalm. 26.6.
Psalm. 118.19, 20.

You may take the whole thus; Then do you worship God a-right, when in heart,
and life, (...)

Q. How must I do to worship him with my spirit and heart?

A. Thou must first get the good knowledge of him. And thou Solomon my Son, said
David, Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart.
Mind you, he first bids know him, and then serve him with a perfect heart, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

Q. Is it easy to get a true knowledge of God?

A. No; Thou must cry after Knowledge, and lift up thy voice for Understanding.
If thou seek for her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure,
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God,
Pro. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Q. How comes it to be so difficult a thing to attain the true Knowledge of God?

A. By reason of the pride and ignorance that is in us, as also by reason of
our wicked ways, Psalm. 10.4. Ephesians. 4 18, 19. Tit. 1.16.

Q. But do not every one profess they know God?

A. Yes; But their supposed knowledge of him varieth as much as does their faces
or complexions, some thinking he is this, and some that.

Q. Will you show me a little how they vary in their thoughts about him.

A. Yes; Some count him a kind of an heartless God, that will neither do evil
nor good; some count him a kind of an ignorant and blind God, that can neither
know nor see through the Clouds; some again count him an inconsiderable God,
not worth the enjoying, if it must not be but with the loss of this World, and
their Lusts. Moreover, some think him to be altogether such an one as
themselves, one that has as little hatred to sin as themselves, and as little
love to holiness as themselves, Zeph. 1.12. Job 22.12, 13. chap. 21.9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm. 50.21.

Q. Are there any more false Opinions of God?

A. Yes; There are three other false opinions of God. 1. Some think he is all
Mercy and no Justice, and that therefore they may live as they list. 2. Others
think he is all Justice and no Mercy, and that therefore they had as good go on
in their sins and be damned, as turn and be never the better. 3. Others think
he is both Justice and Mercy, but yet think also, that his Justice is such as
they can pacify with their own good works, and save themselves with their own
right hand, ( Romans 3.8. Jer. 2.25. Job 40.14.) contrary to these Scriptures,
Hab. 1.13. Isa. 45.21.

Q. How then shall I know when I have the true Knowledge of God?

A. When thy Knowledge of him and the holy Scriptures agree.

Q. The Scriptures! do not all false Opinions of him, flow from the Scriptures?

A. No in no wise; it is true, Men father their errors upon the Scriptures, when
indeed they flow from the ignorance of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.18.

Q. But how if I do not understand the holy Bible, must I then go without the
true knowledge of God?

A. His Name is manifested by his World; the Scriptures are they that testify
of him, and they are able to make the Man of God perfect in all things, and
wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Jesus Christ, John 17.6, 7, 8. John 5.39.
2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

Q. But what must one that knows not God do, to get the knowledge of God?

A. Let him apply his heart unto the Scriptures, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place (even this World) until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in
his heart, E^^. 22.7. chap. 23.12. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20.

Q But how shall I know when I have found by the Scriptures, the true knowledge
of God?

A. When thou have also found the true knowledge of thy self, Isa. 6.5. Job.
42.5.

Q. What is it for me to know my self?

A. Then thou know thy self, when thou art in thine own eyes, a loathsome,
polluted, wretched, miserable Sinner, and that not any thing done by thee, can
pacify God unto thee, Job 42.5. Ezekiel. 20.43, 44. Romans 7.24.

Of Confession of Sin.
Quest. YOu have showed me, if I will indeed worship God, I must first know him
aright, now then to the question in hand, pray how must I worship him?

A. In confessing unto him, Nehem. 9.1, 2, 3.

Q. What must I confess?

A. Thou must confess thy transgressions unto the Lord, Psalm. 32.5.

Q. Was this the way of the godly of old?

A. Yes; Nehemiah confessed his sins, David confessed his sins, Daniel
confessed his sins, and they that were Baptized by John in Jordan, confessed
their sins, Nehem. 1.6. Psalm. 32.5. Dan. 9.4. Mat. 3.6.

Q. What sins must I confess to God?

A. All sins whatsoever; for he that covers his sins shall not prosper, but
whosoever confesses and forsakes them shall find Mercy, Pro. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.

Q. But how if I do neither know, nor remember all my sins?

A. Thou must then search and try thy ways by the holy Word of God, Lam. 3.40.
Psalm. 77.6.

Q. But how if I do not make this search after my sins?

A. If thou do not, God will: if thou do not search them out and confess
them, God will search them out and charge them upon thee, and tear thee in
pieces for them, Psalm. 50.21, 22.

Q. Where must I begin to confess my sins?

A. Where God begins to show thee them: Observe then where God begins
with conviction for sin, and there begin thou with confession of it. Thus David
began to confess, thus Daniel began to confess, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. Dan. 9.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Q. What must I do, when God has showed me any sin, to make right Confession
thereof?

A. Thou must follow that Conviction, until it shall bring thee to the Original
and Fountain of that sin, which is thine own heart, 1 King. 8.38. Psalm. 51.5.

Q. Is my heart, then, the Fountain and Original of sin?

A. Yes: For from within out of the heart of Man proceeds evil thoughts,
Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thifts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit,
Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness. All these evil
things come from within, and defile the Man, Mar. 7.21, 22, 23.

Q. When a Man sees this, what will he think of himself?

A. Then he will not only think, but conclude, that he is an unclean thing that
his heart has deceived him, that it is most desperate and wicked, that it may
not be trusted by any means, that every imagination and thought of his heart
(naturally) is only evil, and that continually, Isa. 64.6. Prove. 28.26. Isa.
44.20. Genesis 6.5.

Q. You have given me a very bad character of the heart, but how shall I know
that it is so bad as you count it?

A. Both by the Text, and by Experience.

Q. What do you mean by Experience?

A. Keep thine eyes upon thy heart, and also upon Gods Word, and thou shall
see, with thine own eyes, the desperate wickedness that is in thine heart, for
thou must know Sin by the Law, that bidding thee do one thing, and thy heart
inclining to another, Romans 7.7, 8.9.

Q. May I thus, then, know my heart?

A. Yes; that is, something of it, specially the Carnality of thy mind, because
the carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7.

Q. Can you particularize some few things wherein the wickedness of the heart
of man shows it self.

A. Yes; by its secret hankering after sin, although the Word forbids it: by
its deferring of Repentance; by its being weary of holy Duties; by its aptness
to forget God; by its studying to lessen and hide Sin; by its feigning it self
to be better than it is, by being glad when it can sin without being seen of
Men; by its hardening it self against the Threatenings and Judgments of God; by
its desperate inclinings to Unbeleif, Atheism, and the like, Pro. 1.24, 25, 26.
Isa. 43.22. Mal. 1.12, 13. Judge. 3.7. Jer. 2.32. Psalm. 106.21. Hos. 2.13. Pro.
30.20. Jer. 2.25. Romans 1.32. chap. 2.5. Zeph. 7.11, 12, 13.

Q. Is there any thing else to be done in order to a right confession of sin?

A. Yes; Let this Conviction sink down into thy heart, that God sees much more
wickedness in thee than thou can see in thy self. If thy heart condemn thee,
God is greater than thy heart, and he knows all things; besides, be has set
thy secret sins in the light of his Countenance, 1 John 3.20. Psalm. 90.8.

Q. Is there any thing else that must go to a right confession of sin?

A. Yes; In thy confessions thou must greaten and aggravate thy sin by all just
circumstances.

Q. How must I do that?

A. By considering against how much Light and Mercy thou have sinned, against
how much Patience, and Forbearance, thou have sinned; also against what
Warnings and Judgments thou have sinned; and against how many of thine own
Vows, Promises, and Engagements, thou have sinned: these things heighten and
aggravate sin, Ezra 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Q. But what need I confess my sins to God, see(...)

A. Confession of sin is necessary, for many Reasons.

Q. Will you show me some of those Reasons?

A. Yes; One is, by a sincere and hearty Confession of sin, thou acknowledgest
God to be thy Sovereign Lord, and that he has right to impose his Law upon
thee, Exodus 20.

Q. Can you show me another Reason?

A. Yes; By confessing thy sin, thou subscribest to his righteous Judgments
that are pronounced against it, Psalm. 51.3, 4.

Q. Can you show me another Reason?

A. Yes; By confession of sin, thou show how little thou deservest the least
Mercy from God.

Q. Have you yet another reason why I should confess my sins?

A. Yes; By so doing thou show whether thy heart loves it, or hates it: He
that heartily confesses his Sin, is like him who having a Thief or a Traitor
in his house, brings him out to condign punishment; but he that forbears to
confess, is like him who hides a Thief or Traitor, against the Laws and Peace
of our Lord the King.

Q. Give me one more reason why I should confess my sins to God?

A. He that confesses his sin, casts himself at the feet of Gods Mercy,
utterly condemns and casts away his own righteousness, concludes there is no
way to stand Just and acquit before God, but by and through the righteousness
of another; whither God is resolved to bring thee, if ever he saves thy Soul,
Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3. 1 John 1.9. Phil. 3.6, 7, 8.

Q. What frame of heart should I be in when I confess my sins?

A. Do it heartily, and to the best of thy power, thoroughly. For to feign, in
this work, is abominable; to do it by the halves, is wickedness; to do it
without sense of Sin, cannot be acceptable; and to confess it with the mouth,
and to love it with the heart, is a lying unto God, and a provocation of the
eyes of his Glory.

Q. What do you mean by feigning and dissembling in this work?

A. When men confess it, yet know not what it is; or if they think they know
it, do not conclude it so bad as it is; or when men ask pardon of God, but do
not see their need of pardon; this man must needs dissemble.

Q. What do you mean by doing it by the halves?

A. When men confess some, but not all that they are convinced of; or if they
confess all, yet labor in their Confession to lessen it; or when in their
Confession they turn not from all Sin to God, but from one Sin to another. They
turned, but not to the most high, none of them did exalt him, Prove. 28.13. Job
31.33. Jam

Q. What is it to confess Sin without sense of Sin?

A. To do it through Custom, or Tradition, when there is not guilt upon the
Conscience, now this cannot be acceptable.

Q. What is it to confess it with the mouth, and to love it with the heart?

A. When men condemn it with their mouth, but refuse to let it go; when with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
Covetousness, Job 20.12, 13. Jer. 8.5. Ezekiel. 33.31.

Q. But I asked you, what frame of heart I should be in, in my Confessions?

A. I have showed you how you should not be. Well, I will show you now what
frame of heart becomes you in your Confessions of Sin. Labor by all means for
a sense of the evil that is in Sin.

Q. What evil is there in Sin?

A. No man with Tongue can express what may by the Heart be felt of the evil of
Sin; but this know, it dishonors God, it provokes him to wrath, it damneth
the Soul, Romans 2.23. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. 2 These. 2.12.

Q. What else would you advise me to in this great work?

A. When we confess sin, tears, shame, and brokenness of heart becomes us, Jer.
50.4. Isa. 22.12. Psalm. 51.17. Jer. 31.19.

Q. What else becomes me in my Confessions of (...)

A. Great detestation of sin, with unfeigned Sighs and Groans, that expresses
thou do it heartily, Job 42.5, 6. Ezekiel. 9.4. Jer. 31.9.

Q. Is here all?

A. No; Tremble at the Word of God; Tremble at every Judgment, lest it overtake
thee; Tremble at every promise, lest thou should miss thereof: for, says
God, To this man will I look even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
Spirit, and that trembles at my Word, Isa. 66.2. Heb. 4.1, 2.

Q. What if I cannot thus confess my Sins?

A. Bewail the hardness of thy heart, keep close to the best Preachers,
remember that thou hangest over Hell, by the weak thread of an uncertain life.
And know, God counts it a great evil, not to be ashamed of, not to blush at
sin, Isa. 63.17. Jer. 6.15. Chap. 8.12.

Q. Is there no thanks to be rendered to God in Confessions?

A. O, Yes; Thank him that he has let thee see thy sins, thank him that he
has given thee time to acknowledge thy sins, thou might now have been
confessing in Hell: thank him also that he has so far condescended as to hear
the self-bemoaning sinner, and that he has promised, Surely to have Mercy upon
such, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

Of Faith in Christ.
Quest. I Am glad that you have instructed me into this part of the worship of
God, pray tell me also how else I should worship him?

A. Thou must believe his Word.

Q. Is that worshipping of God?

A. Yes; after the way which ye call heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers, believing all things that are written in the Law, and the Prophets,
etc. Acts 24.14.

Q. Why should believing be counted a part of Gods worship?

A. Because without faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6.

Q. Why not impossible to please him without believing?

A. Because in all true Worship, a man must believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Besides he that worships God must
also of necessity believe his Word, else he cannot worship with that reverence
and fear that becomes him, but will do it in a superstitious profane manner:
for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14.23.

Q. But do not all believe as you have said?

A. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit is Spirit. And again, the Children of the flesh, these are not the
Children of God, but the Children of the promise are counted for the Seed, Joh.
3.6. Romans 9.8.

Q. What do you mean by that?

A. Thou must be born twice before thou can truly believe once, Joh. 3.3, 5.

Q. How do you prove that?

A. Because believing is a Christian act, and none are true Christians but
those that are born again. But I mean by believing, believing unto Salvation.

Q. Can you prove this?

A. Yes; They that believe in the Name of Christ, are such, which are born not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God,
Joh. 1.12, 13.

Q. What is believing?

A. It is such an act of a gracious Soul, as lays hold on Gods Mercy through
Christ, Act. 15, 11.

Q. Why do you call it an act of a gracious Soul?

A. Because their minds are disposed that way, by the Power of the Holy Ghost,
Romans 15.13.

Q. If such a poor sinner as I am would be saved from the wrath to come, how
must I believe?

A. Thy first question should be, on whom must I believe? Joh. 9.35, 36.

Q. On whom then must I believe?

A. On the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 16.31, 32.

Q. Who is Jesus Christ that I might believe on him?

A. He is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.16.

Q. Why must I believe in him?

A. Because he is the Savior of the World, 2 Pet. 1.1. 1 John 4.14.

Q. How is he the Savior of the World?

A. By the Fathers designation, and sending for God sent not his Son into the
World to condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved, John
3.13.

Q. How did he come into the World?

A. In Man's flesh, in which flesh he fulfilled the Law, died for our sins,
conquered the Devil and Death, and obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Gal.
4.4. Romans 10.3, 4. chap. 8.3. Heb. 2.14 15. chap 6.20 chap 9.12, 24.

Q. But is there no other way to be saved but by believing in Jesus Christ?

A. There is no other name given under Heaven among men whereby we must be
saved and therefore he that believes not, shall be damned, Act. 4.12. Mar.
16.16. John 3.18.36.

Q. What is believing on Jesus Christ?

A. It is a receiving of him with what is in him, as the gift of God to thee a
sinner, Joh. 1. 12.

Q What is in Jesus Christ to encourage me to (...)

A. Infinite Righteousness to justify thee, and the Spirit without measure to
Sanctify thee, Isa. 45.24, 25. Dan. 9.24. Phil. 3.7, 8. Joh. 3.34.

Q. Is this made mine if I receive Christ?

A. Yes; If thou receive him as God offers him to thee, John 3.16.

Q. How does God offer him to me?

A. Even as a rich Man freely offers an Alms to a Beggar, and so must thou
receive him, John 6.32, 33, 34, 35.

Q. Has he indeed made amends for sin? and would he indeed have me accept of
what he has done?

A. That he has made amends for sin, it is evident, because God for Christ's
sake forgiveth thee. and it is as evident that he would have thee accept
thereof, because he offers it to thee, and has sworn to give thee the utmost
benefit, to wit, Eternal life, if thou do receive it, yea and ^^th threatened
thee with eternal Damnation if after all this thou shall neglect so great
Salvation, Ephesians. 5.1. Romans 3.24. Mat. 28.19. Act. 13.32, 33, 38, 39. Heb.
6.17, 18. chap. 2.3. Mar. 16.16.

Q. But how must I be qualified before I shall ^are to believe in Christ?

A. Come, sensible of thy sins and of the Wrath of God due unto them, for thus
thou ^^t bid to come, Mat. 11.28.

Q. Did ever any come thus to Christ?

A. David came thus, Paul and the Jailer came thus, also Christ's Murderers
came thus, Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3. Acts 9.6. Acts 16.30, 31. Act. 2.37.

Q. But does it not seem most reasonable that we should first mend and be good?

A. The whole have no need of the Physician, but those that are sick; Christ
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mar. 2.17.

Q. But is it not the best way, if one can to mend first?

A. This is just as if a sick man should say, is it not best for me to be well
before I go to the Physician; or as if a wounded man should say, when I am
cured I will lay on the Plaster.

Q. But when a poor Creature sees its vileness, it is afraid to come to Christ,
is it not?

A. Yes; But without ground, for he has said, say to them that are of a
fearful heart, be strong, fear not; and to this man will I look, even to him
that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa. 35.4.
Chap. 66.2.

Q. What encouragement can be given us, th^^ to come?

A. The Prodigal came thus and his Father received him, and fell upon his neck
and kissed him. Thus he received the Colossians and consequently all that are
saved, Luke 15. Colos. 2.13.

Q. Will you give me one more encouragement?

A. The Promises are so worded, that they that are Scarlet-sinners,
Crimson-sinners, Blasphemous sinners, have encouragement to come to him with
hopes of life, Isa. 1.18. Mar. 3.28. Joh. 6.36. Luke 24.47. Act. 13.36.

Q. Shall any one that believes be saved?

A. If they believe as the Scriptures have said, if the Scriptures be fulfilled
in their believing, Joh. 7.38. Jam. 2.23.

Q. What do you mean by that?

A. When Faith, which a Man says he has, proves it self to be of the right
kind by its Acts and Operations in the mind of a poor sinner, Jam. 2.19, 20,
21, 22.

Q. Why? is there many kinds of Faith?

A. Yes; There is a Faith that will stand with a heart as hard as a rock; a
short-winded Faith, which dureth for a while; and in time of temptation such
fall away, Luke 8.13.

Q. Is there any other kind of Faith?

A. Yes; There is a Faith that has no more life in it than has the body of a
dead man, Jam. 2.26.

Q. Is there yet another of these unprofitable Faiths?

A. Yes; there is a Faith that is of our selves, and not of the special Grace
of God, Ephesians. 2.8.

Q. Tell me if there be yet another?

A. There is a Faith that stands in the Wisdom of men, and not in the power
of God, 1 Cor. 2.5.

Q. Is here all?

A. No; there is a Faith that seems to be holy, but it will not do, because it is
not the most holy Faith, 2 Pet. 2.20. Jude 20.

Q. Alas! If there be so many kinds of Faith, that will not profit to
Salvation, how easy is it for me to be deceived?

A. It is easy indeed, and therefore the holy Ghost does in this thing, so
often caution us, be not deceived, let no man deceive you, and if a man
thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself, 1
Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.6. Gal. 6.3.

Q. But is there no way to distinguish the right Faith from that which is wrong?

A. Yes; And that by the manner of its Coming, and Operation.

Q. What do you mean by the manner of its Coming?

A. Nay; you must make two questions of this one; that is, what is it for Faith
to come? and in what manner does it come?

Q. Well then, what is it for Faith to come?

A. This word Faith comes, supposes, thou were once without it; it also
supposes that thou did not fetch it whence it was, it also supposes it has
a way of coming, Gal. 3.23, 25.

Q. That I was once without it, you intimated before, but must I take it
without proof for granted?

A. I will give you a proof or two: God has concluded them all in unbelief,
and again it is said Faith comes. And again, the Holy Ghost insinuates our
estate to be dreadful before Faith come, Romans 11.32. Chap. 10.17. Gal. 3.23.

Q. Why? How is it with men before Faith comes?

A. Without Faith or before Faith comes it is impossible to please God, for
whether their actions be civil or religious, they sin in all they do. The
Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, and the plowing of the wicked is
sin, Prove. 21.4.27.

Q. Is not this a very sad condition?

A. Yes; But this is not all, for their present unbelief binds them over to
wrath, by shutting them up to the Law; it also draws them away from God, and
will drown them in everlasting damnation if the grace of God prevent not, Gal.
3.23. Heb. 3.17, 18. John. 3.36.

Q. What if a man saw himself in this condition?

A. There are many see themselves in this Condition?

Q. How came they to see it?

A. By the preaching and hearing the Word of God, Joh. 16.8, 9.

Q. And what do such think of themselves?

A. They do not only think, but know that in this Condition they are without
Christ, without Hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.

Q. Are not they happy that see not themselves in this Condition?

A. Yes; If they have seen themselves delivered therefrom by a work of Faith in
their Souls, else not.

Q. How do you mean?

A. I mean if they have seen themselves delivered from this state, by being by
the Word and Spirit of God implanted into the Faith of Christ, Romans 11.17, 18,
19.

Q. Are not they happy that are never troubled with this sad sight of their
condition?

A. They are just so happy, as is that man who lies fast asleep in his house
while that is on fire about his ears. Can a man be happy that is ignorant that
he is without God and Christ, and Hope! Can a man be happy that is ignorant
that he is hanging over Hell by the poor weak thread of an uncertain Life? for
this is the state of such an one.

Q. But may not Faith come to a man without he see himself to be first in this
Condition?

A. It is Gods ordinary way to convince men of this their sad Condition before
he reveals to them the righteousness of Faith, or work Faith in them to lay
hold of that Righteousness, Joh. 16.9, 10, 11. Gal. 3.23, 25.

Q. How then do you conclude of them that never saw themselves shut up by
unbelief under sin and the curse of God?

A. I will not judge them for the future, God may convert them before they die;
but at present their state is miserable, for because they are shut up and held
prisoners by the Law, by their lusts, and by the Devil, and unbelief, therefore
they cannot so much as with their heart desire that God would have mercy upon
them, and bring them out of their Snares and Chains.

Q. Then do you count it better for a man to see his Condition by nature than
to be ignorant thereof.

A. Better a thousand times to see it in the World than to see it in Hellfire,
for he must see it there or here: now if he sees it here, this is the place of
Prayer, here is the preaching of the Word which is God's Ordinance to beget
Faith Besides, here God applies Promises of Mercy to the desolate, and Christ
also has protested that he that comes to him, he will in no wi^^ cast out,
Joh. 6.37.

Q. I am convinced that I was once without Faith, and also that I cannot fetch
it, but pray te^^ me the way of its coming?

A. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17.

Q. How by hearing?

A. God mixeth it with the Word, when he absolutely intends the Salvation of
the sinner, Heb. 4.2, 3. Act. 13.48.

Q. And how do Men hear when Faith is mixed with the Word?

A. They hear the Word not as the word of Man, but as it is in truth the Word
of God, which works effectually in them that believe, These. 2.13.

Q. Pray tell me now the manner of its coming?

A. It comes through difficulty, it comes gradually.

Q. What are the difficulties which oppose it (...) its coming?

A. Sense of unworthiness, guilt of Conscience, natural Reason, Unbelief, and
arguments forged in Hell, and thence suggested by the Devil into the heart
against it, Luke 5.8. Mar. 9.24. Isa. 6.5. Romans 4.18, 19, 20.

Q. How does Faith come? gradually.

A. Perhaps at first it is but like a grain of Mustard Seed, small, and weak,
Mat. 17.20.

Q. Will you explain it further?

A. Faith, at first, perhaps may have its excellency lie in view only, that is
in seeing where ^ustification and Salvation is; after that it may ^^ep a degree
higher, and be able to say, it may be, or who can tell but I may obtain this
Sa^vation? again, it, may perhaps go yet a ste^ higher and arrive to some short
and transier assurance, Heb. 11.13. Joel 2.13, 14. Zeph. 2.3 Psalm. 30.7.

Q. But does Faith come only by hearing?

A. It is usually begotten by the Word preached, but after it is begotten, it
is increased several ways. It is increased by Prayer, it is increa^ed by
Christian Conference, it is increased b^ Reading, it is increased by
Meditation, it increased by the remembrance of former Experiences, Luke 17.5.
Mar. 9.24. Romans 1.12. chap. 1^ 25, 26. 1 Timothy 4.12, 13, 14, 15. Mat. 16.8, 9.

Q. What do these things teach us?

A. They teach us that the Men of this Worl^ are very ignorant of, and as much
without desi^^ after Faith; they neither Hear, nor Pray, Confer, nor Read, nor
Meditate for the sake of Faith

Q. But you said even now, that this Faith w^^ distinguished from that which
profits not to Salvation, as by the manner of its coming, so by i^ operation?
pray what is its operation?

A. It causes the Soul to see in the ligh^ thereof, that there is no
Righteousness in the World that can save the sinner, Isa. 64.6.

Q. How does it give the Soul this Sight?

A. By giving him to understand the Law and his own inability to do it, Gal.
2.15.16.

Q. And does it also show the Soul where Just^

A. Yes; It shows it that Justifying Righteousness is only to be found in the
Lord Jesus Christ, in what he has done and suffered in the Flesh. Isa. 45.24,
25. Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Q. How does Faith find this Righteousness in Christ?

A. By the Word, which is therefore called the Word of Faith, because Faith by
that finds sufficient Righteousness in him, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9.

Q. How else does it operate in the Soul?

A. It applies this Righteousness to the sinner, and also helps him to embrace
it, Romans 3.21, 22. 1 Cor. 1.30. Gal. 2.20.

Q. How else does it operate?

A. By this application of Christ, the Soul is quickened to Life, Spiritualized
and made Heavenly. For right Faith quickneth to Spiritual Life, Purifies and
Sanctifies the Heart; and works up the Man that has it, into the Image of
Jesus Christ, Col. 2.12, 13. Act. 15.9. chap. 26.18. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Q. How else does it operate?

A. It gives the Soul peace with God through Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.

Q. Surely Christ is of great esteem with them that have this Faith in him, is
he not?

A. Yes, Yes. Unto them therefore which believe he is precious, precious in his
Person, precious in his Undertakings, precious in his Word, 1 Pet. 2.7. chap
1.18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.

Q. Can these people, then, that have this Faith, endure to have this Christ
spoken against?

A. O! No! This is a sword in their bones, and a burden that they cannot bear,
Psalm. 42.10. Zeph. 3.18, 19.

Q. Does it not go near them when they see his ways and people discountenanced?

A. Yes; And they also choose rather to be despised and persecuted with them,
than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season, Heb. 11.24, 25.

Q. Do they not pray much for his second Coming?

A. Yes, yes; They would fain see him on this side the Clouds of Heaven, their
Conversation is in Heaven from whence they look for the Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3.20.

Q. And do they live in this World as if he was to come presently?

A. Yes; For his coming will be glorious and dreadful, full of Mercy and
Judgment. The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
servent heat; the earth also and the works therein shall be burnt up: seeing
then that all these things shall be dissolved what manner of persons ought we
to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.

Of Prayer.
Q. WEll, I am glad that you have showed me that I must worship God by
confession of sin, and Faith in Jesus Christ: Is there any other thing a part
of the true Worship of God?

A. Yes; several, I will mention only two more at this time?

Q. What are they?

A. Prayer, and self-denial.

Q. Is Prayer then a part of the worship of God?

A. Yes; a great part of it?

Q. How do you prove that?

A. O come let us worship, and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker, Psalm. 95.6.

Q. Is there another Scripture proves it?

A. Yes; Then she came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me, Mat. 15.25.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. A sincere sensible affectionate pouring out of the Soul to God in the Name
of Christ for what God has promised, Prove. 15.8. Jer. 31.18, 19. Psalm. 42.2,
3, 4. Joh. 14.13, 14.1 Joh. 5.14.

Q. Does not every body pray?

A. No; the wicked through the pride of his Countenance will not seek after
God; God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 40.4.

Q. What will become of them that do not pray?

A. They do not worship God, and he will destroy them; Pour out thy fury (said
the Prophet) upon the heathen, and upon the families that call not upon thy
name, Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10.25.

Q. But seeing God knows what we want, why does he not give us what we need
without praying?

A. His Counsel and Wisdom leads him otherwise. Thus says the Lord, I will
yet be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36.37.

Q. Why will God have us pray?

A. Because he would be acknowledged by thee, that he is above thee, and
therefore would have thee come to him as the Mean come to the Mighty. Thus
Abraham came unto him, Genesis 18.27, 30.

Q. Is there another Reason why I should pray?

A. Yes; For by Prayer thou acknowledgest, that help is not in thine own power,
2 Chronicles. 20.6, 12.

Q. What Reason else have you why I should Pray?

A. By Prayer thou confessest that help is only in him, Psalm. 62.1.

Q. What other Reason have you?

A. By Prayer, thou confessest thou can not live without his Grace and Mercy,
Mat. 14.30. Heb. 4.16.

Q. Are all that pray, heard of the Lord?

A. No; They looked, that is, prayed, but there was none to save them; even
unto the Lord, but he answered them not, 2 Samuel 22.42.

Q. To What does God compare the Prayers which he refuses to answer?

A. He compares them to the howling of a Dog, Hos. 7.14.

Q. Who be they whose Prayers God will not answer?

A. Theirs, who think to be heard for their much speaking, and vain repetition,
Mat. 6.7.

Q. Is there any others whose Prayers God refuses?

A. Yes; There are that ask and have not, because what they ask, they would
spend upon their lusts, Jam. 4.3.

Q. Is there any other whose Prayer God refuses?

A. Yes; If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer,
Psalm. 66.18.

Q. Is the regarding of sin in our heart such a deadly hindrance to Prayer?

A. Son of Man, says God, these men have set up their Idols in their heart,
and have put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face: should I
be enquired of at all by them? I will set my face against that man, and will
make him a Sign and a Proverb. And I will cut him off rom the midst of my
people, Ezekiel. 14.3, 8.

Q. Whose Prayers be they that God will hear?

A. The Prayers of the Poor and needy, Psalm. 34.6. Isa. 41.17.

Q. What do you mean by the poor?

A. Such as have poverty in Spirit, Mat. 5.3.

Q. Who are they that are poor in Spirit?

A. They that are sensible of the want and necessity of all those things of
God, that prepare a Man to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. What things are they?

A. Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Peace, a new Heart, the Holy Ghost, Sanctification,
see Jam. 2.5. 2 These. 2.16. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

Q. What do you mean by the needy?

A. Those whose Souls long and cannot be satisfied without the enjoyment of
these blessed things, Psalm. 63.1. Psalm. 119.20.

Q. Will God hear the prayers of such?

A. Yes; For he satisfies the longing Soul, and fills the hungry Soul with
good things, Psalm. 107.9.

Q. How shall I know that I am one of those, to whom God will give these things?

A. If thou see a beauty in them beyond the beauty of all other things, Psalm.
110.3.

Q. How else shall I know he hears me?

A. If thou desire them for their beauties sake, Psalm. 90.14, 17.

Q. How else should I know I shall have them?

A. When thy groanings after them are beyond expression, Romans 8.26.

Q. How else should I know, and so be encouraged to pray?

A. When thou followest hard after God in all his Ordinances for the obtaining
of them, Isa. 4.31. chap. 64.5.

Q. How else should I know?

A. When thou make good use of that little thou have already, Rev. 3.8.

Q. Is here all the good signs that my Prayers shall be heard?

A. No; There is one more without which thou shall never obtain.

Q. Pray what is that?

A. Thou must plead with God, the Name and Merits of Jesus Christ, for whose
sake only God gives thee these things. If we ask any thing in his name he
hears us, and whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, says Christ, I will
do it, Joh. 14.13, 14.

Q. Does God always answer presently?

A. Sometimes he does, and sometime he does not, Isa 30.19. Dan. 10.12.

Q. Is not God's deferring, a sign of his anger?

A. Sometimes it is not, and sometimes it is.

Q. When is it no sign of his anger?

A. When we have not wickedly departed from him by our sins, Luke 18.7.

Q. When is it a sign of his anger?

A. When we have backsliden, when we have not repented some former
miscarriages, Hos. 5.14, 15.

Q. Why does God defer to hear their Prayers that have not wickedly departed
from him?

A. He loves to hear their voice, to try their Faith, to see their importunity,
and to observe how they can wrestle with him for a blessing, Song. 2.14. Mat.
15.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Luke 11.5, 6, 7, 8. Genesis 32.25, 26, 27.

Q. But is not deferring to answer Prayer a great discouragement to Praying?

A. Though it is, because of our unbelief, yet it ought not, because God is
faithful. Therefore men ought always to Pray, and not to faint, Luke 10.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

Of Self-Denial.
Q. I Am glad you have thus far granted my request: But you told me that there
was another part of God's Worship, pray repeat that again?

A. It is Self-denial.

Q Now I remember it well, pray how do you prove that Self-denial is called a
part of God's Worship?

A. It is said of Abraham, that when he went to offer up his Son Isaac upon the
Altar for a burnt-offering, which was to him a very great part of Self-denial,
that he counted that act of his, Worshipping God?

Q. Will you be pleased to read the Text?

A. Yes; And Abraham said unto his young Men, abide ye here with the Ass, and I
and the Lad will go yonder and Worship, etc. This now was when he was agoing to
slay his Isaac, Genesis 22.5.

Q. What is self-denial?

A. It is for a Man to forsake his All, for the sake of Jesus Christ.

Q. Will you prove this by a Scripture or two?

A. Yes; Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot
be my Disciple, Luke 14.33.

Q. Indeed this is a full place, can you give me one more?

A. Yes; What things were gain to me, those I count loss for Christ: yea
doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, etc. Phil. 3.7, 8.

Q. These two are indeed a sufficient Answer to my Question; but pray will you
now give me some particular instances of the self-denial of them that have
heretofore been the followers of Christ?

A. Yes; Abel denied himself, to the losing of his Blood; Abraham denied
himself, to the losing of his Country and his Fathers House; Moses denied
himself, of a Crown and a Kingdom, and of ease and tranquillity; Joseph denied
himself, of fleshly Lusts, Genesis 4.8. chap. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26,
27. Genesis 39.7, 8, 9.

Q. But these Men each of them denied themselves but of some things, did they?

A. You see Abel lost all, his Blood and all; Abraham lost his Country to the
hazard of his Life, so did Moses in leaving the Crown and Kingdom, and Joseph
in denying his Mistress, Genesis 12.13. Heb. 11.27. Genesis 39.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Q. Will you discourse a little particularly of Self-denial?

A. With all my heart.

Q. First then, pray in what spirit must this Self-denial be performed?

A. It must be done in the spirit of Faith, of Love, and of a sound mind.
Otherwise, if a Man should sell all that he has and give to the poor, and his
Body to be burnt besides, it would profit him nothing, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

Q. Who are like to miscarry here?

A. They whose ends in Self-denial are not according to the proposals of the
Gospel.

Q. Who are they?

A. They that suffer through Strife and Vainglory; or thus, they who seek in
their sufferings, the praise of Men more than the Glory of Christ, and profit
of their Neighbor.

Q. Who else are like to miscarry here?

A. They that have designs like Ziba to ingratiate themselves by their
pretended Self-denial into the affections of the godly, and to enrich
themselves by this means, 2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3, 4.

Q. Are there any other like to miscarry here?

A. Yes; They that by denying themselves think with the Pharisee, to make
themselves stand more Righteous in Gods eyes than others, Luke 18.11, 12.

Q. Who else are in danger of miscarrying here?

A. They who have fainted in their Works, they whose Self-denial has at last
been overcome by self-Love, Gal. 3.4. chap. 6.9.

Q. Shall I propound a few more questions?

A. If you please.

Q. What then if a Man promises to deny himself hereafter and not now, is not
this one step to this kind of Worship?

A. No, by no means; for the reason why this Man refuses to deny himself now,
is because his heart at present sticks closer to his Lusts and the World, than
to God and Christ.

Q. Can you give me a Scripture-instance to make this out?

A. Yes; Esau never intended for ever to part with the Blessing, he intended to
have it hereafter; but God counted his not choosing of it at present, a
despising of it, and a preferring of his Lusts before it, and therefore when he
would, God would not, but reject both him and his tears, Genesis 25.30, 31, 32,
33. Heb. 12.14, 15, 16.

Q. How and if a man shall say thus, I am willing to deny my self in many
things, though he cannot deny himself in all, is not this one step in this part
of this Worship of God?

A. No, in no wise; for this man does just like Saul, he will slay a part, and
will keep a part alive; the Kingdom must be taken from him also, 1 Samuel 15.

Q. How if a man be willing to lose all but his Life?

A. He that will save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his life
for my sake, says Christ, shall save it unto life Eternal, Mat. 16.25. Joh.
12.25.

Q. How if a man has been willing to lose all that he has, but is not now,
will not God accept of his willingness in time past, though he be otherwise now?

A. No; for the true Disciple must deny himself daily, take up his Cross daily
and go after Jesus Christ. Luke 9.23.

Q. But how if a man carries it well outwardly, so that he does not dishonor
the Gospel before men, may not this be counted Self-Denial?

A. No; If he be not right at heart: for though man looks on the outward
appearance, God looks at the heart; 1 Samuel 16.7.

Q. But if I be afraid my heart may deceive me in this great work, if hard
things come upon me hereafter, is there no way to find out whether it will
deceive me then or no?

A. I will give you a few answers to this question, and will show you first
whose heart is like to deceive him in this work.

Q. Will you befriend me so much?

A. Yes; 1. He that makes not daily Conscience of Self-Denial, is very unlike
to abide a disciple for times to come, if difficult. Judas did not deny himself
daily, and therefore fell when the temptation came, Joh. 12.6.

Q. Will you give me another Sign?

A. Yes; He that indulgeth any one secret lust under a profession, is not like
to deny himself in all things for Christ.

Q. Who are they that indulge their lusts?

A. They that make provision for them, either in apparel, or diet, or
other-wise, Romans 13.12, 13, 14. Isa. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 6.

Q. Who else do so?

A. They that excuse their sins, and keep them disguised that they may not be
reprehended as Saul did, etc. 1 Samuel 15.18, 19, 20, 21.

Q. Who else are they that indulge their lusts?

A. They that heap up to themselves such Teachers that will favor their Lusts,
2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Isa. 30.10.

Q. Who else do indulge their sins?

A. They that choose rather to walk by the imperfect lives of professors than by
the holy Word of God: or thus, they that make the miscarriages of some good
men, an encouragement unto themselves to forbear to be exact in Self-Denial,
these eat up the sins of Gods people as men eat bread, Hos. 4.7, 8, 9.

Q. Will you now show me who are like to do this part of Gods Worship
acceptably?

A. Yes; He whose heart is set against sin as sin, is like to deny himself
acceptably, Romans 7.13, 24.

Q. Who else?

A. He that has the sense and savor of forgiveness of sins upon his heart, 2
Cor. 5.14.

Q. Who else is like to deny himself well?

A. He that has his affections set upon things above, where Christ sits at
the right hand of God, Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Q. Who else is like to deny himself well for Christ?

A. He that sees a greater treasure in Self-Denial, than in self-seeking, 2
Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.

Q Is there none other signs of one that is like to do this part of Gods
worship acceptably?

A. Yes; He that takes up his Cross daily and makes Christ's Doctrine his
Example. Luke 6.47, 48. Joh. 12.25, 26.

Q. But how do you discover a Man to be such a one?

A. He keeps his heart with all diligence, he had rather die than sin; Ill
carriages of professors break his heart; nothing is so dear to him as the Glory
of Christ, Prove. 4.23. Numb. 11.15. Phil. 3.18. Act. 20.24.

Q. Pray can you give me some motive to Self-Denial?

A. Yes; The Lord Jesus denied himself for thee; what say thou to that?

Q. Wherein did Christ deny himself for me?

A. He left his Heaven for thee; he denied for thy sake to have so much of this
World, as has a Fox, or a Bird, and he spilt his most precious Blood for thee.
Joh. 6.38. Luke 9.58. 2 Cor. 8.9. Rev. 1.5.

Q. Can you give another motive to Self-Denial?

A. Yes; What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole World and lose
his own Soul? Luke 8.36.

Q. But why does God require Self-Denial of them that will be saved?

A. God does not require Self-Denial as the means to obtain Salvation, but has
laid it down as proof of the truth of a man's affections to God and Christ.

Q. How is Self-Denial a proof of the truth of a man's affections to God?

A. In that for the sake of his service, he leaves all his enjoyments in this
World. Thus he proved Abraham's affections, thus he proved Peter's affections,
and thus he proved their affections that you read of in the Gospel, Genesis 22.12.
Mat. 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Luke 9.57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62.

Q. What reason else can you produce why God requires Self-Denial?

A. Self-Denial is one of the distinguishing Characters by which true
Christians are manifested from the feigned ones: for those that are feigned,
flatter God with their mouth, but their hearts seek themselves; but the sincere
for the love that he has to Christ, forsakes all that he has for his sake,
Psalm. 78.36, 37. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.

Q. Is there yet another reason why God requires Self-Denial of them that
profess his name?

A. Yes; because by Self-Denial the power and goodness of the Truths of God are
made manifest to the incredulous World. For they cannot see but by the
Self-Denial of Gods people, that there is such Power, Glory, Goodness and
desirableness in Gods Truth as indeed there is, Dan. 3.16, 28. Phil. 1.12, 13.

Q. Have you another Reason why God requires Self-Denial?

A. Yes; because Self-Denial prepares a man, though not for the pardon of his
sin, yet for that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, that is laid
up only for them that deny all that they have for the Lord Jesus his name and
cause in this World, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 10, 17. 2 These. 1.5, 6.

Q. Before you conclude, will you give me a few instances of the severity of
God's hand upon some Professors, that have not denied themselves when called
thereto by him?

A. Yes, Willingly; Lot's Wife for but looking behind her toward Sodom when
God called her from it, was stricken from Heaven, and turned into a Pillar of
Salt, therefore remember Lots Wife, Genesis 19.17, 26. Luke 17.31, 32.

Q. Can you give me another instance?

A. Yes; Esau for not denying himself of one morsel of Meat was denied a share
in the Blessing, and could never obtain it after, though he sought it carefully
with Tears, Genesis 25.32, 33, 34. Heb 12.14, 15.

Q. Have you at hand another instance?

A. Yes; Judas for not-denying himself, lost Christ, his Soul, and Heaven: and
is continued the great Object of God's Wrath among all Damned Souls, John 12.5,
6. Luke 22.3, 4, 5, 6. Mat. 26.14, 15, 16. Act. 1.25.

Q. Will you give me one more instance and so conclude?

A. Yes; Ananias and Sapphirah his Wife, did for the want of Self Denial pull
upon themselves such Wrath of God, that he slew them, while they stood in the
midst before the Apostles, Act. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

The Conclusion.
BEfore I wind up this discourse, I would lay down these few things for you to
consider of, and meditate upon.

I. Consider, That seeing every one by nature are accounted sinners; It Is no
matter whether thy actual sins be little or great, few or many, thy sinful
nature has already laid thee under the curse of the Law.

II. Consider, That therefore thou have already ground for humiliation, sins to
repent of, wrath to fly from, or a Soul to be damned.

III. Consider, That time stays not for thee, and also that as time goes, sin
increases, so that at last the end of thy time, and the completing of thy
sin, are like to come upon thee in one moment.

IV. Bring thy last day often to thy bedside, and ask thy heart if this
morning thou wast to die, if thou be ready to die or no.

V. Know it is a sad thing to lie a dying, and to be afraid to die; to lie a
dying and not to know whither thou art a going; to lie a dying, and not to know
whether good Angels or bad must conduct thee out of this miserable World.

VI. Be often remembering what a blessed thing it is to be saved, to go to
Heaven, to be made like Angels, and to dwell with God and Christ to all
eternity.

VII. Consider how sweet the thought of Salvation will be to thee when thou
see thy self in Heaven, whilst others are roaring in Hell.

The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy Spirit.
THE END.

