A HOLY LIFE, THE BEAUTY OF Christianity: OR, An EXHORTATION to CHRISTIANS to
be HOLY.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for ever.

LONDON, Printed by B. W. for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultry, 1684.

AN INTRODUCTION To the following DISCOURSE.
WHen I write of Justification before God, from the dreadful curse of the Law;
then I must speak of nothing but Grace, Christ, the Promise and Faith: but when
I speak of our Justification before Men, then I must join to these, good Works.
For Grace, Christ, and Faith are things invisible, and so not to be seen by
another, otherwise than through a life that becomes so blessed a Gospel as has
declared unto us the remission of our sins for the sake of Jesus Christ. He
then that would have Forgiveness of Sins, and so be delivered from the Curse of
God, must believe in the Righteousness and Blood of Christ: but he that would
show to his Neighbors that he has truly received this Mercy of God, must do
it by good Works; for all things else to them, is but talk: As for example; A
Tree is known to be what it is, to wit, whether of this or that kind, by it is
Fruit. A Tree it is without Fruit, but so long as it so abides, there is
ministered occasion to doubt what manner of Tree it is.

A Professor is a Professor though he has no good Works; but that, Matthew.
7.17, 18. Jam 2.18.
as such, he is truly godly; he is foolish that so concludes. Not that Works
make a Man good; for the Fruit makes not a good Tree, it is the Principle, to
wit, Faith, Matt. 7.16. Luke 6.44.
that makes a Man good, and his works that show him to be so.

What then? why, all Professors that have not good Works flowing from their
Faith, are naught; Heb. 6.8.
are Bramble-bushes; are nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned. For
Professors by their fruitlesness declare that they are not of the planting of
God; nor the Wheat: Matt. 13.37, 38.
but Tares and Children of the Wicked one.

Not that Faith needs good works as an help to Justification before God. For
in this matter Faith will be ignorant of all good Works, except those done by
the Person of Christ. Here then the good Man works not, but believes: Romans
4.3, 4, 5.
for he is not now to carry to God, but to receive at his Hand the matter of
his Justification by Faith; nor is the matter of his Justification before God
ought else but the good deeds of another Man, to wit, Christ Jesus.

But is there therefore no need at all of good Works, because a Man is
justified before God without them? or can that be called a justifying Faith
that has not for its Fruit, Job 22.2, 3. Jam. 2.20, 26.
good Works? Verily good works are necessary, though God need them not, nor is
that Faith, as to Justification with God, worth a rush, that abides alone, or
without them.

A twofold Faith.
There is therefore a twofold Faith of Christ in the World, and as to the notion
of Justifying Righteousness, they both concur and agree, but as to the manner
of application there they vastly differ.

The one, to wit, the non-saving faith, stands in speculation and naked
knowledge of Christ, and so abides idle: Joh. 1.12. Heb. 11.13. Romans 10.16.
but the other truly seeeth, and receives him, and so becomes Fruitful. And
hence the true justifying Faith, is said to receive, to embrace, to obey the
Son of God as tendered in the Gospel: by which expressions is showed both the
nature of Justifying Faith, in its actings in point of Justification, and also
the cause of its being full of good Works in the World. A gift is not made mine
by my seeing of it, or because I know the nature of the thing so given: but
then it is mine if I receive and embrace it, yea, and as to the point in hand,
if I yield my self up to stand and fall by it. Now he that shall, not only see,
but receive, not only know, but embrace the Son of God; to be justified by him,
cannot but bring forth good Works, because Christ who is now received and
embraced by Faith, Acts 15.9. Chapter 26.18, 19. Heb. 11.11,
leavens and seasons the Spirit of this Sinner (through his Faith) to the
making of him capable so to be. Faith made Sarah receive Strength to conceive
Seed, and we are Sanctified through Faith, which is in Christ. For Faith has
joined Christ, and the Soul together, and being so joined, the Soul is one
Spirit with him: not essentially but in agreement, and oneness of design.
Besides, when Christ is truly received and embraced to the justifying of the
sinner, in that Man's Heart he dwells by his Word and Spirit through the same
Faith also. Now Christ by his Spirit and Word must needs season the Soul he
thus dwells in: so then the Soul being seasoned, it seasoneth the Body, and
Body and Soul, the Life and Conversation.

We know it is not the Seeing, but taking of a potion that makes it work as it
should, nor is the Blood of Christ a Purge to this or that Conscience, except
received by Faith.

Heb. 9.14.
Shall that then be counted right believing in Christ unto justification, that
amounts to no more than to an idle speculation, or naked knowledge of him? shall
that knowledge of him I say be counted such, as only causes the Soul to behold
hold but moves it not to good Works? No verily. 2 Cor. 3.18.
For the true beholding of Jesus to justification and Life, changes from glory
to glory.

Nor can that Man that has so believed, as that by his Faith he has received
and embraced Christ for Life before God, be destitute of good works: for, as I
said, the Word and Spirit comes also by this Faith, and dwells in the Heart and
Conscience: now, shall a Soul where the Word and Spirit of Christ dwells, be a
Soul without good Works? Yea, shall a Soul that has received the Love, the
Mercy, the Kindness, Grace and Salvation of God through the Sorrows, Tears,
Groans, Cross and Cruel Death of Christ, be yet a Fruitless Tree! God forbid.
This faith is as the Salt which the Prophet cast into the Spring of bitter
Water, 2 King 2.19, 20, 21, 22.
it makes the Soul good and serviceable for ever.

If the receiving of a temporal Gift, naturally tends to the making of us to
move our Cap and Knee: and binds us to be the Servant of the Giver: shall we
think that Faith will leave him who by it has received Christ, to be as
unconcerned as a Stock or Stone, or that it is utmost excellency is to provoke
the Soul to a lip-labor, and to give Christ a few fair Words for his Pains and
Grace: and so wrap up the business? No, no: the Love of Christ constrains us
thus to judge that it is but reasonable, 2 Cor. 5.14
since he gave his all for us, that we should give our some for him.

Let no Man then deceive himself (as he may and will if he takes not heed, with
true Notions) but examine himself concerning his Faith, to wit; Whether he has
any, and if some, Whether of that kind that will turn to account in the day
when God shall judge the world.

I told you before that there is a twofold Faith; Two sorts of Works.
and now I will tell you that there are two sorts of good works: and a Man may
be shroudly guessed at with reference to his Faith, even by the Works that he
chooses to be conversant in.

There are Works that cost nothing, and Works that are chargeable: And observe
it, The unsound Faith will choose to it self the most easy works it can find.
For example, there is Reading, Praying, hearing of Sermons, Baptism, Breaking
of Bread, Church fellowship, Preaching, and the like: and there is
mortification of Lusts, Charity, Simplicity, open-Heartedness, with a liberal
Hand to the Poor, and their like also. Now the unsound Faith picks and chooses,
and takes and leaves, but the true Faith does not so.

There are a great many Professors now in England, that have nothing to
distinguish them from the worst of Men, but their Praying, Reading, hearing of
Sermons, Baptism, Church Fellowship, and Breaking of Bread. Separate them but
from these, and every where else they are as black as others, even in their
whole Life and Conversation. Thus they have chosen to them the most easy things
to do them, but love not to be Conscionably found in the practice of the other:
a certain sign their Faith is naught, and that these things, even the things
they are conversant in, are things attended to of them, not for the ends for
which God has appointed them, but to beguile and undo themselves withal.

Praying, Hearing, Reading; for what are these things Ordained, but that we
might by the godly use of them, attain to more of the knowledge of God, and be
strengthened by his Grace to serve him better according to his moral Law?
Baptism, Fellowship, and the Lords Supper, are Ordained for these ends also.
But there is a vast difference between using of these things, and a using of
them for these ends. A Man may pray, yea, pray for such things, had he them, as
would make him better in Morals, without desire to be better in Mortals, or
Love to the things he prays for. A Man may Read and Hear, not to learn to do,
though to know: Yea, he may be dead to doing Moral goodness, and yet be great
for Reading and Hearing, all his days. The people then among all Professors,
Tit. 2.14.
that are zealous of good Works, are the peculiar ones to Christ. What has a
man done that is Baptized, if he pursues not the ends for which that
appointment was Ordained: the like I say of Fellowship, of Breaking of Bread,
etc. For all these things we should use to Support our Faith, to mortify the
Flesh, and strengthen us to walk in newness of Life by the rule of the moral
Law. Nor can that Man be esteemed holy, whose life is tainted with
immoralities, let him be what he can in all things else. I am of that man's mind
as to practical Righteousness, who said to Christ upon this very question, Mark
12.28, 33.
Well Master, thou have said the Truth: For to Love the Lord our God with all
the Heart, and with all the Understanding, and with all the Soul, and with all
the Strength: and to love his Neighbor as himself, is more than all whole
burn-offerings and sacrifices. To love my Neighbor as my self, to do as I
would be done unto, this is the Law and the Prophets. And he that is altogether
a stranger to these things, how dwells the Love of God in him? or how will he
manifest to another that his Faith will save him.

Satan is afraid that Men should hear of justification by Christ, lest they
should embrace it: but yet if he can prevail with them, to keep Fingers off,
though they do hear and look on, and practice lesser things, he can the better
bear it. Yea, he will labor to make such Professors bold to conclude they
shall by that kind of Faith enjoy him, though by that they cannot embrace him,
nor lay hold of him. For he knows that how far soever a Man ingages in a
Profession of Christ with a Faith that looks on, but cannot receive nor embrace
him, that Faith will leave him to nothing but mistakes and disappointments at
last.

The Gospel comes to some in Word only, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. 1 Cor. 4.18, 19, 20.
and the Faith of such stands but in a verbal sound: but the Apostle was
resolved not to know, or take notice of such a Faith: For the Kingdom of God,
says he, is not in Word, but in Power. He whose Faith stands only in a saying,
I believe, has his Works in bare Words also, and as vertual is the one as the
other, and both insignificant enough. If a Brother or a Sister be naked or
destitute of daily Food. Jam. 2.16, 17.
And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled:
notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful to the body,
what does it profit? Even so Faith, if it has not Works is dead, being alone.

This Faith therefore, Satan can allow, Ver. 19.
because it is somewhat of kin to his own.

Besides, What greater contempt can be cast upon Christ than by such wordy
Professors is cast upon him? These are the men that by practice say, The Gospel
is but an empty sound. Yea, the more they profess, the louder they proclaim it
thus to be to his disgrace, while they, notwithstanding their prosession of
Faith, hold and maintain their League with the Devil and Sin.

The Son of God was manifest that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1
John 3.
but these men profess his Faith and keep these Works alive in the World. Shall
these pass for such as believe to the saving of the Soul. For a man to be
content with this kind of Faith, and to look to go to Salvation by it: what to
God is a greater provocation?

The Devil laugheth here, for he knows he has not lost his Vassal by such a
Faith as this, but that rather he has made use of the Gospel, that glorious
Word of Life, to secure his Captive through his presumption of the right Faith,
the faster in his shackles.

It is marvelous to me to see sin so high amidst the swarms of Professors that
are found in every corner of this Land. Nor can any other reason be given for
it, but because the Gospel has lost its wonted virtue, or because Professors
want Faith therein. But do you think it is because of the first? no; the word
of our God shall stand (in its strength) for ever: the Faith of such therefore
is not right, they have for Shields of Gold, made themselves Shields of Brass:
or instead of the Primitive Faith, which was of the operation of God, 2 Chronicles.
12.9, 10. Col. 2.12. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
they have got to themselves a Faith that stands by the power, and in the
Wisdom of Man.

And to say no more to this; for what is God so angry with this Land, but for
the sin of the Professors that dwell therein, while they have polluted his name
with their Gifts, and with their Idols? God, I say, has been provoked most
bitterly by us, while we have profaned his name, making use of his Name, his
Word and Ordinances to serve our selves (O Lord what will thou do to this
Land!). We are every one looking for something; even for something that
carries terror and dread in the sound of its Wings as it comes, though we
know not the form nor visage thereof. One cries out, another has his Hands upon
his Loins, and a third is made mad with the sight of his Eyes, and with what
his Ears do hear. And as their Faith has served them about Justification: so
it now serves them about Repentance and Reformation, it can do nothing here
neither, for though, as was said, Men cry out, and are with their Hands upon
their Loins for fear: yet where is the Church, the House, the Man that stands
in the gap for the Land to turn away this Wrath by Repentance, and amendment of
Life. Behold the Lord comes forth out of his place, and will come down and
tread upon the places of the Earth, and the Mountains shall be molten under
him, and the Valleys shall be cleft, as Wax before the Fire, and as the Waters
that are poured down a steep place (but what is the cause of all this?) For the
transgression of Jacob is all this, Mich. 1.
and for the Sin of the House of Israel.

It is that that is observed by them that can make Observation, that all that
God has done to us already, has been ineffectual as to cause that Humility and
Reformation, by which his judgments must be turned away. Repentance is rare
this day, and yet without doubt, that without which things will grow worse and
worse. As for them that hope that God will save his people, though but from
temporal Judgments, whether they Repent and Reform, or do otherwise: I must
leave them and their Opinions together: this I have found, that sometimes the
Repentance, even of the Godly, has come too late to divert such Judgments. And
how some of the Godly should be so indulged as to be saved from punishment
without Repentance, when the true and unfeigned Repentance of others will not
deliver them, leaves me, I confess, in a Wilderness.

But that which is most of all to be lamented, is, That sin, through custom, is
become no sin. The superfluity of naughtiness is at this day become no sin with
many.

Surely this was the case with Israel, else how could they say when the
Prophets so bitterly denounced Gods judgments against them, Because we are
innocent, Jer. 2.35.
surely his anger shall turn from us. When custom or bad example, has taken
away the Conscience of sin: it is a sign that Soul is in a dangerous Lethargy:
and yet this is the condition of the most that profess amongst us this day. But
to leave this and to proceed.

A twofold love to Christ.
As there is a twofold Faith, two sorts of good Works, and the like, so there is
also A twofold love to Christ. The one standing or stopping in some passions of
the mind, and affections. The other is that which breaks through all
difficulties to the holy Commandment to do it. Of both these there is mention
made in the Scripture: And though all true Love begins at the Heart, yet that
love is but little set by that breaks not through to practice. How many are
there in the World that seem to have the first, but how few show the second.
Mark 10.17.
The young Man in the Gospel did by his running, kneeling, crying* enquiring
and entreating of Christ to show him the way to Life, show that he had inward
Love to Christ and his own Salvation, but yet it was not a love that was strong
as Death, Cant. 8.6.
cruel as the Grave, and hotter than the Coals of Juniper. It was a Love that
stopped in mind and affection, but could not break out into Practice. This kind
of Love, if it be let alone, and not pressed to proceed till it comes into a
laboring practicing of the Commandment, will love as long as you will, to wit,
as long as Mouth and Tongue can wag; but yet you shall not by all your skill
drive this Love farther than the Mouth. For with their Mouth they show much
Love, Ezekiel. 33.31.
but their Heart goes after their Covetousness.

Nor may this Love be counted for that of the right kind, because it is in the
Heart, for the Heart knows how to dissemble about Love, as much as about other
matters. This is feigned Love, or Love that pretends to dear affections for
Christ, but can bestow no cost upon him. Of this kind of Love the world is full
at this day, especially the Professors of this Age, but as I said, of this the
Lord Jesus makes little or no account, for that it has in it an essential
defectiveness.

Thus therefore Christ and his Servants describe the love that is true and of
the right kind, and that with reference to himself and Church.

First, with reference to himself. If a man loves me, says he, John 14.21, 23,
24.
he will keep my Words. And again, He that has my Commandments and keeps
them, he it is that loves me. And, He that loves me not, keeps not my
Sayings. And, The Word which you hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent
me. Behold you now where Christ places a sign of love, it is not in word, nor
in tongue: Not in great and seemingly affectionate gestures, but in a practical
walking in the Law of the Lord. Hence such, and such only are called the
undefiled in the way. (You know who says, I am the way.) Blessed, Psalm. 119.1.
says David, are the undefiled in the way: who walk in the Law of the Lord.

But here again, Matt. 23.23.
the hypocrite will give us the slip by betaking of himself to exterior
matters, as to his mint, anise, and cummin: still neglecting the more weighty
matters of the Law, to wit, Judgment, Mercy, Faith. Or else to the
significative ordinances, Significative ordinances.
still neglecting to do to all men as he would they should do to him. But let
such know that God never ordained significative ordinances, such as Baptism,
the Lords Supper, or the like, for the sake of Water, or of Bread and Wine: nor
yet because he takes any delight that we are dipped in Water, or eat that
bread: but they were ordained to minister to us by the aptness of the Elements,
through our sincere partaking of them, further knowledge of the death, Burial,
and Resurrection of Christ; and of our death and resurrection by him to newness
of life. Wherefore he that eats and believes not, and he that is Baptized,
and is not dead to sin, and walks not in newness of Life, neither keeps
these ordinances nor pleases God. Now to be dead to sin, is to be dead to
those things forbidden in the moral Law: For sin is the transgression of that,
and it avails not to vaunt that I am a Saint and under this or that
significative ordinance, if I live in the transgression of the Law. 1 John 3.4.
For I am convicted of the Law as a transgressor, and so concluded to be one
that loves not Christ, though I make a noise of my obedience to Christ, and of
my partaking of his significative ordinances. The Jews of old made a great
noise with their significative ordinances, whiles they lived in the breach of
the moral Law, but their practice of significative ordinances could not save
them from the judgment and displeasure of their God. They could frequent the
Temple, keep their feasts, slay their Sacrifices, and be mighty apt about all
their significative things. But they loved Idols, and lived in the breach of
the second Table of the Law. Wherefore God cast them out of his presence: hark
what the Prophet says of them. Come to Bethel, and transgress, Amos 4.4, 5.
at Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring your Sacrifices every morning, and
your tithes after three years. And offer a Sacrifice of thanksgiving with
leaven, and proclaim, and publish the free will offerings; For this likes you,
O ye Children of Israel, says the Lord God. Thus as I said, the hypocrite
gives us the slip; for when he hears that love is in the keeping of the
Commandments of God, then he betakes him to the more external parts of worship,
and neglects the more weighty matters, to the provoking of the God of Israel.

Secondly, As love to God is showed, by keeping of his Commandments: So love to
my Neighbor is the keeping of the Commandments of God likewise. By this we
know that we love the Children of God, 1 John 5.2, 3.
when we love God, and keep his Commandments. For this is the love of God (in
us, both to God and Man,) that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments
are not grievous. He that keeps not Gods Commandments, loves neither God nor
Men.

Thus then we must learn to love one anoth^r. He that keeps Gods Commandment,
does to his brother what is right, for that is Gods Commandment. He that keeps
Gods Commandment does to his Brother even as he would be done unto himself, for
that is Gods Commandment. He that keeps Gods Commandment shuts not up his
bowels of Compassion from him: for the contrary is his Commandment. Further, He
that keeps Gods Commandment shows his Brother what he must do to honor the
Christ that he professes, aright: Therefore he that keeps the Commandment,
loves his brother. Yea, the keeping of the Commandment is loving the Brethren.

But if all love which we pretend to have one to another, were tried by this
one Text, how much of that that we call so would be found to be nothing less?
Preposterous are our Spirits in all things, nor can they be guided right but by
the word and spirit of God: the which the good Lord grant unto us plentifully,
that we may do that which is well pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Yea and that there may, by them, be wrought sound repentance in us
for all that has been done by us amiss, lest he give Jacob to the spoil, and
Israel to the Robbers; for that they have sinned against him by not walking in
his ways, Isa. 42.24.
and by not being obedient to his Law.

Let me add, lest God does not only punish us in the sight, and by the hand of
the wicked: but imbolden them to say, it was God that set them on, yea lest
they make those sins of ours, which we have not repented of, not only there
bye-word against us to after generations, but the argument one to another of
their justification for all the evil that they shall be suffered to do unto us:
saying, Deuteronomy. 29, 22, 28.
when men shall ask them wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land? What
means the heat of this great anger? 1 King. 9.8. Jer. 22.8.
even because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers,
and walked not in his ways.

John Bunyan.

A HOLY LIFE, THE BEAUTY OF Christianity.
2. Tim. 2.19. And, let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity.


TImothy, unto whom this Epistle was writ, chap. 4, 5, Ephesians. 4.11.
was an Evangelist, that is, inferior to Apostles and extraordinary Prophets,
and above ordinary Pastors and Teachers. And he with the rest of those under
his circumstances was to go with the Apostles hither, and thither, to be
disposed of by them as they saw need for the further edification of those who
by the Apostolical Ministry were converted to the Faith: And hence it is that
Titus was left at Creet, 1 Timothy 1.3.
and that this Timothy was left at Ephesus. For they were to do a work for
Christ in the world, which the Apostles were to begin, and leave upon their
hand to finish. Now when the Apostles departed from places, and had left these
Evangelists in their stead, usually there did arise some bad Spirits among
those people, where these were left for the furtherance of the Faith. This is
manifest by both the Epistles to Timothy, and also by that to Titus: wherefore
Paul, upon whom these two Evangelists waited for the fulfilling of their
Ministry, writes unto them while they abode where he left them, concerning
those turbulent Sprits which they met with, and to teach them how yet further
they ought to behave themselves in the house of God, which is the Church of the
living God, the pillar and ground of truth. And to this purpose he gives them
severally diverse instructions (as the judicious Reader may easily understand)
by which he incourageth them to the prosecution of that service which for
Christ they had to do for those people where he had left them, and also
instructs them how to carry it toward their disturbers, which last he does,
not only Doctrinally, but also by showing them by his example and practice,
what he would have them do.

This done, he labors to comfort Timothy with the remembrance of the
stedfastness of Gods eternal decree of Election, because grounded on his
foreknowledge; saying, though Hymeneus and Philetus have erred from the Faith,
and by their fall, have overthrown the Faith of some, Yet the foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his: Now lest
this last hint should still encourage some to be remiss and carnally secure,
and foolish, as I suppose this Doctrine abused, had encouraged them to be
before: Therefore the Apostle immediately conjoyneth to it, this exhortation:
And, let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Two
truths strangely, but necessarily joined together, because so apt to be severed
by the children of men; for many under the pretense of their being elected,
neglect to pursue Holiness; and many of them again that pretend to be for
Holiness, quite exclude the Doctrine, and motives that election gives thereto.
Wherefore, the Apostle, that he might set men's notions as to these things,
right, he joins these two together, signifying thereby, that as electing love
does instate a man in the blessing of eternal Life, so Holiness is the path
thereto; and, that he that refuses to depart from iniquity shall be damned,
notwithstanding he may think himself secured from Hell by the act of Gods
electing love. For election designeth men not only to Eternal Glory, but to
holiness of Life [a means] thereto. Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
And the manner of this connection of truth is the more to be noted by us,
because the Apostle seems to conjoyn them in an holy heat of Spirit: Saying,
The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them
that are his. And, and let every one that shall but so much as name the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity: Or, as who should say, God will be revenged upon
them for all, or notwithstanding they appropriate unto themselves the benefits
of election.

In the Text we have, 1. An Exhortation. 2 The Extension of that Exhortation.


1. The Exhortation is, That men depart from iniquity.

2. The Extension of it, is to them, all of them, every one of them that name
the name of Christ. And, let every one that names the name of Christ depart
from iniquity.

In the Exhortation there are several things to be taken notice of, because
insinuated by the Apostle.

The first is, That iniquity is a very dangerous and hurtful thing, as to the
Souls of sinners in general, so to them that name the name of Christ.

It is very a dangerous and hurtful thing to men in general. For it is that
which did captivate the world at the beginning, and that made it a bondslave to
the Devil. It has also done great hurt to mankind ever since, to instance a few
things:

2 Pet. 2.12.
1. It Is that which has stupefied and besotted the powers of men's Souls, and
made them even next to a Beast and Brute in all matters supernatural and
heavenly. For as the Beast minds nothing but his lusts, and his belly, by
nature: So man minds nothing but things earthly, sensual and devilish, by
reason of iniquity.

Ephesians. 4.18.
2. It has blinded and darkened the powers of the Soul, so that it can neither
see where it is, nor which is the way out of this besotted condition.

Romans 2 5.
3. It has hardened the heart against God, and against all admonition and
counsel in the things of the Gospel of Christ.

Colos. 1.21.
4. It has alienated the will, the mind, and affections from the choice of the
things that should save it, and wrought them over to an hearty delight in those
things, that naturally tend to drown it in perdition and destruction.

5. It has made man odious in Gods eyes, Ezekiel. 16.5.
it has provoked the Justice of God against him, and made him obnoxious to Hell
fire.

6. Yea, It so holds him, Pro. 5.22.
so binds him, so reserves him to this, that, not he himself, nor yet all the
Angels of Heaven, can deliver him from this deplorable condition.

7. To say nothing of the pleasure and delight that it makes him take in that
way to Hell in which he walks. Isa. 66.3. Pro. 7.22, 23, 24.25.
Never went fat Ox so gamesomely to the shambles, nor fool so merrily to the
correction of the stocks, nor silly bird so wantonly to the hidden net, as
iniquity makes men go down her steps to the pit of hell and damnation.

O it is amazing, it is astonishing to consider what hurt sin has done to man,
and into how many dangers it has brought him: but let these few hints at this
time suffice as to this. I will now speak a word to the other particular:
namely, that as iniquity is dangerous and hurtful to the Souls of Men in
general, so it is to them that name the name of Christ. As to the so, and so
naming of him, to that I shall speak by and by, but at this time take it thus:
That religiously name his name. And I say iniquity is hurtful to them.

1. It plucks many a one of them from Christ, and the religious profession of
him. I have even seen, that men who have devoutly and religiously professed
Jesus Christ, have been prevailed withal by iniquity to cast him and the
profession of his name quite off, and to turn their backs upon him. Israel,
says the Prophet, has cast off the thing that is good. Hos. 8.3.
But why? Of their Silver and their gold they have made Idols. The sin of
Idolatry drew their hearts from God: their love to that iniquity made them turn
their backs upon him. Wherefore God complains, that of forwardness to their
iniquity, and through the prevalence thereof, Ezekiel. 23.35.
they had cast him behind their back.

2. As it plucks many a professor from Christ; so it keeps many a one from an
effectual closing with him. How many are there that religiously profess and
make mention of the name of Christ, that yet of love to, and by the interest
that iniquity has in their affections, never close with him unto salvation,
but are like to them of whom you read in Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7.
that they are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth.

3. And concerning those that have indeed come to him, and that have
effectually closed with him, and that name his name to good purpose: yet how
has iniquity hurt and abused many of them.

1. It has prevailed with God to hide his face from them, a thing more bitter
than death.

2. It has prevailed with God to chastize, and to afflict them sorely; Lam.
3.33.
a thing in which he takes no pleasure.

3. It has provoked God to give them over to the hand of the Enemy, Jer. 12, 7.
Mat. 18.34.
and to deliver them to the tormentors.

4. It has brought them to question their interest in Christ, Psa. 31.22.
and whether they ever had grace in their Souls.

5. And for those that have yet believed they were in his favor, Psalm. 51.
this iniquity has driven them to fear that God would cast them away, and take
all his good things from them.

Psa. 38.8. Psa. 31.10. Psa. 6.6. Jer. 31.18. 2 Cor. 12.21. Psa. 116.3. Ps.
31.3.4. Jo 13.27. Psalm. 88. Lam. 3.4. Lam. 3.16. Jer. 8.14. Chap. 23.15. Psalm.
60.3. Ezekiel 4.16.
Yea, he that would know the hurt that iniquity has done to them, that name the
name of Christ, let him consider the cries, the sighs, the tears, the
bemoanings, the bewailings, the lamentations, the sorrows, the confessions the
repentings and griefs wherewith they have been attended, while they have
complained that they have been put in the stocks, laid in the dungeon, had
their bones broken, suffered the terours of God, been distressed almost to
distraction, and have been fed with Gravel, Gall, Wormwood, and with the Water
of astonishment for days, yea, years together. By all which, and many more
which might be mentioned, it appears that iniquity is a dangerous and hurtful
thing.

But I proceed, and come in the next place to the Extension of the exhortation:
namely, that it reaches to all those that name the name of Christ. And let
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. To handle this a
little, and,

First, to show you what the Apostle here means by naming of the name of
Christ: he means not an irreligious naming of that worthy, name, nor those
that name it irreligiously. This is evident, because, he passes by their
manner of naming of it without the least reproof, the which he would not have
done, had the fault been in their manner of naming of the name of Christ. Now I
say, if he intends not those that name the name of Christ irreligiously, then
though the exhortation [ let every one] seems to extend it self to all and all
manner of persons that any ways name the name of Christ, yet it is limited by
this, to wit, that rightly, religiously, or according to the way of the
professors of Christ, name his worthy name. And it must needs be so taken, and
that for these reasons.

1. For that, as I said before, the Apostle takes no notice of their manner of
naming of his name, so as ^o reprove any undecency or unseem^iness in their
Naming of him; wherefore he allows of the manner of their naming of him.

2. Because, the Apostles design in this exhortation was, and is, that the
naming of the name of Christ, might be accompanied with such a life of
holiness, as might put an additional luster upon that name when ever named in a
religious way; but this cannot be applied to every manner of naming the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For if a man shall name the name of Christ unduely, or
irreligiously, though he shall never so much there withal depart from
iniquity, and be circumspect to the utmost in all civility and morality, yet he
answers not the Apostles end which he seeks by this his exhortation, For,

1. Suppose a man should name the name of Christ vainly, idly, in vain mirth,
wantonness, false or vain swearing, or the like, and shall back this his manner
of naming the name of Christ with all manner of Justness and uprightness of
life, would this answer the Apostle's end in this his exhortation? Verily no:
for this manner of naming the name is worthy reprehension; Thou shall not take
my name in vain, or vainly make use thereof: Exodus 20.
And moral goodness attending the so naming of the name of Christ will do more
hurt than good.

2. There is a reproachful and scandalous naming of the name of Christ, such as
the Jews, and Pharisees did accustom themselves unto, as to call him Jesus, the
deceiver; and Christ in a way of scorn and contempt. Nor were these men quite
destitute of that which put a luster upon their opinions; for said the Lord
Christ himself unto them, Mat. 23.
Ye indeed appear beautiful outward.

3. There is such a naming of the name of Christ as to make it a cloak for
false and dangerous Errors: that men, by the use of that name and the putting
of it upon such errors and delusions, may put off their errors to others the
better. Mat. 24.5.
Many shall come in my name, to wit with their delusions, presenting them in my
name to the world, and shall put them off in my name to the destruction of the
Soul. Now can any imagine that the Apostle should extend his exhortation to
such, that they thus continuing to name the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity. To what end should such be comprehended in this exhortation of his?
To no purpose at all: for the more an erroneous person or a deceiver of Souls
shall back his errors with a life that is morally good, the more mischievous,
dangerous, and damnable is that man and his delusions; wherefore such a one is
not concerned in this exhortation.

4. There is a naming of the name of Christ magically, and after the manner of
Exorcism, or conjuration: as we read in the Acts of the Apostles. The vagabond
Jews, Acts 19.13, 14, 15.
the exorcists there say, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches. Thus they
called over them that had evil spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus. But what if
these should cloth this their devilish art and devilish way of using or naming
of the name of the Lord Jesus, with departing from iniquity so, as to commend
their whole life to bye-standers for such as is morally good: what advantage
would Christ, or Paul, or the Gospel get thereby? verily none at all, but
rather damage and reproach: as will soon appear to any man's reason, if it be
considered that goodness of life joined to badness of principles, is like the
Devil clothed in white, or Satan transformed into an Angel of light. And Paul
was grieved in his Spirit when the wench that had a spirit of divination did
acknowledge him to be the servant of the most high God, for he knew it would
nothing further or help forward the Lords design, but be rather an hindrance
thereto. For when Witches and Devils come once to commend, or make use of the
name of Christ, Christ and Paul like it not; therefore Paul's exhortation which
here we are presented with by the Text, is not extended to any of the four
sorts aforenamed, but,

First, Acts 15.17.
To those upon whom his name is called, they should depart from iniquity. I say
those whom God has so far dignified, as to put the name of Christ upon them:
and I will add, that apply that name to themselves. And the reason is because
God is now concerned. Chap. 11.26.
God has changed thy name from Pagan, to Christian, and thou chusest to call
thy self by that ^ame, saying, I belong to Christ. Now thou must depart from
iniquity, for that notice is taken of thee both by Heaven and Earth, that thou
art become a Disciple, and let every one that (so) names the name of Christ,
or, 1 Pet. 4.16.
that names it (being himself by God and himself put under such circumstances
as these) depart from iniquity.

Secondly, It is spoken to those that name the name of Christ either in the
public, or pri^ate, worship of God: being themselves professed worshippers of
him: and the reason is, for that the ordinances as well as the name of God is
holy, and he will be sanctified in them that come nigh him. He therefore that
approaches the presence of Christ in prayer, Lev. 10.3.
or any other Divine appointment, must take heed of regarding of iniquity in
his heart; else the Lord will stop his ears to his prayers, Psa. 66.18.
and will shut his eyes, and not take notice of such kind of worship or
worshippers.

Thirdly, Those that the Apostle in this place exhorts to depart from iniquity,
are such as have taken unto themselves the boldness to say, that they are in
him, abide in him, and consequently are made partakers of the benefits that are
in him. He that says he abides in him, 1 John 2.6.
ought himself also to walk even as he walked. And the reason is, because
Christ is a fruitful root, and a free conveyer of sap into the branches; Hence
it is written, Ps. 104.16.
that the trees of the Lord are full of sap. So then, he that names the name
of Christ by way of applying to himself his benefits, and as counting that he
is found of God in him, and so abides, ought himself to walk even as he
walked, that he may give proof of what he says to be true, by bearing forth
before men that similitude of righteousness, that is in his Root and Stem: For
such as the stock or tree is, such let the branches be, but that cannot be
known but by the fruit: Mat. 7.16.
by their fruit ye shall know them. So then, he that thus shall name the name
of Christ, let him depart from iniquity: Yea, let every such man do so.

Fourthly, This exhortation is spoken to them that name Christ as their
Sovereign Lord and King; let them depart from iniquity. Isa. 33.21.
The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will
save us, are great words: and as they cannot be spoken by every one; so they
ought not to be spoken lightly by them that can. Nor may he that claims so high
a privilege, be but obedient, submissive, apt to learn, conscienciously to put
in practice what he has learnt of his Judge, his Lawgiver, and his King. Lest
when some shall hear him say that Christ by name is his Lawgiver, and his King
(and shall yet observe him to do things evil, and to walk in ways that are not
good) they should think evil and speak so of his King; saying, learnt you this
of Christ your King, or does your King countenance you in ways that are so bad?
Or do you by thus and thus doing, submit to the laws of your King! Yea your
King, his name and Gospel shall bear the burden of the evil, together with the
shame thereof, if thou that namest the name of Christ, shall not depart from
iniquity.

Lastly, What ever man he be that by his naming of the name of Christ, shall
intimate that he has any reverence of love to, or delight in that Christ,
whose name he names, that man should depart from iniquity not only for the
reasons that are above mentioned, but for those that may be named afterward.
But having thus far opened the word, and showed who, and what manner of man the
Apostle had in his eye, in this his exhortation: I shall come in the next place
to make some observations upon the Text. As

First, That it is incident to men to name the name of Christ religiously, that
is, rightly as to words and notions, and not to depart from iniquity. This was
the occasion of this exhortation, for Paul saw that there were some that did
so: to wit, that named the name of Christ well, as to words, but did not depart
from iniquity. Some such he also found among them at Corinth, which made him
say, Awake to righteousness, and sin not; 1 Cor. 15.34.
he found such at Ephesus, and cries out to them most earnestly, saying, Awake
thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14, 15
and arise from the dead: for albeit they were professors of Christ, yet they
lived too much like those that were dead in trespasses and sins. This he also
found among the Hebrews, wherefore he says to them, let us lay aside every
weight, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
and the sin that does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
race that is set before us. These professors were easily beset with sin, yea it
did hang upon them as weights to hinder them from making of that proffesion of
Christ, whose name they named, so beautiful as did become both him and them.

In my discourse upon this subject, I must endeavor to show you two things.

First, What Paul means when he says, depart from iniquity.

Secondly, Why some that as to words, rightly name the name of Christ, do not
depart from iniquity.

The first of those does need some explanation, because in some sense even the
best of Saints cannot depart from sin, or iniquity.

1. Because, as to the being of it, it is seated and rooted in their flesh, and
has its dwelling there. Yea, it has, and so will have an abiding there, so
long as man is on this side that state of perfection, which is not to be
enjoyed while we are in the flesh: for in me, Romans 7.
that is in my flesh, sin dwells, nor does any thing else but sin dwell there:
for in me, that is in my flesh (said Paul) dwells no good thing, therefore the
Apostle must not be understood as if he intended to insinuate that there was a
possibility that the nature, and being of sin could be plucked up by the roots,
and so cast clean away from us, as to the very nature thereof: no, that will
abide with us, for it has its dwelling in us.

2. And as they cannot depart from the nature of it as such, that is, as they
cannot be rid of the being of sin, so neither can they depart from the motions,
and stirrings of sin, no more than they can stir from the motions or stirrings
of their natural senses, or of their natural reasons: The motions of sin, which
Paul also calls the lusts thereof, will be where the nature and being of sin
is, because it is not dead; for that which lives, what manner of life soever
it has, will have motion according to the manner of life which it has: and
sin being one of the most quick and brisk things that are, it will also have
its motions and lusts accordingly. Hence Paul says, it lusts and will lust,
Romans 6.12. Gal. 5.17.
where it is, and dwells: though the very spirit of God, and the utmost
diligence of a Christian be also there to oppose it.

3. Again, as the being and motions of sin will be with us, so also will it in
its endeavors. It will endeavor to overcome us, and to make us captives to it
self, and to Satan; and these endeavors will be with us; nor can we so depart
from iniquity, Ephesians. 6.12. 2 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 12.4.
as to be utterly rid of all sense and feeling of what endeavors there are in
sin and iniquity to be master and Lord, and reign; sin will endeavor to defile
the mind, to defile the conscience, to defile the life and conversation: and
this endeavor, as endeavor, we cannot depart from; that is, cause that it
should not be in our flesh: for there it will be, since sin in its being is
their.

4. As the being, motions, and endeavors of sin will still abide in our flesh,
so consequently will its polluting fumes be upon us; nor does the Apostle mean,
when he bids us depart from iniquity, that we should think that we can so be,
or so do, in this life, as that our being or doing should not smell of the
strong scent of sin. Job. 14.4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. We are all as an
unclean thing, and therefore all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Isa.
64.6.
The scent, the smell, the rank and odious stink of sins abides upon, yea, and
will abide upon us, when most spiritual here, and upon our most spiritual
actions too, until they be taken away by Christ. Thus far therefore, we cannot
be concerned in the exho^tation. For should Paul exhort us to depart from the
being, motion, endeavor, and polluting fumes and scent of sin: I mean so to
depart from them, as that there shall no such thing have place, or motion, or
striving, or scent in, or upon us: he would exhort us to that which is
altogether impossible for us to perform, yea, to perform through that working
of the spirit of God which is to be with us, and in us here. Yea, he must
exhort us to that which he could not perform himself, but such exhortations did
not stand with the wisdom of an Apostle. Wherefore there is a certain meaning
in this exhortation, from the which if we swerve, we shall both wrong the
Apostle and our selves.

Let us inquire then, what Paul should mean when he bids them, that name the
name of Christ, depart from iniquity. And for our better understanding of him
we must consider that there is an iniquity that is inherent in us, and an
iniquity that is apart, and at a distance from us: Now if he means, as
certainly he does, that they that name the name of Christ should depart from
that sin and iniquity that is in themselves: then, though he cannot mean that
we should separate that from our persons, for that is impossible, yet he would
have us take off and withdraw our minds and affections there from. And he
tells us that they that are Christ's do so. And they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: Gal. 5.24.
sinful lusts and sinful motions, our minds and affections should depart from
them. There are the affections and lusts of sin: and there are the affections
and lusts or desires of the soul: and again, there are the affections and lusts
of the new man, in Saints. Now this is that that the Apostle would have, to
wit, that the affections and passions of our souls should not choose but depart
from the affections and lusts of our old man, and should be renewed and made
willing to be led by the Holy Ghost from them. This I say, says he, Verse. 16.
walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Wherefore when he says, depart from iniquity, if he means, from our own
inherent iniquity, then he mu^t mean thus, take your mind and your affections
off, carry your minds away from them, Col. 3.1.2* 3.
set your minds and affections upon other objects, and let your minds and
affections be yielded up to the conduct of the word and spirit of God. Let not
sin therefore reign in your mortal body, To. 6.12.
that ye should obey it in the lust thereof.

Now a man, in mind, and affections, may depart from that which yet will not
depart from him: yea, a man in mind, may depart from that which yet will dwell
in him as long as he lives.

For instance, there are many diseases that cleave to men, from which, in their
minds, they willingly depart. Yea, their greatest disquietment is, that so bad
a distemper will abide by them: and might they but have their desire
accomplished, they would be as far there from as the ends of the earth are
asunder, and while they are found to continue together, the mind departs
therefrom, and is gone either to God or to Physicians, for help, and
deliverance from it.

And thus it is with the Saint, and should be with every one that by way of
profession names the name of Christ: Romans 7.
he should depart from his indwelling sin, with his mind: with his mind he
should serve the law of God.

And this is an excellent thing to do, and can be done by none but such as are
possessed with an excellent spirit. Ah! to find a man that really departs from
himself, and that draws the affections of the soul, from the affections and
lusts of his flesh, is a rare thing. Ezekiel. 11.21.
The heart of the most of professors go after the heart of their detestable
lusts, and after their inward abominations: Gal. 6.8.
But such shall of the flesh reap corruption, notwithstanding they name the
name of Christ.

Sin is sweet to him that is nothing but flesh, Job 20.12.
or that can savor nothing but what is of the flesh: nor can it be that he
that is such, should depart from himself, his sweet self: To. 8.5, 6, 7, 8,
no they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh: wherefore
they that are in the flesh, though they profess Religion and name the name of
Christ, cannot please God; for such instead of walking in and after the spirit,
have put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their faces, Ezekiel. 14.7,
8.
to hinder their departing therefrom, nor will all their inquiring of God, nor
their seeking and praying to him, keep them from stumbling and falling, and
spliting themselves in sunder upon the rocks and ruins that are provided for
them, Job 14.16.
as a reward of the evil of their doings. Yea, they shall suck the poison of
Asps, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them, notwithstanding all their
profession?

Quest.
But some may say, how shall I know that I do depart from the iniquity of my
flesh, from the iniquity that is in me.

Answ.
I shall answer this question briefly thus:

1. How is iniquity in thine eye, when severed from the guilt and punishment
that attends it? is it as sepeparate from these, beauteous, or illfavoured? I
ask thee how it looks, and how thou likest it, suppose there were no guilt or
punishment to attend thy love to, or Commission of it. For if in its own nature
it be desirable to thy mind, and only therefore shunned, for fear of the
punishment, that attends the Commission of it: without doubt thou art none of
them that do depart from it: all that thou do, is, thou shunnest the sin, not
of abhorrence of the sin, but for fear of the punishment that attends it. Like
the Thief that yet refuses to take away his neighbors horse, not of hatred of
theft, but for fear of the Gallows.

2. How do thou like thy self, as considered possessed with a body of sin,
and as feeling, and finding that sin works in thy members, does this yield
thee inward pleasedness of mind, and a kind of secret sweetness, or how? for to
be sure, where a sanctified mind is, Job 42.6. Ezekiel. 16.63. To. 6.12.
there is nothing more odious in it self, nor that makes a man so in his own
eyes, as does this sight, the sight of sin in him, of the working of lust in
him. It Is this that makes the good man ashamed, that makes him blush, and that
makes him abhor himself.

3. How look thy duties in thine eyes, I mean thy duties which thou do in
the service of God? I say, how look the best of these, the most warm and
spiritual of these, since not one of them can be performed, but they do catch
the stain of sin, as coming from thee? or art thou through the ignorance that
is in thee as unacquainted with these things?

4. Why would thou go to heaven? Is it because thou would be saved from
Hell, or because thou would be freed from sin? I say would thou go to
Heaven, because it is a place that is Holy, or because it is a place remote from
the pains of Hell? I ask again, wherein do thou think, the blessedness of
Heaven consists? is it in the holiness that is there; or in the freedom that is
there from Hell? There is not a man alive but would go to Heaven, that he may
be saved from Hell: but how many would go thither that they might be saved from
the pleasures of sin, from the inward pleasure of sin; of that I will be
silent: though surely they are those that are out of love with sin, and that do
depart from iniquity.

Verily my brethren, it is a great thing to depart from iniquity; it is a great
thing to have my will, my mind, and my affections departing from it.

But secondly, As they that depart from iniquity withdraw their minds and
affections from the lusts and motions of it, so they depart also from the
occasions of it; To. 14.13. 1 Timothy 5.4. Exodus 23.7. Prove. 5.8. 2 Timothy 2.16.
there are occasions by which sin works to bring forth the fruits thereof,
and some seek those occasions. But he that has set himself to depart from sin
in himself, will not seek occasions from abroad, to do it. Such a man as will
keep far from an evil matter, will not company with a person that pollutes and
defiles, nor will he come near the door of the Adulteresses house. He will shun
profane and vain babbling, for fear of the ungodliness that attends it. He will
walk with wise men that he may be wise, Prove. 13.20.
knowing that a companion of fools shall be destroyed.

Now there are occasions given and occasions taken to sin against the Lord
Jesus: but he that departs from iniquity departs from them both. He is not
for giving any occasion to others to sin; he had rather wrong himself and put
up injuries done, than give occasion to others to do iniquity, and as he is for
giving none, 1 Timothy 5.22.
so neither is he for taking any. He is for partaking of no man's sins, but for
keeping of himself pure.

Thirdly, To depart from iniquity is to depart from it in those examples that
are set before us thereto: occasions, and examples are sometimes the same, but
there may be occasions to sin, where there are no examples thereto: and
therefore in that they differ. And to depart from iniquity is to shun and
depart from those examples, those beastly examples that in every corner of the
Country present themselves to men.

Examples to drunkenness; Examples to Whoredom; Examples to Swearing, to lying,
to Stealing, to Sabbath-breaking, to Pride, to Covetousness, to Deceit, to
Hypocrisy, and to what not, are now adays common among men, and he that is to
seek in this matter, and that knows not how to be expertly base, may have
patterns and examples thereto in every hole. But to depart from iniquity, is to
depart from sinful examples, to shut the eyes at them, to turn the back upon
them, and to cry out to Heaven for grace, to be kept in the path of life. And,
let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

Fourthly, To depart from iniquity, is to depart from the enticings of
iniquity. There is that in iniquity that is of an enticing nature. Its
Pleasures, Profits, Honors, Delights and sweetnesses are enticing, and he that
hankers after these is not departed, nor departing from iniquity: A man must be
weaned from these things, and must find some things somewhere else, that are
better than these, else he cannot depart from iniquity.

But some may say I go from it and it follows me. Quest.
I reject it and it returns upon me. I have said it, nay a thousand times, and
yet it offers it self and its deceits to me again, what would you have me do?

I would answer thus, Answ.
Departing from iniquity, is not a work of an hour, or a day, or a week, or a
month, or a year: But it is a work that will last thee thy life time; and there
is the greatness and difficulty of it: Were it to be done presently, or were
the work to be quickly over; how many are there that would be found to have
departed from iniquity: but for that it is a work of continuance, and not worth
any thing, unless men hold out to the end, therefore it is that so few are
found actors, or overcomers therein. Departing from iniquity, with many, is but
like the falling out of two neighbors, they hate one another for a while, and
then renew their old friendship again

But again, since to depart from iniquity is a work of time, of all thy time:
no wonder if it dogs thee, and offers to return upon thee again and again:
for that is mischievous and seeks nothing less than thy ruin; wherefore thou
must in the first place take it for granted that thus it will be, and so cry
the harder to God for the continuing of his presence, and grace upon thee in
this blessed work, that as thou have begun to call upon the name of the Lord
Jesus, and begun to depart from iniquity: so thou may have strength to do it
to the last gasp of thy life.

And further, for that departing from iniquity is a kind of a warfare with it,
for iniquity will hang in thy flesh what it can, and will not be easily kept
under, therefore no marvel is thou find it wearisome work, and that the thing
that thou would be rid of, is so unwilling to let thee depart from it.

And since the work is so weighty, and that it makes thee to go groaning on: I
will for thy help give thee here a few things to consider of, And

1. Remember that God sees thee, and has his eyes open upon thee, even then
when sin and temptation is lying at thee to give it some entertainment. This
was that that made Joseph depart from it, Genesis 39.8, 7.
when solicited to embrace it by a very powerful argument.

2. Remember that Gods wrath burns against it, and that he will surely be
revenged on it, and on all that give it entertainment. This made Job afraid to
countenance it, and put him upon departing from it: for destruction from God
was a terror to me, Job 31.23.
and by reason of his highness I could not endure.

3. Remember the mischiefs that it has done to those that have embraced it, and
what distress it has brought upon others. This made the whole congregation of
Israel tremble to think that any of their brethren should give countenance to
it. Josh. 22.16, 17, 18.


4. Remember what Christ has suffered by it, that he might deliver us from the
power of it. This made Paul so heartily to depart from it, 2 Cor. 5.14.
and wish all Christians to do so as well as he.

5. Remember that those that are now in hellfire went thither for that they
loved iniquity, Psalm. 9.17. Psalm. 11.6.
and would not depart from it.

6. Remember that a profession is not worth a pin, Jam. 2.16, 17.
if they that make it do not depart from iniquity.

7. Remember that thy deathbed will be very uneasy to thee, if thy
conscience, Hos. 7.13.14.
at that day, shall be clogged with the guilt of thy iniquity.

8. Remember that at the Judgment day Christ will say to those, Luke 13.27.
depart from me, that have not here departed from their sin and iniquity. Mat.
25.41.


Lastly, Remember well, and think much upon what a blessed reward the Son of
God will give unto them at that day, that have joined to their profession of
faith in him a holy and blessed conversation.

Having thus briefly showed you these things, I shall come in the next place to
show you,

Why some, that as to words, rightly name the name of Christ, do not depart
from iniquity. The reasons.
That it is incident to men to name the name of Christ religiously, and not to
depart from iniquity: I have proved already, and now I must show you why it is
so, and the reasons are of three sorts.

First, Some profess him, First Reason.
yet have not saving faith in him, nor yet received grace from him. That some
profess him that have not says in him, nor received grace from him, I will
make appear first. And then that they do not depart from iniquity, shall be
shown afterward.

That the first is true, consider, Christ says to his Disciples, there are
some of you that believe not. Joh. 6.46.
And again, For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not,
and who should betray him. Now if they believe not, they have none of his grace
in them: for faith is the first and head grace, the beginning and leading
grace: he therefore that is destitute of that, is empty of all the rest.
Besides, other Scriptures also confirm this truth. James calls some of the
professors of Christ that were in his day, Jam. 2.20.
vain, or empty men; that is, men void of grace. And the Apostle suggesteth in
the very words below the Text, that as in Gods house there are Golden, and
Silver Saints, 2 Timothy 2.20.
so their are also earthy and Wooden ones. For in a great house as Gods is, are
not only Vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of wood and of earth, Romans
9.20.21, 22.23.
and some to honor, and some to dishonor; that is, some for Heaven, and some
for Hell.

Now they are these Wooden, and Earthy professors that he aims at in the
Text; to wit, that they should depart from iniquity, or else their profession
would do them no good, and these also that he despaireth of in the next words,
saying, But, but in this great house of God there will not only be Golden and
Silver Christians, but Wooden and Earthly ones. And if any man purge himself
from these, from these men's companies, and from these men's vices, he shall be a
vessel to honor sanctified, and meet for the Masters use, and prepared to
every good work.

From all which it is gathered that there are some that name the name of Christ
in a way of profession, that have neither faith nor grace in them, and so
consequently that do not depart from iniquity. For,

First, These want that principle; that holy and blessed principle that should
induce them thereunto; to wit, the great and principal graces of the spirit,
and they are four. First, As I have said, They want faith, that heart purifying
grace: for the heart is purified by faith. Acts 15.9.
I have showed you already that departing from iniquity must be with the mind
and affections, or with the heart: but how can that be, where the heart is not
sanctified and made holy? For an unsanctified mind cannot depart from iniquity,
no more than the Ethiopian can change his Skin; Jer. 13.23.
but nothing can purify the heart but faith. Therefore nothing can make a
professor depart from iniquity where faith is wanting. So then, when men
professedly name the name of Christ without having holy faith in him: they
still abide by their iniquity: they depart not from their iniquity, but rather
make of their profession, a cloak for their iniquity, for their malice, 1 These.
2.15. 1 Pet. 2.16.
and for their covetousness and the like. It is not profession, but faith, that
brings God and the Soul together: and as long as God and the soul are at
distance, what ever profession is made, there is not a departing, not an heart
departing from iniquity. Wherefore to these professors, James writes thus:
Draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to you, Jam. 4.8.
cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded.
Men, far from God, cannot think reverently of him, nor so speak and profess
him, as stands with the nature of Gospel Religion; wherefore God says, draw
near hither, that is by faith, and again, Isa. 40.1.
let them come near, then let them speak, then let them profess. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith a man cannot please God, because he cannot without it, stand
before him in the spotless righteousness of Christ, nor yet depart from
iniquity and live a holy life.

There are three things in Faith, that directly tend to make a man depart from
iniquity.

1. It apprehends the truth of the Being, and greatness of God, and so it
aweth the spirit of a man.

2. It apprehends the love of this God in Christ, and so it conquereth, and
overcomes the spirit of a man.

3. It apprehends the sweetness and blessedness of the nature of the Godhead,
and thence persuades the soul to desire here communion with him, that it may
be holy, and the enjoyment of him, when this world is ended, that it may be
happy in, and by him for ever.

But without Faith these things cannot be apprehended, and therefore those that
want it, whatever their profession is, they will not depart from iniquity.

Secondly, Repentance, is another of the great and principal graces, which the
Holy Ghost works in the heart: Wherefore without this also there can be no
departing from iniquity. It is in vain to expect it of any man, let his
profession be never so stately and great, if he is a stranger to found
repentance. How many are there in our day, since the Gospel is grown so common,
that catch up a notion of good things, and from that notion make a profession
of the name of Christ, get into Churches, and obtain the title of a Brother, a
Saint, a member of a Gospel congregation, that have clean escaped repentance. I
say they have caught up a notion of good things, and have through that
adventured to name the name of Christ; quite forgetting to take repentance with
them. Repentance should be, Mark 1.15. Pro. 3.7. chap. 16.6.
and is one of the first steps into true Gospel profession: but some know
nothing of it, until they come to the end of all, and their repentance will do
them no good. Repentance is not, but where the true fear of God is; yea, the
fear of God is one ground of repentance. Repentance is the scouring grace, it is
that which purges. Repentance is, as I may call it, that bitter pill without
the taking, and sound working of which, base and sinful humors will rest
unstirred, unpurged, undriven out of the soul. Can repentance be where godly
sorrow is not? or can repentance be where the fruits of repentance are not?
Mark 1.4.5. Romans 6.21. Jer. 7.3, 5.
O the fruits of repentance, thick sown by preachers, but it comes up but
thinly! Where shall the fruits of repentance be found? Confession of sin is one
fruit of repentance; shame for sin, is another fruit of repentance; amendment
of life, is another fruit of repent^nce; restitution for cousening, cheating,
defrauding, beguiling thy neighbor, Luke 19.5, 6, 7, 8.
is another fruit of repentance; yea, if you would see the fruits of repentance
as described by the Holy Ghost, and put together for the further conviction and
shame of the impenitent professor; look into the Second Epistle, to the
Corinthians, Chapter 7. verse. 9, 10, 11.

But this is a day that was never read of, a day wherein conversion is
frequent, without repentance; such a conversion as it is, and therefore does the
Church of God now swarm with them, that religiously name the name of Christ,
and yet depart not from iniquity.

Alas! all Houses, all Tables, all Shops, have hanging up in them, the sign of
the want of repentance. To say nothing of the talk, of the beds, and the backs
of most that profess: Eccles. 7.27, 28.
by which of these is it that one of a thousand for Men; and for Women, one of
ten thousand do show that they have repentance? No marvel then that the name of
Christ is so frequently mentioned there, where iniquity dwells, yea, reigns,
and that with the consent of the mind.

I would not be austere, but were wearing of Gold, putting on of apparel,
dressing up houses, decking of children, learning of complements, boldness in
women, letchery in men, wanton behaviors, lascivious words, and tempting
carriages, signs of repentance: then I must say, the fruits of repentance swarm
in our Land: but if these be none of the fruits of repentance then, O, the
multitude of professors, that religiously name the name of Christ, and do not
depart from iniquity. But,

Thirdly, Love is another of those great and principal graces, which the H^ly
Ghost works in the heart: wherefore let profession be never so high, yet if
Love be wanting there, to be sure such professors depart not from iniquity. 1
Cor. 13.
Hence all profession, and subjecting to profession are counted nothing, where
love is not. Love is counted a most infallible sign that a man is in a state of
Salvation. He that loves dwells in God, is born of God, and knows him. 1 John 4.7, 16, 21.
Love divides it self to God, and to my Neighbor. Love to God, is, that we
keep his savings, his commandments, his Laws. If a man love me, says Christ,
he will keep my words; and he that loves me not, keeps not my sayings. Joh.
14.23, 24.
For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous. So then, that professor that has not love,
cannot depart from iniquity.

Psalm. 119.136.
1. Where no love is, men cannot be tender of the name of God, they are not
afflicted because men keep not Gods Law. 1 Cor. 13.5.


2. Where no love is, men cannot deny themselves of that, which otherwise they
might lawfully do, lest the weak should fall, and the world be destroyed. Romans
14.15. Psalm. 97.10.


3. Where love to God is, there is hatred against iniquity; ye that love the
Lord, hate evil.

A man cannot love God, that loves not holiness; he loves not holiness, that
loves not Gods word; he loves not Gods word, that does not do it: It is a
common thing to find men partial in Gods Law, setting much by small things, and
neglect^ng the weightier matters, paying Tithe of Mint, and Anise, and Cummin,
and neglecting the weightier matters. These turn the Tables of Gods book
up-side-down; making little Laws, of great ones; and great ones, of little
ones; counting half an hours bodily service, better than a moral life. Love!
Love is gone out of the Conutry; Love to ^he doctrine of the first Table, Love
to the doctrine of the second Table* O how many professors, in Gods eyes, are
accounted of no more than sounding brass for want of this ornament, love. 1
Cor. 13.


To speak nothing of the first Table, where is he that has his love manifested
by the second? where are they that feed the hungry, and cloth the naked, and
send portions to them, for whom nothing is prepared? Where is Paul that would
not eat meat while the world stands, lest he made his brother offend? 1 Cor.
8.13.
Where is Dorcas, with her garments she used to make for the Widow, and for the
Fatherless. Acts 9.36.39. Job 30.25 chap. 31.13.32.
Yea, where is that rich man that (to his power) durst say as Job does, as is
recorded in those Chapters quoted in the Margent? Love! love is gone, and now
coveting, pinching, griping and such things are in fashion; now iniquity
abounds, instead of grace, in many that name the name of Christ. They want
love, and therefore cannot depart from iniquity.

Fourthly, Hope is another of those great and principal graces, which the Holy
Ghost works in the heart, and without which let a man be never so high in
profession, and so open in naming the name of Christ, he cannot depart from
iniquity. As was said before of faith, so we say now of hope. 1 John 3.3.
And every one that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure.
Here is that excellent office, or rather effect of hope made manifest, it
purifieth, it cleanses a man; it makes him make the Lord Jesus his example, as
well as his Savior. He purifieth himself even as he is pure; to wit, in soul,
in body, in spirit, in life and conversation. Hope of life eternal by Christ,
makes a man purify himself in obeying the truth through the spirit. Hope to be
with Christ hereafter, will make me strive to believe him here. Hope of being
with Angels then, will make a man strive to live like an Angel here. Alas!
alas! there is a company of half-priests in the world, and they cannot, they
dare not teach the people the whole counsel of God, because in so doing they
will condemn themselves and their manner of living in the world: where is that
Minister now to be found that dare say to his people, look on me, and walk as
you have me for an example? or that dare say, what you see and hear to be in
me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you. Philip. 3.17. chap. 4.9.
These men had hope, and hope purified them to an example, till they became
patterns to others: Is not this now far off from some professors in the world,
are they purified, are they clean that name the name of Christ? are they weaned
from that milk, and drawn from the breasts. No, nor their profession is not
attended with grace; they name the name of Christ; well, but they do not depart
from iniquity. Let a man believe a lie, and according to the reality of his
belief, such will his obedience be; let a man hope for that, for which he has
no ground to hope, yet his hope will work with him according to the power
thereof: And yet we have a generation of men that professed the blessed Gospel,
which yields the most substantial ground for faith and hope: yea, we have a
company of men that will be naming the name Christ, which is the sweetest, the
most taking, and desirable name that is named among the sons of men, and for
all that, this Gospel, this worthy name, nor yet their naming of it, does make
them depart from iniquity. But what is the reason? why, they have taken up a
profession, but want the Grace of Christ; the Faith, the Repentance, the Love
and hope of the Gospel. No marvel then, if they abide among the wooden sort of
professors: No marvel then, though the iniquity of their heels still follows
them, and that it droppeth from them wherever they go. But so much for the
first reason, Why men do name the name of Christ and yet do not depart from
iniquity.

Second reason.
Secondly, The second reason, why some that name the name of Christ, depart not
from iniquity, is, for that, though they rest not in bare notions, as those
forementioned, yet they take up as they, short of the saving grace of God.
There are bare notions, there are common workings, and there is a work that is
saving, and that will do the soul good to eternity.

1. There are bare notions, 1 These. 1.5. 1 Cor. 4.19, 20.
and they that have them, are such unto whom the Gospel comes in word only;
such whose Religion stands in word only, and is not attended with a power
suitable: that is, there goes not along with the word, a power sufficient to
subdue, and work over the heart to a cordial, and gracious close with that word
that comes to them. Yet such is the noise, and sound of the word that they are
willing to become professors thereof; there is some kind of musicalness in it,
specially, when well handled and fingered by a skilful preacher. And lo, says
God unto such preachers, when their auditory is made up of such kind of
hearers, And lo, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32.
thou art unto them as a very lovely Song (or as one that sings a Song of
Loves) of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument:
For they hear thy words but they do them not.

2. But then, besides these, there is another sort, and they go further than
these. For to them the word came, not in word only, but also in power: though
not in that or in such a power, as is sufficient, absolutely against all
atempts whatsoever, to bring the soul to glory. Of these we read in several
places; to wit, that they have tasted of the powers of the world to come; but
not so as to bring them safe to glory. Yet thus far they go.

Heb. 6.4.
1. They attain light or illumination, to see much of their state by nature with.

1 King. 21.27, 28, 29.
2. This light stands not in bare speculation, but lets fall upon the
conscience, convincing arguments to the bowing and humbling of the spirit.

3. They submit to these convictions, and reform, and may for a time, not only
come out from them that live in error, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.
but escape the pollutions of the world, by the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Gal. 3.4. chap. 4.20.


4. Yea, so powerful will this dispensation be, that it will prevail with them,
to do and suffer many things for the vindication of the truth of that Gospel
which they profess. For

1. The word will be sweet unto them.

2. Christ, the gift of God, Heb. 6.4.5.
will be relished by them.

3. The powers of the world to come will be in them.

4. Some workings of the Holy Ghost will be in them.

5. And joy, Luke 8.13.
which is as oil to the wheels, will be with their souls.

Thus, I say, it is with some professors, who yet cannot be said to depart from
iniquity, that is, for all ado, because the things that now are upon them,
abide with them but awhile. For awhile, they believe; Luke 8.13. Joh. 5.35. 2
Pet. 2.11
they rejoice in the light for a season. So they clean escape from them, who
live in error for a little, or awhile; and after that return to their old
course, and are again entangled with their inquities and overcome. This is
called, A turning with the Dog to his own vomit again, and with the Sow that
was washed to her wallowing in the mire. And some of these are set forth by
this and such like sayings. Mat. 12.43, 44, 45,
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places
seeking rest, and finding none. Then he says I will return into my house, from
whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there, and the last state of
that man is worse than the first.

Now the causes of this declension, returning, or falling away again unto
iniquity, are many.

First, One is for that this work, this work of power that they have been made
partakers of, has not been thorough enough upon all the powers of their souls.
Their understandings, their Judgments and Consciences have been dealt with, but
the power of God has not been upon their wills and minds, Psalm. 110.3.
and affections rightly to subdue them to the grace of the Gospel. Indeed there
seems to be a subjection of the will, and an overruling of the mind, and
affections also, else they could not for a time lay aside their iniquity, come
off from the pollutions of the world, and for a season rejoice in the word and
be pleased with the light thereof. But we may consider, that this may be, not
for that a sound work of God has passed upon these powers of the soul, but
that rather this was by reason of those reflex acts, that the understanding now
enlightened, the judgment now informed, and the conscience now convinced, had
upon these other powers of the soul. And I the rather think it so, because
willingness, mindfulness of, and affection for this Gospel, lasted no longer
than the light shined in their understandings, or than the things were relished
by their judgment and conscience. So that when the light of their Candle went
out, and when the taste of this sugar-plumb was out of their mouth, their wills
and affections, not being possessed with the fear of God, they returned again
to their course, and went away as before with iniquity.

Nor do I by any thing here discoursed, lay blame or fault at the door of God.
For,

1. He is a free agent to do what he pleases, and may if he please refuse to
give any thing, or if he gives something, why may he not give what he pleases
also? He may give special grace to one, and that which is not so to another: he
may open Baalams eyes, Numb. 24.3. Acts 16.14. Heb. 6. Cant. 5.1.
and open Lydia 's heart; he may give some but a taste, and cause some to eat
abundantly. He may suffer some to fall away, and keep others by his power,
through faith unto salvation.

2. Besides, Gods withdrawing, to wit, of those common workings, if they were
withdrawn without a cause given, (which yet I question) yet why may they not be
withdrawn from these, as well as from his own peculiar ones. He knows but
little, that does not know that God ofttimes hides his face from his own, and
also withdraws from them the light and great influences of the Holy Ghost: and
turns them over at least in their own apprehensions to the ungodly, and to
fallen Angels for their Chastisement, or Trial, or Instruction, etc.

3. And why may not God, since these Rebels had such working with them, as that
their minds, by their understandings, their will and affections, by their
judgment and consciences were somewhat taken and allured, cause a withdrawing
of these for trial, and to see if they would cry after him to return.

But we will let these things pass, and call you again to a remembrance of what
is in hand: we are now showing that there be them that name the name of Christ,
that yet depart not from iniquity, and in showing the cause of their not so
doing, one was for that the Gospel came to them in word only; and the other was
for that though it came to others in power, yet not in power, or in that power,
that effectually keeps some to salvation. Upon this second reason I now am,
and am showing how it comes to pass that they that are under the power of the
things that we have before discoursed, should notwithstanding that return to
their vomit again. One cause of this declension, or going back to iniquity I
have just now touched upon, and we have some more behind.

Secondly, Therefore such persons upon the withdrawing of those influences that
at present are mighty upon them, do forthwith forget, both what they had, and
what work it made upon them. Straightway they forget what manner of men they
were: It Is said of Israel they sang his praises, they soon forgot his word. So
these they forget.

1. They forget what light and what conviction they had.

2. They forget what sorrow for sin they had.

3. They forget what tastes of Christ and his word they had.

4. They forget what joy and comfort they had.

5. They forget how fair for heaven they were.

6. And they forget how cleansed once they were.

2 Pet. 1.9.
They have forgotten that they were purged from their old sins. Now
forgetfulness makes things that are past, as nothings; and if so, then it can
lay no obligations upon the mind to engage it to the delight of them, and to
the enjoying of them, no not in the thoughts of them, as if they were remembered
by us. For^etfulness is a very dangerous thing; ^t makes preaching vain, 1 Cor.
15.1, 2.
profession ^ain, faith vain and all to no pur^ose. Such profession is but a
dream, and the professors but as dreamers; ^ll vanishes in the morning. This
made Paul so caution the Corinthi^ns, that they forgot not the preach^ng; and
the Author to the Hebrews, ^o earnestly call them, in their back^liding, back
to the remembrance of former days, and to the recollecting of what it was that
then had made them so willingly endure their great fight of affliction. Heb.
10.32, 33.


Forgetfulness, I say, makes things, no^hings; It makes us as if things had
never been; and so takes a way from the soul one great means of stay, support
and encouragement, when choice David was dejected, the remembrance of the Hill
Hermon was his stay: when he was to go out against Goliath; the remembrance of
the Lion and the Bear was his support: so when those that have had the power of
the things of God upon them, can think of this; when they are withdrawn, it
will, even the thinking of it will have some kind of operation upon the soul.
And therefore you shall find that the recovering of a backslider, usually
begins at the remembrance of former things* Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, Revel. 21.2, 3.
and repent, and do thy first works.

It Is marvelous to see how some men are captivated with this forgetfulness.
Those that sometimes have prayed, cried, groaned, and sighed for eternal life:
Those that sometimes thought no pains too much, no way too far, no hazzards too
great to run for eternal life; those who sometimes were captivated with the
word, and with the comforts and joy thereof, and that, had it been possible,
could have pulled out their eyes, Gal. 4.14.15.
and have given them to a Gospel Minister, so dear, and sweet were the good
tidings which they brought to such.

I say it is marvelous to see how such men are captivated with the forgetfulness
of this. They are as if they never had been them men; they are, as if they
never had had such things; or as if they had never had thought about them. Yea,
they are strange, and carry it strangely to all those that still are under the
power of that word, and of that mighty hand, by which sometimes themselves were
guided.

Should one say to some, Art not thou the man that I once saw crying under a
Sermon, that I once heard cry out, what must I do to be saved, and that
sometime ago I heard speak well of the holy word of God: how askew will they
look upon one; or if they will acknowledge that such things were with them
once, they do it more like images and rejected Ghosts, than men. They look as
if they were blasted, withered, Joh. 15.
cast out and dried to powder, and now fit for nothing, but to be cast into the
fire, and burned. The godliness from which they are departed, and the iniquity
unto which again they have joined themselves, has so altered, so metamorphosed,
and changed their heart, and mind, and ways. This therefore is the second thing
which shows why some that have been under something of the power of things, are
again with iniquity, entangled and overcome.

Thirdly, Another thing that makes these enlightened ones that they continue
not to depart from iniquity, is the persecution that always attends the word:
for persecution always attends the word, that of the Tongue, or that of the
Sword: Now these men that were once enlightened, though they cannot remember
what they were themselves, yet Satan helps them to think that their neighbors
remember what they were: and having now lost the savor, the sense of what they
once had, and sinned away that spirit that brought it to them, they grow weak;
ye are above all men the most unable to stand up, to abide the shock, and
trial, that for their profession is coming upon them. Wherefore, Mat. 4.16, 17.
Luke 8.13.
by and by they are offended; to wit, with their own profession, and call
themselves an hundred fools, for being so heedless, so witless, and unwary to
mind Gods holy things, in such a time and day. Then they bethink with
themselves how to make an honorable retreat, which they suppose they usually
do, by finding fault first with their own unadvisedness, and of the
over-perswasiveness of others; they also now begin to say farewell conscience,
yea, God and Heaven and all, and join in confederacy with the world again. Thus
are they in fear, where no fear is; and the sound of a shaken leaf does chase
them. And there are four things are the cause of this.

First, For that, notwithstanding the former power that attended the word to
their hearts, their hearts did still abide as hard as a rock, there was no true
and sound breaking, nor softning in that: wherefore there the word wanted depth
of earth, as our Lord is pleased to call it; and anon when the Sun was up, that
which remained was presently scorched, and so withered away.

Secondly, Notwithstanding what they had sometimes enjoyed, yet the grace of
the fear of God was wanting in them; so wanting, Eccl. 7.16, 17, 18.
that what should hinder but that they should return to go as they came, and
leave Christ, the Gospel, and the people of God to shift as well as they can
for themselves.

Psalm. 78.30, 36, 37.
Thirdly, All that they enjoyed did not estrange their heart from their lusts,
though when they were in the power of things they were deader to them than
formerly; I say than formerly: And it is even with such, as with them, who are
for a time taken off from what yet they love, by some new employ in which they
are engaged. Saul went out to look for David to kill him, but when he came at
Naioth in Ramah, 1 Samuel 19.18.24.
the spirit of God came upon him and he prophesied. But this lasted but for a
while, Saul soon returned to his old envy against the holy man again.

Fourthly, It comes upon them even of judgment and wrath, for since they so
soon give way to sin, and forget, God suffers them to fall into fear of men,
and to force their hearts to comply with bad things, even as Judas and Demas
did; till they are swallowed up of that Gulf, into which the ungodly descend.
As for such Psalm. 125.5.
as turn aside unto their own crooked ways the Lord shall lead them forth with
the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 125.5.


When once God is angry with a people; He can deal with them, He can give them
up to those lusts in judgment, that they will not be separated from by mercy.
Yea, he can make a way for his anger to overtake them that have made a way by
the deceits of their hearts, to go a Whoring from under him.

And these are the causes, why those that were once enlightened and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, return with the Dog
to his own Vomit again, and so though they have or do name the name of Christ,
yet depart not from iniquity.

Thirdly, A third Reason, why they that name the name of Christ, The third
reason.
do not depart from iniquity, may be, because Grace is weak, and corruption
strong. I speak now of them that are truly gracious: for as those that never
had nothing but notion, did never at all depart from iniquity; and as those
that never had saving grace, though common workings were with them, do but a
little depart from iniquity: so those that yet have the grace of God in them,
in truth, do not, as they should, depart from iniquity: wherefore the
exhortation is as much to them as it is to any body else; And let them that
name the name of Christ, with gracious lips, depart from iniquity. For though
there is a great difference 'twixt these, and the two sorts that I mentioned
before, these having the true principles of holiness in them; but the other
nothing thereof: yet they, even they, also have need of this exhortation: for
they do not as they should, depart from iniquity. Their graces as I said are
weak, and that is the reason thereof.

That these do not depart from iniquity as they should, is clear.

1. For that their highest acts of holiness, Isa. 64.6. Psalm. 143.2. Heb.
13.15. Mat. 6.12.
are tainted therewith, and made imperfect thereby: this is manif^st, because
they s^ill are afraid to show themselves before God in their own works, and
because they betake them for acceptance with God, to the Priestly Office of
Christ, and pray by him, Forgive us our trespasses.

2. This is clear also, 2 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.12. Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. 2 Cor. 7.1.
because we are, while in this world, no where by the word, said to have
attained to the mark and point of absolute perfection; but are bid to grow, to
follow on, to press forward, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. Yea,
the best of us all, even the Apostles and Prophets, have not only made it
manifest by their imperfections, that as yet they have not departed from
iniquity, as they should; but they have confessed, and denied not, that they
were yet in the pursuit of righteousness, and had not already attained.

3. This is clear also, for that the righteousness, by the which the best of
Saints are justified in the sight of God, is a righteousness of another, not
their own; the righteousness of another man, for that there is not any upon
earth that does good and sins not. And what need we pray, forgive us our
trespasses, approach God in the perf^ctions of another, and be bid to perfect
holiness, if we had already attained, or were already perfect, or were so
departed from iniquity as we should?

4. Ala^, the complaints of God concerning this matter does sufficiently
testify the truth of what I say. When God came to his people in Egypt, and bid
them forsake the Idols of Egypt, they did not. But they rebelled against me,
says he, and would not hearken unto me: they did not, every man, cast away the
abominations of his eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols of Egypt. Well,
He saved them out of Egypt, and brought them into the Wilderness, and said to
them there, Obey my Laws and my Commandments; But the House of Israel rebelled
against me in the Wilderness, they walked not in my Statutes, they despised my
judgments. Well, then he had them from the Wilderness to Canaan, and then said
to them, Ezekiel. 20.
Keep my Laws. But when he had brought them into the Land, then they also
polluted themselves, and sinned against him as before.

Again, Hag. 2.14^
when God brought them out of captivity, both they and every thing that they
did was unclean.

To be short, Jam. 3.2. 1 Jo. 1.9.
what says Paul in the seventh to the Romans? what says James in the third
Chapter of his Epistle? And what says John in his first Epistle, and first
Chapter? Do they not all confess, though themselves were Apostles, and so for
Grace and Gifts beyond any that breath in this world, that sin and iniquity was
yet with them; and so consequently that there was not as yet, that departing by
them, therefrom, as there should.

And the reason, as I have said, is because grace is weak, weak in the best and
most strong of the Saints of God. Hence the greatest Saints use to complain,
when much assaulted with corruptions, or attended with very hard service for
God, of their weakness, and insufficiency, as to a compleatness of doing the
will of God.

1. Moses, when God did but bid him nourish and succor Israel in the
Wilderness, Numb. 11.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and carry them in his bosom, as the Nursing-father bears the sucking Child,
was stricken with such fear of miscarrying, through the weakness of his graces
and the power of his corruptions, that he cried to God saying, I am not able to
bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me. And if thou deal
thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, and let me not see my
wretchedness.

2. Job, when he was, for a proof of his integrity, to be exercised awhile with
some of the judgments of God, cries out in a sense of his w^akness to bear them,
and to go through as he should: Is my strength the strength of stones, Job
6.12. chap. 7.12. chap. 13.24, 25.
or is my flesh brass? And again, Am I a Sea, or a Whale, that thou set a
watch over me? Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? And will thou pursue
the dry stubble?

3. So Daniel, when he was but to stand and talk with the Angel, how weak did
he find himself; There remained, Dan. 10.
says he, no strength in me; and, O my Lord, by the vision my sorrows are
turned upon me, and I have retained no strength. For how can the servant of
this my Lord, talk with this my Lord? for as for me, straightway there
remains no strength in me, neither is breath left in me. Some may say, but
this is natural weakness. But I ask, how came nature to be so weak, but through
sin? the remains whereof abiding still upon the best of Saints, make them,
notwithstanding their graces, incapable to do any thing as they should.

4. Paul, a man of men, who had so much Grace, revelation of grace, and
Communion with Christ, that sometimes he knew not whether he was in or out of
the body, and yet you find him making bitter complaint of the weakness of his
grace, and of the power of his corruptions. I am Carnal, says he, and what I
hate, that do I. How to perform that which is good I find not; when I would do
good, evil is present with me. Romans 7.
But I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members. O
wretched man that I am, etc. What complaints, what confessions, what bewailings
of weakness is here? And what need was there of any of this, if Paul could, as
he would, have departed from iniquity?

I have instanced in these four men, because as to failings and miscarriages,
they are as free (by what the holy record says) as any four of whose lives you
shall read in all the Bible: but you see that they were too weak to do, and
depart from iniquity as they would.

Grace may be said to be weak, either when a lower or less degree thereof, is
compared with a higher and greater degree of the same; or it may be said to be
weak when, in what degree of it you will, it shall be engaged by, or engage it
self against sin, etc.

1. There are degrees of grace in the world: some have less, and some bigger
measures thereof, and according to the measure of grace received, so is a
Christian capable of action. He that has little, acts but weakly; he that has
much, acts more strongly; and he of the Saints that has most, acts best of
all: but yet none of these three can act so as they should and would, and,
consequently, so depart from iniquity as is their duty. Witness those four that
I mentioned but now, for they are among the first rate of Saints, yet you see
what they did, and hear what they said.

Sin is a mighty Tyrant: it is also installed in our flesh, and has moreover
that in it which suiteth with what ever is sensual in us: The flesh relisheth
it well, though the spirit of the Christian is against it.

Sin is an Active beast, and will not admit that the soul should attempt to put
forth it self in any good thing, without opposition, and contradiction. When I
should do good, evil is present with me.

Sin is of a polluting and defiling nature; and what grace soever it touches,
it staineth, and in staining, makes it weaker, than were it not so defiled it
would be. Besides, not a grace, nor an act of grace in the soul can escape
untouched.

Unbelief stands ready to annoy faith in the grace, as well as in the act of
faith.

Hardness of heart will not let love so affectionately, and sympathisingly act
as it should.

Sense and reason being polluted, will not let hope be so steadfastly fixed upon
unseen things as it should.

Pride will not let us be so humble as we ought; nor self, so self denying:
passion often interrupts our patience, and angry motions our meekness. By these
and more that might be named, it appears that sin is in us, opposes our
graces, and lets them from acting as they should. And because this sin has
part of our self in its possession; therefore, though our more noble part be
utterly against it, yet we depart not from it as we should.

Numb. 20.12. Psalm. 106.32. Job 38.2. chap. 42.6. Dan. 4.8. Romans 7.24.
God charge Moses with rash and unadvised words, and so he does Job also:
Daniel did wear the name of an Idol God; and Paul freely confesses himself
unfirm.

Nor may what has now been said, be applied to those that are weak in faith,
and so in every other grace; for the strongest grace when acted as well as we
can, cannot cause that we depart from iniquity as we should.

1. Because the strongest grace, cannot act without opposition.

2. Because we that are the actors are lame, infirm, and made weak by sin that
dwells in us.

3. Because grace and a state of grace, is not that wherein the perfection
designed for us does lie; for that is in another world.

1. This is a place to act faith in.

2. This a place to labor and travel in.

3. This is a place to fight and wrestle in.

4. This is a place to be tried in.

And therefore this is no place of perfection, and consequently no place, where
Gods people can depart from iniquity as they should.

Now there is a twofold way of departing from iniquity.

1. One is when the mind is set against it, and withdrawn from the love and
liking of it.

2. The other is when the practice of it is shunned by the whole man.

The first of these ways, the Saints though they truly do depart from iniquity,
yet depart not from it as they should.

1. Their understanding sees not the utmost baseness that is in it.

2. Their judgment is not informed about the vileness of it to perfection.

3. The conscience has not yet been convinced of all the evil that is in it.
Then,

1. How should the soul abhor it as it should.

2. How should the desires depart from it, with that fervency as they should.

3. And the will and affections so turn away from it as they should.

Secondly, As to the shunning of the acts of sin, there we also come wonderful
short.

We shun not the sins of others as we should: This is made appear,

1. For that we shun not the company of base men as we should.

2. Nor shun or refuse to imitate them in their evil, as we should. How easily
are good men persuaded to comply with bad men's ways: Yea, Jehosaphat himself
said to Ahab that base one; Behold, 1 Kings 22.4.
I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horse. Joseph
could learn in Pharaohs Court, Genesis 42.15, 16. Gal. 2.11, 12, 13 14.
to swear by Pharoahs life. Peter also when dissembling was in fashion among
the people, could learn to dissemble likewise.

We shun not our own sins, or the sins of our own company as we should.

Christians learn to be proud one of another; to be covetous one of another; to
be treacherous and false one of another; to be cowardly in Gods matters one of
another; to be remiss and negligent in Christian duties one of another.

Besides, If I should go about to show here, 2 Samuel 12.12. Exodus 32.22, 23, 24.
Judge. 6.29, 30, 31.
how Christians will hide iniquity, as David; how they will excuse it, as did
Aaron, how they will plead for it, as did the men of the City of Joash for
Baal, and the like, I might soon make it abundantly appear, that Christians do
not depart from iniquity as they should. And therefore the exhortation stands
good, and of use to the best of Saints on earth, that they and every of them
should depart from iniquity. Yea, the observation also that they do not do it
as they should, does still stand good against us.

Wherefore, as it is true in those that have nothing but notion, and that it is
true in those that are wrought upon, but not effectually: so it is true, upon
those that are truly gracious; observation, proves it fears; of damnation prove
it; the outcry of the world, proves it; and the confession of the best men,
proves it.

I come now to another observation, with which I will present you, and that is
this, namely, that every one that in way of profession and religion names the
name of Christ, should depart from iniquity. I say, that every one that in a
way of profession and Religion, names the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity. This truth needs more practice than proof: For I think there are none
that have either Scripture or reason by them, but will freely consent to this.

Nor is there any thing ambiguous in the observation that we need now to stand
upon the explaining of. For,

What iniquity is, who knows not?

That it cleaves to the best, who knows not?

That it is disgraceful to profession, who knows not? and therefore that it
ought to be departed from, who knows not?

But because the motives in particular may not be so much considered as they
ought, and because it is Satan's design to tempt us to be unholy, and to keep
iniquity and the professing man together: therefore I will in this place spend
some arguments upon you that profess, and in a way of profession do name the
name of Christ, that you depart from iniquity; to wit, both in the inward
thought, and in the outward practice of it. And those arguments shall be of
four sorts, some respecting Christ, some his Father, some our selves, and some
the World.

First, The Christ, whom you profess, whose name you name, and whose Disciples
you pretend to be, is holy. Heb. 7.26.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. This is natural to our discourse: for if Christ be
holy, and if we profess him, and in professing of him, declare that we are his
Disciples, we ought therefore to depart from iniquity, that we may show the
truth of our profession to the world.

Secondly, They that thus name the name of Christ, should depart from iniquity,
because This Christ, whose name we name, is loving. Those that have a loving
Master, a Master that is continually extending his love unto his Servants,
should be forward in doing of his will, that thereby they may show their sense,
and acceptance of the love of their Master. Why, this is his will, that we
depart from iniquity, that we throw sin away: 1 These. 5.22.
that we fly every appearance of evil.

Thirdly, They that thus name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
Because of the honor and reputation of their Lord. It Is a disparagement to
Christ, that any of his servants, and that any that name his name, should yet
abide by, and continue with iniquity. Mal. 1.6.
A son honors his Father, and a servant his Master: If then I be a Father,
where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear? says the Lord of
Hosts, unto you, O Priests, that despise my name? and ye say, wherein have we
despised thy name.

Fourthly, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
because of his name, that his name may not be evil spoken of by men: for our
holiness puts a luster and a beauty upon the name of Christ, and our not
departing from iniquity draws a cloud upon it. Wherefore we ought to depart
from iniquity, that the name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified, and not
reproached through us.

Fifthly, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
because of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. That the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which they profess, may not be evil spoken of by our neighbors.
The Gospel is called holy; 2 Pet. 2.21.
therefore let them be holy that profess it: The which they can by no means be,
if they depart not from iniquity. Men cannot serve the designs of the Gospel,
and their own worldly and fleshly designs. But they that profess the name of
Christ, they should be tender of his Gospel, that they keep that in good esteem
and reputation in the world. The which they can by no means do, unless they
depart from iniquity.

Sixthly, They that name the name of Christ should depart from iniquity,
Because the very profession of that name is holy. The profession; is an holy
profession. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord: The vessels, that
is, the profession for by that, is as it were, carried about the name, and
Gospel of Jesus Christ. We must therefore lay aside all iniquity, and
superfluity of naughtiness, and do as persons professing Godliness, as
professing a profession, 1 Timothy 2.10. Heb. 3.1.
that Christ is the Priest of, the High Priest of. It is a reproach to any man
to be but a bungle^ at his profession, to be but a sloven in his profession.
And it is the honor of a man to be excellent in the managing of his
profession. Christians should be excellent in the managment of their
profession, and should make that which is good in it self, good to the Church
and to the world, by a sweet and cleanly managing of it.

Seventhly, They that profess the name of Christ, or that name it religiously,
should to their utmost depart from iniquity, because of the Church of Christ
which is holy. He that religiously professes the name of Christ, has put
himself into the Church of Christ, though not into a particular one, yet into
the universal one. Now that is holy. What agreement then has the temple of God
with Idols? I, or any Pillar, or Post, or Pin, 2 Cor. 6.16.
or member of that temple. One black sheep is quickly espied among five hundred
white ones, and one mangie one will soon infect many. One also among the
Saints, that is not clean, is a blemish to the rest, and, as Solomon says,
Eccl. 9.18.
one sinner destroys much good.

Eighthly, They that profess the name of Christ, or that name that name
religiously, should depart from iniquity, Because of the Ordinances of Christ,
for they are holy. Men of old before they went in to meddle with holy things,
Exodus 30.17, 18.19.20.21.
were to wash their hands and their feet in a vessel prepared for that purpose.
Now since they that name that name religiously do also meddle with Christ's
appointments, they must also wash and be clean: cleanse your hands ye sinners
if you mean to meddle with Christ in his appointments: Wash lest God cut you
off for your not departing from iniquity.

Ninthly, They that name the name of Christ religiously, should depart from
iniquity, because of Christ's observers. There ar^ many that keep their eye upon
Christ, and that watch for an opportunity to speak against him even through the
sides of those that profess him. Behold, Luke 2.34.
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel: And for a
sign that shall be spoken against. Some take occasion to speak against him,
because of the meanness of his person; here some again speak against him,
because of the plainness of his doctrine; also some speak against him, because
of the meanness of his followers; and some speak against him, because of the
evil deeds of some that profess him. But if he that gives just occasion of
offense to the least of Saints had better be drowned in the Sea with a
Millstone about his neck: what think you, shall his judgment be, who, through
his mingling of his profession of Christ's name, with a wicked life shall tempt
or provoke men to speak against Christ?

I come now to those arguments that respect God the Father.

First, Then, they that profess the name of Christ should depart from iniquity;
because of God the Father, because God the Father has made Christ to be to us
what he is; to wit, the Apostle and High Priest of our profession. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Joh. 5.23. chap. 15.8.
He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, which has sent him.
Nor can the Father be honored by us, but by our departing from iniquity. All
our talk and profession of Christ, adds no glory to his Father, who has made
him our King, and Priest, and Prophet: if it be not joined to an holy
conversation. Wherefore, if you profess the name of Christ, and would hold the
word in hand, that you have believed in him, depart from iniquity, for the
Fathers sake that has sent him.

Secondly, As it is the Father which has made Christ to us what he is; so it is
the Father, who has called us to partake of Christ and all his benefits: 1
Cor. 1.9. Heb. 3.14.
Wherefore we must depart from iniquity, that profess the name of Christ, that
we may glorify him for his call. He has called us to the fellowship of his Son
Jesus Christ; That is, to partake of all that good that is in him, as Mediator,
and to be done by him for those that trust in him. Nor had we ever come out of
a cursed and condemned condition, to Christ for life and blessedness, but by
the call of the Father; For it is not of works, Romans 9.10, 11.
but of him that calls: now since he has called us to this privilege, [even
us whom he has called] and left others in their sins to perish by his
judgments, Heb. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3.
it is meet, we should depart from iniquity. Specially since the call by which
he called us, is heavenly, and holy, and because he has not only called us to
glory, but to virtue.

Thirdly, We that religiously name the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity, because God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ has commanded us so
to do. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the
end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus
Christ. As obedient Children, not fashioning your selves according to your
former lusts in your ignorance; but as he that has called you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation: Because it is written, Be ye holy, as I am
holy.

Fourthly, They that religiously name the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity, that they may answer the end for which they are called to profess his
name. The Father has therefore called them to profess his name, that they might
be trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be
glorified. Do thou then profess the name of Christ; bring forth those fruits
that become that holy profession, that you may be called trees of
righteousness, and that God may be glorified for, and by your professed
subjection to the Gospel of his Son. Isa. 61.3.


Fifthly, They that name (as before) the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, should
depart from iniquity, that they may show to the world the nature and power of
those graces, which God the Father has bestowed upon them that do religiously
name the name of Christ. And the rather, because, he that religiously names
that name, declares even by his so naming of him, that he has received grace
of the Father, to enable him so to do. Now he cannot declare this by deeds,
unless he depart from iniquity: Tit. 1.16.
and his declaring of it by words alone signifies little to God or man.

Sixthly, We therefore that religiously name the name of Christ, should also
depart from iniquity; because the spirit of the Father will else be grieved.
Ephesians. 4.30.
The countenancing of iniquity; the not departing therefrom, will grieve the
holy spirit of God, by which you are sealed to the day of redemption: and that
is a sin of an higher nature than men commonly are aware of. He that grieveth
the spirit of God shall smart for it here, or in Hell, or both. And that spirit
that sometimes did illuminate, teach and instruct them, can keep silence, can
cause darkness, can withdraw it self, and suffer the soul to sin more and more;
and this last is the very judgment of Judgments. 1 These. 5.19.
He that grieves the spirit, quenches it; and he that quenches it, vexes it;
and he that vexes it, sets it against himself, and tempts it to hasten
destruction upon himself. Wherefore take heed, professors, Isa. 63.10. Acts 5.9.
I say take heed, you that religiously name the name of Christ, that you meddle
not with iniquity, that you tempt not the spirit of the Lord to do such things
against you, whose beginnings are dreadful, and whose end in working of
judgments is unsearchable. A man knows not whither he is going, nor where he
shall stop, that is but entering into temptation; nor whether he shall ever turn
back, or go out at the gap that is right before him. He that has begun to
grieve the Holy Ghost, may be suffered to go on until he has sinned that sin
which is called the Sin against the Holy Ghost. And if God shall once give thee
up to that, then thou art in the Iron cage, out of which there is neither
deliverance nor redemption. Let every one therefore that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity, upon this second consideration.

Thirdly, In the next place, I come now to those arguments that do respect thy
self.

First, Those that religiously name the name of Christ should, must depart from
iniquity, because else our profession of him is but a lie. 1 John 1.6.
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie. And walk
in darkness: that is, and walk in iniquity, and depart from a life that is
according to the course of this World. He that says, chap. 2 4.
I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not
in him: The truth that he professes to know, and that he says he has
experience of, is not in him. 1 King. 17.24.
Every man that names the name of Christ, is not therefore a man of God, nor
is the word in every man's mouth, truth; though he makes profession of that
worthy name. It is then truth in him, and to others with reference to him, Rev.
2.2, 9. chap. 3.9.
when his mouth and his life shall agree. Men may say they are Apostles, and be
liars: they may say, they are Jews, that is Christians, and lie, and be liars,
and lie in so saying. Now this is the highest kind of lying, and certainly must
therefore work the saddest sort of effects. Thus man's best things are lies. His
very saying, I know him, I have fellowship with him, I am a Jew, a Christian,
is a lie. His life gives his mouth the lie: Acts 5.4. Rev. 21.8.27. chap.
22.15.
and all knowing men are sure he lies. 1. He lies unto God: he speaks lies in
the presence, and to the very face of God. Now this is a daring thing: I know
their lies, says he: and shall he no^ recompense for this? See these
Scriptures in the Margent, and take heed. I speak to you that religiously name
the name of Christ, and yet do not depart from iniquity. 2. He lies unto men;
every knowing man; every man that is able to judge of the tree by the fruit,
knows that that man is a lier, and that his whole profession as to himself is a
lie, if he does not depart from iniquity. Thus Paul called the slow bellies,
the unsound professors among the Cretians, Tit. 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
liers. They were so in his eyes, for that their profession of the name of
Christ was not seconded with such a life as became a people professing
godliness. They did not depart from iniquity. But again, 3. Such a man is a
lier to his own soul. What ever such an one promises to himself, his soul will
find it a lie. There be many in the world that profess the name of Christ, and
consequently promise their soul the enjoyment of that good, that indeed is
wrapped up in him, but they will certainly be mistaken hereabout, and with the
greatest terror, will find it so, when they shall hear that direful sentence,
Luke 13.27.
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. Christ is resolved that the
loose-lived pr^fessor shall not stand in the judgment, nor any such sinners in
the congregation of the righteous. They have lied to God, to men, and to
themselves; but Jesus then will not lie unto them: He will plainly tell them
that he has not known them, and that they shall not abide in his presence. But,

Secondly, Those that religiously name the name of Christ should depart from
iniquity, else, as they are liers in their profession, so they are
self-deceivers. I told you but now such lie to themselves, and so consequently
they deceive themselves. But be ye doers of the word, Jam. 1.22.
not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. It Is a sad thing for a man, in,
and about eternal things, to prove a deceiver of others; but for a man to
deceive himself, his own self of eternal life, this is saddest of all: Yet
there is in man a propenseness so to do. Hence the Apostle says, be not
deceived, and let no man deceive himself. And again, Verse. 26.
If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain. These words [But deceives
his own heart] I have much mused about: for they seem to me to be spoken to
show how bold and prodigiously desperate some men are, who yet religiously name
the name of Christ: desperate I say at self deceiving. He deceives his own
heart; he otherwise persuades it, than of its own self it would go:
Ordinarily men are said to be deceived by their hearts, but here is a man that
is said to deceive his own heart, flattering it off from the scent and dread of
those convictions, that by the word sometimes it has been under: persuading of
it that there needs no such strictness of life be added to a profession of
Faith in Christ, as by the Gospel is called for: or that since Christ has died
for us, and rose again, and since salvation is alone in him, we need not be so
concerned, or be so strict to matter how we live. This man is a self deceiver:
he deceives his own heart. Self deceiving, and that about spiritual, and
eternal things, specially when men do it willingly, is one of the most
unnatural, unreasonable, and unaccountable action in the world. 1. It is one of
the most unnatural actions. For here a man seeks his own ruin, Prove. 1.18.
and privily lurks for his own life. We all cry out against him that murders
his Children, his Wife, or his own body, and condemn him to be one of those
that has forgot the rules, and love of nature: But behold the man under
consideration is engaged in such designs as will terminate in his own
destruction: he deceives his own soul. 2. This is also the most unreasonable
act; there can no cause, nor crum of cause that has the least spark or dram of
reason, or of any thing that looks like reason, be shown why a man should
deceive himself, and bereave his soul of eternal life. Therefore, 3. Such men
are usually passed over with astonishment and silence. Be astonished O Heavens
at this! Jer. 2.11, 12, 13.
and be ye horribly afraid, for my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain* of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken
Cisterns, that can hold no water.

But above all; This, as to this head, is the most amazing place, where it is
said that the self deceiver makes his self deceiving, his sport: 2 Pet. 2.13.
Sporting themselves with their own deceivings. These are a people far gone to
be sure, that are arrived to such an height of negligence, carelessness,
wantonness, and desparateness of spirit, as to take pleasure in, and make a
sport of that which will assuredly deceive them forever. But this is the fruit
of professing of Christ, and of not departing from iniquity. The wisdom and
judgment of God is such, as to give such over to the sporting of themselves in
their own deceivings.

Thirdly, Those that religiously name the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity, because of the scandal that will else assuredly come upon Religion,
and the things of Religion through them. Upon this head I may begin to write,
with a sigh; For never more of this kind than now. There is no place where the
professors of religion are, that is clean and free from offense and scandal.
Iniquity is so intailed to religion, and baseness of life to the naming of the
name of Christ, that one may say of the professors of this age, as 'twas said
of them of old, Isa. 28.8.
All places are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.
Where are they even amongst those that strive for the rule, that mind it at
all, when it pinches upon their lusts, their pride, avarice and wantonness? Are
not, now adays, the bulk of professors like those that strive at a Gnat and
swallow a Camel? Yea, Mat. 23.24. Jer. 2.33.
do not professors teach the wicked ones to be wicked? Ah! Lord God, this is a
lamentation, and will be for a lamentation. What asore disease is now got into
the Church of God, that the Generality of professors should walk with scandal!

No fashion, no vanity, no profuseness, and yet no niggardliness but is found
among professors. They pinch the poor and nip from them their due, to maintain
their own pride and vanity. I shall not need to instance particulars, for from
the Rich to the Poor, from the Pastor to the People, from the Master to his
Man, and from the Mistress to her Maiden, all are guilty of scandal, and of
reproaching, by their lives, the name of the Lord. For they profess, and name
that worthy name of Christ, but are not, as they should, departed from iniquity.

1. Hence the name of God is polluted and reproached even till God is weary and
cries out, pollute ye my name no more with your gifts, Ezekiel. 20.39.
and with your Idols. O do not pollute my name, says God: Rather leave off
profession, and go every one to his wickedness. Tell the world, if you will not
depart from iniquity, that Christ and you are parted, and that you have left
him, to be embraced by them to whom iniquity is an abomination. 'Twould far
better secure the name of God from scandal and reproach, than for you to name
the name of Christ, and yet not to depart from iniquity. Then, though you sin
as now you do, the poor world would not cry out, Ay! this is your Religion!
Then they would not have occasion to vilify religion, because of you; since
you tell them that Christ and you are parted. But,

2. If you will not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet depart from
iniquity, you also scandal the sincere professors of Religion; and that is a
grievous thing. There are a people in the world that have made it their
business ever since they knew Christ, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, and that desire to perfect holiness in the fear of God:
and you scandalous professors mixing your selves with them, 2 Pet. 2.13. Jud.
12.
make their gold look dim. You are spots and blemishes to them; you are an evil
mixing it self with their good, and a scandal to their holy profession. They
are you that make the heart of the righteous sad, whom God would not have sad.
They are you that offend his little ones. O! the Millstone that God will
shortly hang about your necks, when the time is come that you must be d^owned
in the Sea, and Deluge of Gods wrath.

3. If you will not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet depart from
iniquity; you continue to extend your scandal also to the word and doctrine of
God. They that name the name of Jesus religiously, should so carry it in the
world, that they might adorn the doctrine of God their Savior: but thou that
professest, and yet departest not from iniquity; thou causest the name and
doctrine which thou professest, to be blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit. 2.5, 10.
and reproached by the men of this world; and that is a sad thing, a thing that
will bring so heavy a load upon thee, when God shall open thine eyes (and he
will open them either here or in hellfire, that thou will repent it with great
bitterness of soul. The Lord smite thee to the making of thee sensible to thy
shame, and conversion, if it be his blessed will. Amen. But,

4. If thou will not leave off to name the name of Christ, nor yet depart from
iniquity, thou will bring reproach, scorn and contempt upon thy self. For sin
is a reproach to any people. Prove. 14.34.
1. These are they that God will hold in great contempt and scorn: See the
first of Isaiah. 2. These are they that his people shall have in great
contempt. Therefore, says he, Mal. 2.9. Jer. 25.9, 18.
have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as
you have not kept my ways, but have lifted up the face against my Law. 3. Such
shall also be contemned, and had in derision of the men of this world. They
shall be an hissing, a byword, a taunt and a reproach among all people. For
him that honors me, says God, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
but he that despises me, shall be lightly esteemed. I remember that Philpot
used to tell the Papists that they danced BAREARSED in a Net, because of the
evil of their ways; and the Lord bids professors have a care that the shame of
their nakedness does not appear, or lest they walk naked, and their shame be
discovered. For those professors that depart not from iniquity, however they
think of themselves, their nakedness is seen of others. And if it be a shame to
the modest to have their nakedness seen of others, what bold and brazen brows
have they who are not ashamed to show their nakedness, yea, the very shame of
it, to all that dwell about them? And yet thus does every one that religiously
names the name of Christ, and yet does not depart from iniquity.

Fourthly, Those that religiously name the name of Christ, and do not depart
from iniquity; They are the cause of the perishing of many. Mat. 18.7.
Woe, says Christ, to the world because of offenses: And again, woe to that man
by whom the offense comes. These are they that cause many to stumble at sin,
and fall into Hell. Hark, you that are such, what God says to you. Mal. 2.8.
You have caused many to stumble at the Law, and at religion. Men that are for
taking of occasion, you give it them: men that would enter into the Kingdom;
you puzle, and confound them with your iniquity, while you name the name of
Christ, and do not depart therefrom. One sinner destroys much good: these are
the men that encourage the vile to be yet more vile; these be the men that
quench weak desires in others; and these be the men that tempt the ignorant to
harden themselves against their own salvation. A professor that has not
forsaken his iniquity, is like one that comes out of the Pesthouse among the
whole, with his Plague sores running upon him. This is the man that has the
breath of a Dragon, he poisons the Air round about him. This is the man that
slays his children, his kinsmen, his friend, and himself. What shall I say? A
man that names the name of Christ, and that departs not from iniquity; to
whom may he be compared? The Pharisees, for that they professed religion, but
walked not answerable thereto, unto what does Christ compare them, but to
Serpents and Vipers; what does he call them, but hypocrites, Whited Walls, Mat.
23.
Painted sepulchers, fools, and blind? and tells them that they made men more
the children of H^ll than they were before. Wherefore such an one cannot go out
of the world by himself: for as he gave occasion of scandal, when he was in the
world; so is he the cause of the damnation of many. Prove. 11.30.
The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life: but what is the fruit of the
wicked? of the professors that are wicked? why, not to perish alone in their
iniquity. Job 22.20.
These, as the Dragon, draw many of the Stars of Heaven, Rev. 12.4.
and cast them to the earth with their most stinking tail: cast many a
professor into earthly and carnal delights, with their most filthy
conversations.

Acts 20.30. Phil. 3.18, 19.
The Apostle did use to weep, when he spoke of these professors, such offense he
knew they were and would be in the world.

These are the chief of the Engines of Satan, with these he works wonders.
One Balaam, one Jeroboam, one Ahab, O how many fish bring such to Satan's net.
These are the Tares that he strives to sow among the wheat, for he knows they
are mischief to it. Wherefore let every one that names the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.

Fifthly, Those that religiously name the name of Christ, and do not depart
from iniquity: how will they die, and how will they look that man in the face,
unto the profession of whose name, they have intailed an unrighteous
conversation? Or do they think that he does not know what they have done, or
that they may take him off with a few cries and wringing of hands, when he is
on the Throne to do Judgment against transgressors. O! it had been better they
had not known, had not professed: yea, better they had never been born. For as
Christ said of Judas, so may it be said of these; It had been good for that
man, if he had never been born. And as Christ says it had been good, so Peter
says, it had been better. Good they had not been born, Mark 14.22. 2 Pet. 2.20,
21.
and better they had not known and made profession of the name of Christ.

But perhaps some may ask me, Quest.
what iniquity they must depart from, that religiously name the name of Christ?

I answer, first, in general, Answ. 1.
Those that religiously profess the name of Christ, must depart from all
iniquity. Heb. 12.2. 1 These. 5.22.
They should lay aside every weight; they should fly all appearance of evil.
Many there be that are willing to part with some sins, some pleasures some
unjust Prophets, if they may be saved: but this selling of all, parting with
all, forsaking of all, is a very hard chapter.

And yet the Lord Jesus lays it there, Luk 14.33.
saying so likewise, whosoever he be of you (of any of you that professes my
name) that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple. Christ by
this Text requires more of them that are his than to forsake all iniquity:
Wherefore to be sure, every sin is included. No less than Universal obedience,
Hos. 10.2.
will prove a man sincere. A divided heart is a faulty one. He that forsakes
not every sin, Job 20.13. Joh. 14.21, 22, 23, 24.
is partial in the Law, nor can he have respect to all Gods Commandments. There
can be no true love to Christ where there are reserves; he that will hide any
one sin in his bosom, or that will keep it, as the phrase is, under his tongue,
is a secret enemy to Jesus Christ. He loves not Christ that keeps not his
sayings. To halt between two is naught, and no man can serve two Masters.
Christ is a Master, and sin is a Master: yea, and Masters are they, so
opposite, that he that at all shall cleave to the one, shall by the other be
counted his enemy. If sin at all be countenanced, Christ counts himself
despised. What man would count himself beloved of his Wife, that knows she has
a bosom for another? Thou shall not be for another man, says he, Hos. 3.3.
so will I be for thee. Would the King count him a Loyal subject, who would
hide in his house, nourish in his Bed, and feed at his Table, one that
implacably hates and seeks to murder his Majesty? Why, sin is such an enemy
to the Lord Jesus Christ: therefore as Kings command that Traitors be delivered
up to Justice; so Christ commands, that we depart from iniquity. Take away all
iniquity, is a good prayer, and to resist unto blood, striving against sin,
Hos. 14.2. Heb. 12.4. 2 Cor. 10.5.
is a good warfare, and he that brings every thought to the obedience of Christ
gets a brave victory. Grace leaveneth the whole soul, and so consequently all
the parts thereof: now where the whole is leavened, the taste must needs be the
same throughout. Grace leaves no power, faculty, or passion of the soul
unsanctified; wherefore there is no corner in a sanctified soul, where sin may
hide his head, to find rest, and abode without control: consequently, he that
has harbor for this or that sin, and that can find an hiding place, and an
abode for it in his heart, is no Christian man. Let them then that christianly
name the name of Christ, make it manifest that they do not do it feignedly, by
departing from iniquity. But,

Answ. 2.
Secondly, And more particularly: They that name the name of Christ, as above,
let them depart from their Constitution-sin, or if you will, the sin that their
temper most inclines them to. Every man is not alike inclined to the same sin,
but some to one and some to another: Now let the man that professes the name of
Christ religiously, consider with himself, unto what sin or vanity am I most
inclined; is it Pride? is it Covetousness? is it fleshly lust? And let him
labor, by all means, to leave off and depart from that. This is that which
David called his own iniquity, and says, I was also upright before him, and I
kept my self from mine iniquity. Psalm. 18.23
Rightly are these two put together; for it is not possible that he should be
an upright man that indulgeth, or countenanceth his constitution-sin; but on
the contrary, he that keeps himself from that will be upright as to all the
rest: and the reason is, because if a man has that grace as to trample upon,
and mortify his darling, his bosom, his only sin, he will more easily and more
heartily abhor and fly the rest.

And indeed, if a man will depart from iniquity, he must depart from his
darling sin first: for as long as that is entertained, the other, at least
those that are most suiting with that darling, will always be haunting of him.
There is a man that has such and such haunt his house, and spend his substance,
and would be rid of them, but cannot: but now, let him rid himself of that, for
the sake of which they haunt his house, and then he shall with ease be rid of
them. Thus it is with sin. There is a man that is plagued with many sins,
perhaps because he imbraceth one; well, let him turn that one out of doors and
that is the way to be rid of the rest. Keep thee from thy darling, thy bosom,
thy constitution-sin.

Motives to prevail with thee to fall in with this exhortation, are several.

1. There can no great change appear in thee, make what profession of Christ
thou will, unless thou cast away thy bosom sin. A man's constitution-sin, is, as
I may call it, his visible sin; it is that by which his neighbors know him and
describe him: whether it be pride, Covetousness, lightness, or the like; now if
these abide with thee, though thou should be much reformed in thy notions,
and in other parts of thy life. Yet say thy neighbors, he is the same man
still: his Faith has not saved him from his darling: he was proud before, and is
proud still; was covetous before, and is covetous still; was light and wanton
before, and is so still. He is the same man, though he has got a new mouth. But
now, if thy constitution-sin be parted with, if thy darling be cast away, thy
conversion is apparent, it is seen of all, for the casting away of that is death
to the rest, and ordinarily makes a change throughout.

2. So long as thy constitution-sin remains, as winked at by thee, so long thou
art an hypocrite before God; let thy profession be what it will: also when
Conscience shall awake and be commanded to speak to thee plainly, what thou
art, it will tell thee so, to thy no little vexation and perplexity.

3. Besides, do what thou can, so long as thou remainest thus, thou will be
of a scandalous life. No honor is brought to religion by such. But,

Again, As they that name the name of Christ should depart from their
constitution-sin: so they should depart from the sins of other men's ^empers
also. Much harm among ^rofessors is done by each others sins. There is a man
that has clean escaped from those who live in error: has shaken off the carnal
world and the men thereof, and is come among professors, but behold, there also
he meets with wicked men, with men that have not departed from iniquity, and
there he is entangled. This is a sad thing, and yet so it is. I doubt there are
some in the world, I mean professors, that will curse the day that ever they
were acquainted with some professors. There are professors that are defilers,
professors that are wicked men, Jer. 5.26. Jer. 2.33.
professors of whom a wicked man may learn to sin. Take heed of these, lest
having fled from thine own sins, thou should be taken with the sins of
others. Be not partakers of other men's sins, is the counsel and caution that
Paul gives to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22.
if he would keep himself pure.

4. Do thou profess the name of Christ, and do thou pretend to be a man
departing from iniquity? Then take heed thou do not dedeceive thy self, by
changing one bad way of sinning, for another bad way of sinning. This was a
trick that Israel played of Old: for when Gods Prophets followed them hard with
demands of Repentance and Reformation, then they would gad about to change
their ways; Jer. 2.36.
but behold, they would not change a bad way for a good, but one bad way for
another; hopping as the Squirrel, from bow to bow, but not willing to forsake
the tree. Hence they were said to return, but not to the Most High. Hos. 7.16.
Take heed I say of this: Many leave off to be drunkards, and fall in with
covetousness: many fall off from covetousness to pride and lasciviousness: take
heed of this. This is a grand deceit, and a common one too, a deceit of a long
standing, and almost a disease Epidemical among professors.

Many times men change their darling sins, as some change their Wives and
Servants; that which would serve for such an one this year, may not serve to be
so for the year ensuing. Hypocrisy would do a while ago, but now Debauchery.
Profaneness would do, when Profaneness was in fashion; but now a deceitful
Profession. Take heed, professor, that thou do not throw away thy old darling
sin for a new one. Men's tempers alter. Youth is for Pride and wantonness,
Middle age for cunning and craft, Old age for the world and Covetousness. Take
heed therefore of deceit in this thing.

5. Do thou profess the name of Christ, and do thou pretend to be a man
departing from iniquity? take heed lest thy departing from iniquity should be
but for a time: Some do depart from iniquity, as persons in wrangling fits
depart from one another; to wit, for a time, but when the quarrel is over, by
means of some intercessor, they are reconciled again. O! Satan is the
intercessor between the soul and sin, and though the breach between these two
may seem to be irreconcilable; yea, though the soul has sworn it will never
give countenance to so vile a thing as sin is, more * yet he can tell how to
make up this difference, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
and to fetch them back to their vo^^t again, who one would have thought, had
quit^ escaped his sins, and been gone. Take heed therefore, O professor: For
there is danger of this, and the height of danger lies in it. And I think that
Satan, to do this thing, makes use of those sins again, to begin this
rejoinder, which he finds most suitable to the temper and constitution of the
sinner. These are, as I may call them, the Master sins; they suit, they jump
with the temper of the soul: these as the little end of the Wedge, enter with
ease, and so make way for those that come after, with which Satan knows he can
rend the soul in pieces. Wherefore,

6. To help this, take heed of parlying with thy sins again, when once thou
have departed from them: Sin has a smooth tongue; if thou harken to its
enchanting language, ten thousand to one but thou art entangled. See the saying
of the Wiseman, Prove. 7.21, 22.
with much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her
lips, she forced him. He goes after her straightway, as a^ Ox goes to the
slaughte^, or as a Fool to the correction of the Stocks. He heard her Charm,
Verse. 27.
and by hearing, is noosed, and led away to her house, which is the way to
Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. Take heed therefore of listening to
the charms, wherewith sin inchanteth the soul. In this be like the deaf Adder,
stop thine ear, plug it up, to sin: and let it only be open to hear the words
of God.

Thirdly, Let them that name the name of Christ, Answ. 3.
depart from the iniquity of the times. There are sins that may be called the
iniquity of the day. It was thus in Noah's day, it was thus in Lots day, and
'twas thus in Christ's day; I mean in the days of his flesh: and it is a famous
thing for professors to keep themselves from the iniquities of the times. Here
lay Noah's excellency, here lay Lots excellency, and here will lie thy
excellency, if thou keep thy self from the iniquity of this day. Act. 2.40.
Keep or save your selves from this untoward generation, is seasonable Counsel:
but taken but of few; the sin of the time, or day, being as a strong current or
stream that drives all before it. Hence Noah and Lot were found as it were
alone, in the practice of this excellent piece of righteousness, in their
Generation. Hence it is said of Noah that he was a just man, and perfect in his
Generations. And again, The Lord said unto Noah, come thou and all thy house
into the Ark; Genesis 6.9.
for thee have I seen righteous before me, in this Generation. The meaning is,
he kept himself clear of the sin of his day, Chap. 7.1.
or o^ the Generation among which he lived.

The same I say of Lot, he kept himself from the sin of Sodom: and hence Peter
cries him up for such a right^ous man. Just Lot, says he, that righteous man, 2
Pet. 2.7, 8.
whose righteous soul was vexed with the fil^hy conv^^sation of the wicked.
Mark a Just man, a Righteous man, his righ^eous soul, etc. But how obtained he
this char^cter? Why h^ ab^orred the sin of his time, he fell not in with the
sin of the people, but was afflicted and vexed there about: yea, it was to him
a daily burden. For that righteous man dwelling a^ong them, in seeing and
hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, Psalm. 119.158.
with their unlawful deeds. So David, I beheld, says he, the transgressors,
and was gri^ved because they kept not thy word. The sin of the times, is to God
the worst of sins, and to fall in with the sin of the times, is counted as the
highest of transgressions. Consequently, to keep from them, though a man should
through infirmity be guilty of others, yet he is accounted upright. And hence
it is (I think) that David was called a man after Gods own heart; to wit,
because he served his own generation, by the will of God, or as the Margent
reads it, Acts 13.
after he had in his own age served the will of God. By the sin of ^he t^mes
Satan, as it were, set up his Standard in defiance to God; seeking then to
cause his name in a signal way to be dishonored, and that by the professors of
that age. And hence it is that the Lord does manifest such wrath against his
people, that are guilty of the common sin of their day, and that he shows such
special favor to them that abstain therefrom. Was there no more, think you,
but Noah, in his generation that feared ^od: yes several no doubt, but he was
the man, that kept clear of the sin of his day, therefore he and his family
must be partakers of Gods deliverance: The other must die before, and not be
permitted to the mercy of the Ark, nor to see the new world with Noah. Unbelief
was the sin of the day, when Israel was going from Egypt to Canaan; therefore
all that were guilty of that transgression, must be denied to go in to see that
good Land, yea, though it were Moses himself. And the Lord said to Moses and
Aaron, Numb. 20.12.
because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the Childr^n of
Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the Land which I
have given them.

The sin of the day, is an high transgression; from the which because Caleb,
and Joshua kept themselves, God kept them from all the blasting Plagues, that
overtook all the rest, and gave them the Land which he had promised to their
Fathers. But my servant Caleb, Numb. 14.22, 23, 24.
because he had another spirit in him, and has followed me fully, him will I
bring into the Land, whereunto he went, and his seed shall possess it. Idolatry
was the sin of the day, just before Israel were carried captive into Babylon.
Now those of the Priests that went astray then, Ezekiel. 44.10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16.
even they say, God shall bear their iniquity. But the Priests, the Levites the
sons of Zadok that kept the charge of my Sanctuary, when the children of Israel
went astray from me, they shall come near unto me, to minister unto me, and
they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, says the
Lord God. They shall enter into my Sanctuary, and they shall come near to my
table to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

Great complaints have we now among professors, of deadness in duties,
barrenenss of the ministry, and of the withdrawing of God from his people; But
I can tell you a cause of all this, namely, the sin of the day is got into the
Church of God, and has defiled that holy place. This is the ground and cause of
all these things: nor is it like to be otherwise, till the cause shall be
removed. If any should ask me what are the sins of our day. I would say they
are conspicuous, they are open, Isa. 3.9.
they are declared as Sodoms were. They that have embraced them, are not
ashamed of them: Yea, they have got the boldness to plead for them, and to
count them their enemies that seek to reform them. All tables are full of Vomit
and filthiness. And for Pride and Covetousness for loathing of the Gospel, and
contemning holiness, as these have covered the face of the Nation: so they have
infected most of them, that now name the name of Christ.

And I say again, when you find out a professor that is not horribly tainted
with some of these things, (I exclude not the Ministers nor their families) let
him be as a Beacon upon an Hill, or as an Insign in our Land. But say one,
would you have us singular? and says another would you have u^ make our selves
ridiculous? and says a third, such and such more Godly Wise than we, do so. But
I answer, if God has made you singular, and called you to grace, that is
singular; and bid you wa^k in ways that are singular, and diverse from the ways
of all others. Yea, if to depart from iniquity will make you ridiculous, if to
be holy in all manner of conversation will make you ridiculous, then be
contented to be counted so. As for the Godly-wise you speak of, let them
manifest themselves to be such by departing from iniquity. I am sure that their
being tainted with sins of the day, will not prove them godly-wise. Behold, I
have taught you, said Moses, Statutes and Judgments, even as the Lord my God
commanded me; that ye should do so in the Land whither ye go to possess it.
Keep therefore, and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in
the sight of the Nations, which shall hear of all these Statutes, and say,
surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people. Here then is
wisdom, and this is that that manifests a people to be understanding, and
godly-wise, even the keeping of the commandments of God. And why, follow the
apish fashions of the world; has the God o^ wisdom set them on foot among us?
or is it because the Devil and wicked men (the inventors of these vain toys)
have outwitted the law of God? What Nation is there so great, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7,
8.
who has God so nigh unto them as his people have, and as he is in all things
that we call upon him for? and what Nation is there so great, that has
Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as all this law, said Moses, which I set
before you this day. This then is that which declares us to be godlywise, when
we keep our soul diligently to the holy words of God: and sit not only our
tongues and lips, but also our lives thereto.

Fourthly, But again, let them that name the name of Christ depart from the
iniquity, that is, Answ. 4.
as I may call it, from family-iniquity. There is an house-iniquity; an
iniquity that loves not to walk abroad, but to harbor within doors. This the
holy man David was aware of, therefore he said that he would behave himself
wisely, in a perfect way; yea, says he, Psalm. 101.^.2.
I will walk within my house, with a perfect heart.

Now this house-iniquity stands in these things.

1. In Dom^stick broyls and quarrels.

2. In Domestic Chambrings, and wantonness.

3. In Domestic misorders of Children and Servants.

First, For house broils and quarrels, it is an iniquity to be departed from,
whether it be betwixt Husband and Wife, or otherwise. This, as I said, is an
iniquity that loves not to walk abroad, but yet it is an horrible plague within
doors. And many that show like Saints abroad, yet act the part of Devils when
they are at home, by giving way to this house iniquity; by cherishing of this
house-iniquity. This iniquity meets the man and his wife at the very
threshold of the door, and will not suffer them to enter, no not with one foot
into the house in peace, but how far this is from walking together as heirs of
the grace of life, is easy to be determined. Ephe^ 5.21* ^2 23, 24.^5, 26, 27,
28. 1 ^et. 3.7.
Men should carry it in love to their wives, as Christ does to his Church; and
wives should carry it to their husbands, as the Church ought to carry it to her
Savior: and until each relation be managed with respect to these things: this
house-iniquity will be cherished there. O! God sees within doors as well as
without, and will judge too for the iniquity of the house as well as for that
more open.

2 dly, As house-iniquity stands in domestic broyls, and Contentions: So it
also stands in Chambrings and wantonness. To. 13.13.
Wherefore the Apostle puteth them both together, saying, not in chambring and
wanness, not in strife and envy. This chambring and wantonness is of a more
genneral extent, being entertained by all, insomuch that sometimes from the
head to the foot all are horribly guilty. But, it is a shame to speak of those
things that are done of some in secret: Ephesians. 5.12.
For through the lusts of their own hearts, Romans 1.24, 27.
they dishonor their own bodies between themselves, working that which is
unseemly, to their ignominy and contempt; if not with their fellows, yet with
God, who sees them; Psalm. 139.12.
for the darkness hides not from him. It was for this kind of iniquity with
other, that God told Ely that he would judge his house for ever: 1 Samuel 3.13.
also the words that follow are to be trembled at, Verse. 14.
that say, The iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever. Such an evil thing is house-iniquity in the eyes of the God
that is above.

Thirdly, As domestic iniquity stands in these, so also in the disorders of
children and servants. Childrens unlawful carriages to their Parents, is a
great house- iniquity, yea, and a common one too. 2. Tim. 3.2, 3.
Disobedience to Parents is one of the sins of the last days. O! It Is horrible
to behold how irreverently, how irrespectively, how sawcily and malapertly,
children, yea, professing children, at this day, carry it to their Parents;
Snapping, and checking, curbing and rebuking of them, as if they had never
received their beings by them, or had never been beholding to them for bringing
of them up: yea as if the relation was lost, or as if they had received a
dispensation from God to dishonor, and disobey Parents.

I will add that this sin reigns in little and great, for not only the small
and young, but men are disobedient to their Parents; and indeed, this is the
sin with a shame, that men shall be disobedient to Parents; the sin of the last
times, that men shall be disobedient to Parents, and without natural affection.
Where now adays shall we see children that are come to men and women's estate,
carry it as by the word they are bound. to their aged and wornout P^rents? I
say, where is the honor they should put upon them? who speaks to their aged
Parents with that due regard to that relalation, to their age, to their wornout
condition, as becomes them? Is it not common now adays for Parents to be
brought into bondage, and servitude by their children? For Parents to be under,
and children above; for Parents to be debased, and children to Lord it over
them. Nor does this sin go alone in the families, where it is: no, those men
are lovers of their own selves, Covetous Boasters, proud, Blaspheemers, 2 Timothy
3.2.
that are disobedient to their Parents. Isa. 3.4, 5.
This is that the Prophet means, when he says, the child shall behave himself
proudly aginst the ancient; and the base against the honorable. This is a
common sin, and a crying sin, and to their shame be it spoken that are guilty;
a sin that makes men vile to an high degree, and yet it is the sin of
professors. But behold how the Apostle brands them: he says, such have but a
form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5.
and deny the power thereof, and bids the godly shut them out of their
fellowship. This sin also is, I fear, grown to such a hight in some, as to make
them weary of their Parents, and of doing their duty to them. Yea, I wish that
some are not murderers of Fathers and Mothers, by their thoughts, while they
secretly long after, and desire their death; that the inheritance may be
theirs, 1 Timothy 1.9.
and that they may be delivered from obedience to their Parents. This is a sin
in the house, in the family, a sin that is kept in hugger mugger, close; but
God sees it, and has declared his dislike against it, Ephesians 5.1, 2, 3.
by an implicit threatening, to cut them off that are guilty of it. Let them
then that name the name of Christ, depart from this iniquity.

Disorders of Servants, is also an house-iniquity, and to be departed from by
the godly. Psalm. 101.7. 2 Chro. 9.4.
He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house, said David; and he
that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. One of the rarities in Solomon's
house, and which the Queen of Sheba was so taken with, was the goodly order of
his Servants.

Some of the disorders of Servants are to be imputed to the Governors of
families, and some to the Servants themselves. Those that are to be i^puted to
the Governors of Families are such as these.

1. When the Servant learns his vileness of his Master, or of her Mistress.

2. When Servants are countenanced by the Master against the Mistress; or by
the Mistress against the Master: or when in opposition to either, they shall be
made equals in things.

3. When the extravagancies of Servants are not discountenanced, and rebuked by
their superiors, and the contrary taught them by word and life.

Those to be imputed to the Servants themselves are.

1. Their want of reverence to their superiors.

2. Their backbiting and slandring of them.

3. Their unfaithfulness, in serving of them.

4. Their murmuring at their lawful commands, etc.

From all these Domestic iniquities let every one depart that religiously
names the name of Christ. And before I leave this head, let me, to enforce my
exhortation, urge upon you a few considerations to work with you, yet further
to depart from these house-iniquities.

First, A man's house, and his carriage there does more be speak the nature and
temper of his mind, than all public profession. If I were to judge of a man
for my life, I would not judge of him by his open profession, but by his
Domestic behaviors. Open profession is like a man's best Cloak, the which is
worn by him, when he walks abroad, and with many is made but little use of at
home. But now what a man is at home, that he is indeed. There is abroad, my
House, my Closet, my heart; and my House my Closet show most what I am: though
not to the world, yet to my family, and to Angels. And a good report from those
most near, and most capable of advantage to judge, is like to be truer than to
have it only from that which is gotten by my observers abroad. The outside of
the Platter, Mat. 23.25, 26, 27, 28.
and Cup may look well, when within they may be full of excess: The outward
show and profession may be tolerable: When, within doors may be bad enough.
Jos. 24.15.
I and my house will s^rve the Lord, is the character of a godly man.

Secondly, As the best judgment is made upon a man from his house: so that man
is like to have the approbation of God for good, that is faithful in all his
house. I know Abraham, says God, Genesis 18.17, 18.19.
that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord. To make religion, and the power of godliness the
chief of my designs at home, among those, among whom God by a special hand has
placed me, is that which is pleasing to God, and that obtains a good report
of him. But to pass these, and to come to other things.

1. A Master of a family, and Mistress of the same, are those that are
entrusted of God, with those under their tuition and care to be brought up for
him; be they children or servants. This is plain from the Text last mentioned:
wherefore here is a charge committed to thee of God: look to it, and consider
with thy self, whether thou have done such duty and service for God in this
matter, as, setting common frailties aside, thou can with good Conscience
lift up thy face unto God: The which to be sure, thou can by no means do, if
iniquity, to the utmost, be not banished out of thy house.

2. And will it not be a sad complaint that thy servant shall take up against
thee, before the Judge at the last day, that he learnt the way to destruction
in thy house, who art a professor. Servants though themselves be carnal, expect
when they come into the house of professors, that there they shall see religion
in its spangling colors; but behold, when he enters thy door, he finds sin and
wickedness there. There is pride instead of humility, and height and raillery
instead of meekness and holiness of mind. He looked for an house full of
Virtue, and behold, nothing but Spiders-webbs. Fair and plausible abroad, but
like the Sow in the Mire at home. Bless me, says such a servant, are these the
religious people! Are these the servants of God, where iniquity is made so much
of, and is so high^y entertained! And now is his ^eart filled with prejudice
against all religion, or else he turns ^ypocrite like his master and his
mistress, wearing, as they, a cloak of religion to cover all, abroad, while all
naked and shameful at home. But perhaps thy heart is so h^^d, and thy mind so
united to the pleasing of thy vile affections, that thou will say, what care I
for my servant. I took him to do my work, not to train him up in religion.
Well, suppose the soul of thy servant be thus little worth in thine eyes: Yet
what will thou say for thy children, who behold all thy ways, and are as
capable of drinking up the poison of thy footsteps, as the Swine is of drinking
up swill: I say, what will thou do for them? Children will learn to be naught
of Parents, of professing Parents soonest of all: They will be tempted to think
all that they do is right. I say, what will thou say to this? Or art thou like
the Ostrich, whom God has deprived of wisdom and has hardened her heart against
her Young? Job 39.13.14, 15, 16.
will it please thee when thou shall see that thou have brought forth Children
to the murderer? or when thou shall hear them cry, I learnt to go on in the
paths of sin by the carriages of professing Parents. If it was counted, of old,
Hos. 9.13.
a sad thing for a man to bring forth children to the Sword, as Ephraim did:
What will it be for a man to bring up children for Hell, and damnation? But,

Fifthly Let those that name the name of Christ, Answ. 5.
depart from the iniquity of their Closet. This may be called part of the
iniquity of the house: But because it is not public, but as a retired part,
therefore I put it here by it self. There are are many Closet sins that
professors may be guilty of, and from which they have need to depart: as,

First, There is the pride of a library, that is, the study or Closet, and I
doubt this sin and iniquity to this day is with many great professors: and in
my judgment it is thus manifested.

1. When men secretly please themselves to think it is known what a stock of
Books they have; or when they take more pleasure in the number of, than the
matter contained in their books.

2. When they buy books rather to make up a number, than to learn to be good
and godly men thereby.

3. When, though they own their books to be good and godly, yet they will not
conform thereto.

This is an iniquity now on foot in this Land, and ought to be departed from.
It Is better to have no books, and depart from iniquity, than to have a
thousand, and not to be bettered in my soul thereby.

Secondly, There is an iniquity that attends the Closet, which I may call by
the name of vacancy. When men have a Closet to talk of, not to pray in; a
Closet to look upon, not to bow before God in; a Closet to lay up Gold in, but
not to mourn in for the sins of my life. A Closet, that could it speak, would
say, my owner is seldom here upon his knees before the God of Heaven: seldom
here humbling himself, for the iniquity of his heart, or or to thank God for
the mercies of his life.

Thirdly, Then also a man is guilty of Closet-iniquity, when though he does not
utterly live in the neglect of duty, he formally, carnally, and without
reverence and godly fear performs it. Also when he asks God for that which he
cannot abide should be given him, or when he prays for that in his Closet,
that he cannot abide in his house, nor his life.

Fourthly, Then also a man is guilty of Closet-iniquity, when he desires that
the sound of the devotion he does there, may be heard by them without in the
house; the street, or of those that dwell by. Mat. 6.6, 7.
For a Closet is only for the man, and God, to do things in secretly.

These things let the professor beware of, lest he add to his iniquity, sin;
until he, and it comes to be loathsome. The Closet is by God appointed for men
to wait upon him in, and to do it without hypocrisy. To wait there for his
mind, and his will, and also for grace to perform it. And how can a man that
went last time out of his Closet to be naught, have the face to come thither
again? If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer; and
if so, then he will not meet me in my Closet; and if so, then I shall quickly
be weary thereof, being left to my self, and the vanity of my mind.

It is a great thing to be a Closet-Christian, and to hold it: he must be a
Close-Christian, that will be a Closet-Christian. When I say, a
Close-Christian, I mean one that is so in the hidden part, and that also walks
with God. Many there be that profess Christ, who do oftener (in London)
frequent the Coffee-house than their Closet; and that sooner in a morning run
to make bargains, than to pray unto God, and begin the day with him. But for
thee, who professest the name of Christ, do thou depart from all these things;
do thou make conscience of reading, and practicing, do thou follow after
righteousness; do thou make conscience of beginning the day with God: for he
that begins it not with him, will hardly end it with him. He that runs from God
in the morning, will hardly find him at the close of the day: Nor will he that
begin^ with the world and the vanities thereof, in the first place, be very
capable of walking with God all the day after. It Is he that finds God in his
Closet, that will carry the savor of him into his house, his shop, and his
more open conversation: when Moses had been with God in the Mount, Exo. 34.
his face shone; he brought of that glory into the Camp.

Sixthly, I add again, Answ. 6.
let those that name the name of Christ, depart from the iniquity that cleav^th
to opinions. This is a sad age ^or that; let opinions, in themselves, be never
so good, never ^o necessary, never so innocent, ^et there are spirits in the
world that will entail iniquity to them, and will make the vanity so
inseparable with the opinion, that it is almost impossible with some to take in
the opinion and leave out the iniquity, that by craft and subtilty of Satan, is
joined thereto. Nor is this a thing new, and of yesterday. It has been thus
almost in all ages of the Church of God, and that not only in things small, and
indifferent, but in things fundamental, and most substantial. I need instance
in none other for proof hereof, but the doctrine of faith, and holiness. If
faith be preached as that which is absolutely necessary to Justification; then
faith-fantastical, and looseness and remisness in life (with some) are joined
therewith. If holiness of life be preached, as necessary to salvation, then
faith is undervalued, and set below its place; and works as to justification
with God set up and made copartners with Christ^ merits in the remission of
sins. Thu^ iniquity joyneth it self with the great and most substantials of the
Gospel, and it is hard to receive an^ good opinion, Ephesians. 5.12, 13.
what ever, but iniquity will join it self thereto Wicked spirits do not only
tempt men to transgress the moral law, but do present themselves in heavenly
things, working there, and laboring in them, to wrest the judgment, and turn
the understanding and conscience awry in those high and most important things.
Wherefore, I say, we must be the more watchful, and careful lest we be abused
in our notions and best principles, by the iniquities that join themselves
thereto.

It Is strange to see at this day, how, notwithstanding all the threatenings of
God, men are wedded to their own opinions, beyond what the law of grace and
love will admit. Here Is a Presbyter, here is an Independent, an Anabaptist, so
joined each man to his own opinion, that they cannot have that communion one
with another, as by the testament of the Lord Jesus, they are commanded and
enjoined. What is the cause? Is the Truth? No! God is ^he author of no
confusion in the Church of God. 1 Cor. 14.33.
It is then because every man makes too much of his own opinion, abounds too
much in his own sense, and takes not care to separate his opinion from the
iniquity that cleaves thereto. That this confusion is in the Church of Christ,
I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, and I of Christ, is too manifest. But
what unbecoming language is this for the Children of the same Father, members
of the same body, and heirs of the same glory to be accustomed to? whether it
is Pride, or Hypocrisy, or Ignorance, or Self, or the Devil, or the Jesuit,
or all these jointly working with the Church, that makes and maintains these
names of distinction. This distance, and want of love, this contempt of one
another, these base and undervaluing thoughts of brethren, will be better seen,
to the shame and confusion of some, in the Judgment.

In the mean time, I advise thee with whom I am at this time concerned, to take
heed of this mixture, this sinful mixture of trut^ and iniquity together. And
to help thee in this thing: keep thine eye much upon thine own base self,
labor also to be sensible of the imperf^ctions that cleave to thy best
performances, be clothed with humility, and prefer thy brother before thy self:
and know that Christianity lies not in small matters, neither before God, nor
understanding men. And it would be well if those that so stickle by their
private and unscriptural notions (which only is iniquity cleaving to truth): I
say it would be well if such were more sound in faith, and morals, and i^ by
their lives they gave better conviction to the world, that the truth and grace
of Christ is in them.

Sometimes, so much iniquity is mixed with good opinions that it prevails, not
only to hurt men in this world, but to drown them in misery everlasting. 'Twas
good that the J^ws did own and allow the ceremonies of the law, but since the
iniquity that joined it self thereto, did prevail with them to make those
ceremonies copartners with Christ in those matters that pertained to Christ
alone: therefore they perished in them. The Galatians also with many of the
Corinthians had like to have been overthrown by these things. Take heed
therefore of that iniquity that seeks to steal, with the truth, into thy
heart, thy judgment and understanding.

Nor does one iniquity come without another, they are linked together, and come
by companies, and therefore usually they that are superstitious in one thing,
are corrupted in several other. The more a man stands upon his points to
justify himself, and to condemn his holy brethren: the more danger he is in of
being overcome of diverse evils. And it is the wisdom of God to let it be so,
that flesh might not glory in his presence. His soul, that is lifted up; Hab.
2.4.
to wit, with his good doings, with his order, and methods in religion, his
soul is not upright in him. I have often said in my heart, what is the reason
that some of the brethren should be so shy of holding communion, with those
every whit as good, if not better, than themselves? Is it because they think
themselves u^worthy of their holy fellowship? No verily: it is because they
exalt themselves, they are leavened with some iniquity that has mixed it self
with some good opinions that they hold, and therefore it is that they say to
others, stand by thy self, come not near me, Isa. 65.5.
for I am holier than thou: But what is the sentence of God concerning those?
Why, these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day. Wherefore,
as I said before, so I say now again, take heed of the iniquity that cleaves
to good opinions. The which thou will in no wise be able to shun, unless thou
be clothed with humility. But,

Seventhly, Let them that name the name of Christ, Answ. 7.
depart from Hypocrisies. This exhortation is as the first, general; for
hypocrisies are of that nature, that they spread themselves (as the leprosy of
the body) all over; not the faculties of the soul only, but all the duties of a
man. So that here is a great iniquity to be parted from, an over-spreading
iniquity. This sin will get into all thy profession, Mat. 23.15. Luke 20.19,
20. Ezekiel. 8.12. Mat. 26.20, 21. 2 Timothy 1.5. 2 Cor. 6.6. Mal. 2.23. Mat. 23.15.
Col. 2.23. Mat. 6.2. 1 Cor. 13.3. Luke 12.1.2.
into every whit of it, and will make the whole of it a loathsome stink in the
nostrils of God. Hypocrisy will be in the Pulpit, in Conference, in Closets,
in Communion of Saints, in Faith, in Love, in Repentance, in Zeal, in Humility,
in Alms, in the Prison, and in all duties. So that here is, for the keeping of
thy soul upright and sincere, more than ordinary diligence to be used.
Hypocrisy is one of the most abominable of iniquities. It is a sin that dares
it with God. It is a sin that says, God is ignorant, or that he delights in
iniquity. It is a sin that flattereth, that dissembleth, that offers to hold
God, as it were, fair in hand about that which is neither purposed nor
intended. It is also a sin that puts a man upon studying and contriving to
beguile, Hypocrisy a vile sin.
and deceive his Neighbor, as to the bent and intent of the heart, and also as
to the cause and end of actions. It is a sin that persuades a man to make a
show of Civility, Morality, or Christian religion as a cloak, a pretense, a
guise to deceive withal. It will make a man preach for a place, and praise,
rather than to glorify God and save souls; It will put a man upon talking that
he may be commended; It will make a man, when he is at prayer in his Closet,
strive to be heard without doors; It will make a man ask for that he desires
not, and show zeal in duties, when his heart is as cold, as senseless, and as
much without savor, as a clod: It will make a man pray to be seen and heard of
men, rather than to be heard of God. It will make a man strive to weep, when he
repents not, and to pretend much friendship, when he does not love. It will
make a man pretend to experience, and sanctification, when he has none; and to
faith and sincerity, when he knows not what they are. There is opposed to this
sin, simplicity, innocence, and godly sincerity, without which three graces,
thou will be an Hypocrite, let thy notions, thy knowledge, thy profession, and
commendations from others be what they will. Pro. 16.2. Pro. 21.2. Luke 16.15.
Helps against this sin there are many, some of which I shall now present thee
with.

1. Believe that Gods eye is always upon thy heart to observe all the ways, all
the turnings, and windings of it.

2. Believe that he observes all thy ways, and marks thy actions. The ways of
man are before the eyes of the Lord, Pro. 5.21.
and he pondereth all his goings.

3. Believe that there is a day of judgment a coming, and that then all things
shall be revealed and discovered as they are. Luke 12.2, 3.
For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid, that shall
not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, shall be heard
in light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear in Closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the house tops.

4. Believe that an Hypocrite, with the cunning and shrouds for his hypocrisy,
can go unseen no farther than the grave, nor can he longer flatter himself with
thoughts of life. Job 20.5, 6, 7, 8.
For the triumphing of the wicked is short, the joy of the Hypocrite but for a
moment. Though his exellency reach up to the heavens, and his head reaches
unto the clouds: yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung, they which
have seen him, shall say where is he? He shall fly away as a dream and not be
found; yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.

5. Believe that God will not spare an Hypocrite, in the judgment; Luke 20.47.
no nor punish him neither with ordinary damnation: but as they have here
sinned in a way by themselves, so there they shall receive greater damnation.

Of all sins, the sin of Hypocrisy bespeaks a man most in love with some lust,
because he dissembleth both with God and man to keep it.

For a conclusion upon this sevenfold answer to the question above propounded;
let me advise those that are tender of the name of Christ, to have regard to
these things.

First, Be well acquainted with the word, and with the general rules of
holiness; to wit, with the moral law, the want of this is a cause of much
unholiness of conversation. These licentious and evil times, wherein we live,
are full of iniquity, nor can we (though we never so much love God) do our duty
as we are enjoined, if we do not know it. The law is cast behind the back of
many, when it should be carried in the hand, and heart, that we might do it to
the end, the Gospel, which we profess, might be glorified in the world. Let
then the law be with thee to love it, and do it in the spirit of the Gospel,
that thou be not unfruitful in thy life. Let the law, I say, be with thee, not
as it comes from Moses, but from Christ; for though thou art set free from the
law, as a Covenant for life, yet thou still art under the law to Christ, and it
is to be received by thee, as out of his hand, to be a rule for thy
conversation in the world. 1 Cor. 9.18.
What then thou art about to do, do it or leave it undone as thou shall find it
approved, or forbidden by the law. And when ought shall come into thy mind to
be done, and thou art at a stand, and at a loss about the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness thereof, then betake thy self to the law of thy God, which is in
thy hand, and ask if this thing be good, or to be avoided.

If this were practiced by professors, there would not be so much iniquity
found in their Beds, their Houses, their Shops, and their conversations as
there is.

Secondly, As thou must be careful to find out the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of a thing before thou put forth thy hand thereto: so thou must also
consider again, whether that which is lawful is expedient. A thing may be
lawful in it self, and may yet be unlawful to thee, to wit; if there be an
inconveniency, or an inexpediency attending the doing of it. 1 Cor. 6.12. chap.
10.23.
All things are lawful for me, says the Apostle, but all things are not
expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. This then
thou must consider, and this also thou must practice.

But this is a hard lesson, and impossible to be done except thou art addicted
to self-denial. For this Text, and so the practice of what is contained
therein, has respect chiefly to another, to wit, to thy neighbor, and his
advantage and edification; and it supposes, yea, injoyneth thee, if thou will
depart from iniquity, to forbear also some things that are lawful, and
consequently profitable to thee, for the sake of, and of love to thy neighbor.
But how little of this is found among men? Where is the man that will forbear
some lawful things, for fear of hurting the weak thereby. Alas! how many are
there that this day profess, that will not forbear palpable wickedness: No,
though the salvation of their own souls are endangered thereby; and how then
should these forbear things that are lawful, even of godly tenderness to the
weakness of their neighbor?

Thus much have I thought good to speak, in answer to this question, what
iniquity should we depart from, that religiously name the name of Christ: and
now we will make some use of what has been spoken.

And the first shall be an use of examination. Art thou a professor? Use. 1.
Do thou religiously name the name of Christ? If so, I ask, do thou
according to the exhortation here, Depart from iniquity. I say, examine thy
self about this matter, and be thou faithful in this work: for the deceit in
this will fall upon thine one pate. Deceive thy self thou may, but beguile
God thou shall not. Be not deceived, Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked, for what a man sows, that shall he reap* Wherefore let no
man deceive himself, either in professing, while he lives viciously; or in
examining whether his profession of this name, and his life and conversation do
answer one another. What departing from iniquity is, I have already showed, in
the former part of this book: Wherefore I shall not here handle that point
farther, only press upon thee, the necessity of this exhortation, and the
danger of the not doing of it faithfully. The necessity of it is urged,

1. From the deceitfulness of man's heart, which will flatter him with promises
of peace and life, both now and hereafter, though he live in iniquity, while he
professes the name of Christ. For there are that say in their hearts, or that
have their hearts say unto them, I shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst.
And what will become of them that so do, you may see by that which follows in
the Text. The heart therefore is not to be trusted, for it will promise a man
peace in the way of death and damnation. I doubt not but many are under this
fearful judgment to this day. What means else their quietness of mind, their
peace and boasts of Heaven, and glory, though every step they take, as to life
and conversation, Jer. 17.9. Pro. 28.26.
is an apparent step to Hell and Damnation; these sayings, The heart is
deceitful: and, he that trusts his heart is a fool; were not written without a
cause. Let as many therefore as would examine themselves about this matter have
a jealous eye over their own heart, and take heed of being beguiled thereby:
let them mix hearty prayer with this matter, unto God, that he will help them
to be faithful to themselves, in this so great a matter, yea, let them compare
their lives with the holy Commandment, and judge by that rather than by the
fleshly fondness, that men naturally are apt to have for, and of their own
actions. For by the Verdict of the word, thou must stand and fall, both now, at
Death, and in the day of Judgment. Take heed therefore of thy Heart, Joh. 12.48.
thy carnal heart, when thou go into thy Life, to make a search for
iniquity. Take the word with thee, and by the word do thou examine thy self.

2. It is urged from the cunning of Satan. Would thou examine thy self
faithfully as to this thing, then take heed of the flatteries of the Devil: Can
he help it, thou shall never find out the iniquity of thy heels. He will labor
to blind thy mind, to harden thy heart, to put such virtuous names upon thy
foulest vices, that thou shall never, unless thou stoppest thine ear to him,
after a godly sort, truly examine and try thy ways, Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5.
according as thou art commanded. Wherefore take heed of him, for he will be
ready at thy side when thou go about this work. Now for thy help in this
matter, set God, the Holy God, the All-seeing God, the sin-revenging God,
before thine eyes; for our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29.
And believe that he has pitched his eyes upon thy heart, also that he
pondereth all thy goings, Pro. 5.21. chap. 21.2.
and that thy judgment, as to thy faithfulness, or unfaithfulness, in this
work, must proceed out of the mouth of God. This will be thy help in this
thing, that is, if thou usest it faithfully; also this will be thy hindrance,
if thou shall neglect it, and suffer thy self to be abused by the Devil.

3. It is urged from the dangerousness of the latter days. Would thou examine
thy self, then make not the lives of others any rule to thee in this matter.
It Is prophesied long ago, by Christ and by Paul, Mat. 24.12. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6.7, 8.
concerning the latter times, that iniquity shall abound, and be very high
among professors. Therefore it will be a rare thing to find an exemplary life
among professors. Wherefore cease from man, and learn of the word, try thy self
by the word, receive conviction from the word; and to take off thy self from
taking of incouragemnt from others, set the judgment before thine eyes, and
that account that God will demand of thee then; and know that it will be but a
poor excuse of thee to say, Lord such an one does so, did so, would do so: and
they professed, etc. Whether thou will hear me, or not, I know not, Prove. 9.12.
yet this I know, If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self: but if thou
scornest, thou alone shall bear it.

Let me then, to press this use farther upon thee, show thee in a few
particulars, the danger of not doing of it, that is of not departing from
iniquity, since thou professest.

First, The iniquity that cleaves to men that profess, if they cast it not
away, but countenance it, will all prove Nettles and Briars to them: And I will
assure thee, yea, thou know, that Nettles and Thorns will sting and scratch
but ill-favouredly. I went, says Solomon, Pro. 24.30, 31.
by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of
understanding. And lo, it was all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had
covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.

Suppose a man were, after work all day, to be turned into a bed of Nettles at
night: or after a man had been about such a business, should be rewarded with
chastisements of Briars and Thorns: this would for work be but little help,
relief, or comfort to him; why this is the reward of a wicked man, of a wicked
professor, from God; Nettles and Thorns are to cover over the face of his
Vineyard, his Field, his Profession, and that at the last of all; for this
covering over the face of his Vineyard, with Nettles and Thorns, is to show
what fruit the slovenly, slothful, careless, professor will reap out of his
profession, when reaping time shall come.

Nor can he whose Vineyard, whose profession is covered over with these Nettles
and Thorns of iniquity, escape being afflicted with them in his conscience: For
look as they cover the face of his Vineyard through his sloth now, so will they
cover the face of his conscience, in the day of judgment. For profession and
conscience cannot be separated long: If a man then shall make profession
without conscience of Gods honor in his conversation, his profession and
conscience will meet in the day of his visitation. Nor will he, whose condition
this shall be, be able to ward off the guilt, and sting of a slothful and bad
conversation, from covering the face of his conscience, by retaining in his
profession the name of Jesus Christ: For naming, and professing of the name of
Christ, will, instead of salving such a conscience, put venom, sting, and
keenness into those Nettles, and Thorns, that then shall be spread over the
face of such consciences. This will be worse than was that cold wet cloth that
Hazael took and spread over the face of Benhadad, 2 King. 8.15.
that he died. This will sting worse, tear worse, torment worse, kill worse.
Therefore look to it.

2. Nor may men shift this danger by their own neglect of inquiring into the
truth of their separation from iniquity, for, that God himself will search
them. I search the reins and the heart, says he, to give unto every one of you
according to his ways. Revel. 2.23.


There are many that wear the name of Christ for a Cloak, and so make their
advantages by their iniquity; but Christ at death and judgment, will rent this
Cloak from off such shoulders, then shall they walk naked, yea, the shame of
their nakedness shall then appear. Now since no man can escape the search of
God, and so, not his judgment: it will be thy wisdom to search thine own ways,
and to prevent judgment by judging of thy self.

3. Christ will deny those to be his that do not depart from iniquity, though
they shall name his name among the rest of his people. Depart from me, says
he, Luke 13.25, 26, 27.
all you that departed not from iniquity. Yea, they that shall n^me his name
religiously, and not depart from iniquity, are denied by him all along.

1. He allows them not now to call him Lord. Luke 6.46.
And why call ye me Lord, Lord, says he, and do not the things which I say? He
cannot abide to be reputed the Lord of those that presume to profess his name,
Ezekiel. 2.39.
and do not depart from iniquity. The reason is, for that such do but profane
his name, and stave others off from falling in love with him and his ways. Romans
2.24. Jer. 44.26.
Hence he says again, Behold I have sworn by my great name, says the Lord,
that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah.

Psalm. 66.18.
2. He regards not their prayers. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear my prayer. And if so, then what ever thou have at the hand of
God, thou have it, not in mercy, but in judgment, and to work out farther thine
everlasting misery.

3. He will not regard their soul, but at the last day will cast it from him,
as a thing abhorred by him. As is evidently seen by that thirteenth of Luke,
but now noted in the margent.

Wherefore from these few hints, thou, whoever thou art, may well perceive
what an horrible thing it is to make a profession of the name of Christ, and
not to depart from iniquity. Therefore let me exhort thee again to examine thy
self, if thou have, and do, (since thou professest that name) depart from
iniquity.

And here I would distinguish, for there is two parts in iniquity, to wit, the
guilt, and filth. As for the guilt, that is contracted by inquity, I persuade
my self, no man who knows it, needs to be bid to desire to depart from that;
nay, I do believe that the worst Devil in Hell would depart from his guilt, if
he could, and might: but this is it, to wit, to depart from the sweet, the
pleasure, and profi^ of iniquity. There are that call evil good, iniquity good,
and that of professors too: this is that to be departed from, and these are
they that are exhorted to forsake it upon the pains and penalties before
threatened. Therefore, as I said, let such look to it, that they examine
themselves if they depart from iniquity. And come, now thou art going about
this work, let me help thee in this matter.

1. Ask thy heart, what evil do thou see in sin?

2. How sick art thou of sin?

3. What means do thou use to mortify thy sins?

4. How much have thou been grieved to see others break Gods Law, and to find
temptations in thy self to do it.

For the First, 1. There is a soul-polluting evil in iniquity,

2. There is a God provoking evil in iniquity.

3. There is a soul-damning evil in iniquity. And until thou come
experimentally to know these things, thou will have neither list, nor will, to
depart from iniquity.

For the Second. I mean not sick with guilt, for, so the damned in hell are
sick, but I mean sick of the filth, Numb. 11.14, 15. 1 Chro. 4.9, 10. Romans
7.24. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. Philip. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
and polluting nature of it. Thus was Moses sick of sin, thus Jabez was sick of
sin, and thus was Paul sick of sin.

For the Third. You know that those that are sensible of a sickness, will look
out after the means to be recovered; there is a means also for this disease,
and do thou know what that means is, and have thou indeed a desire to it?
Yea, could thou be willing even now to partake of the means that would help
thee to that means, that can cure thee of this disease? There are no means can
cure a man that is sick of sin, but glory; and the means to come by that is
Christ, and to go out of this world by the faith of him. There is no grace can
cure this disease; yea, grace does rather increase it: For the more grace any
man has, the more is he sick of sin; the greater an offense is iniquity to him.
So then, there is nothing can cure this disease but glory: but immortal glory.
And do thou desire this Medicine. 2 Cor. 54.
And does God testify that thy desire is true, not feigned. I know that there
are many things that do make some even wish to die: but the question is not
whether thou do wish to die: for death can cure many diseases: but is this
that that moves thee to desire to depart; to wit, that thou might be rid,
quite rid, and stripped of a body of death, because nothing on this side the
grave can rid thee and strip thee off it. And is hope, that this day is
approaching, a reviving cordial to thee? And does the hope of this strike
arrows into the heart of thy lusts, and draw off thy mind, and affections, yet
farther, from iniquity.

To the Fourth. How much have thou be^n grieved to see others break Gods Law,
and to find temptations in thy self to do it? I beheld the transgressors and
was grieved, Psalm. 119.158.
said David, because men kept not thy word. The same also had Paul, because of
that body of sin and death which was in him. Professor, I beseech thee be thou
serious about this thing, because it will be found, when Go^ comes to judge,
that those that profess Christ, and yet abide with their iniquity, are but
wooden, earthy professors, and none of the silver or golden ones: and to
consequently such as shall be Vessels, not to honor, but to dishonor; not to
glory, but to shame.

Use 2.
Secondly, My next shall be a use of terror. Has God commanded by the mouth of
his holy Apostles and Prophets, that those that name the name of Christ, should
depart from iniquity: Then what will become of those that rebel against his
word. Where the word of a King is* t^ere is power; and if the wrath of a King
be as the roaring of a Lion, what is, and what will be the wrath of God, when
with violence it falls upon the head of the wicked?

Sirs, I beseech you consider this, namely, that the man that professes the
name of Christ, and yet lives a wicked life, is the greatest enemy that God
has in the world, and consequently, one that God, in a way most eminent, will
set his face against. Hence he threatens such so hotly, saying, And the
destruction of the transgressors, Isa. 1.28. chap. 33.14.
and of the sinners shall be together; and that they that forsake the Lord
shall be consumed. But what sinners are these? why, the sinners in Zion, the
hypocrites in the Church. So again, The Lord shall purge out from among you the
Rebels, Ezekiel. 20.38. Amos 9.10.
and them that transgress against him. All the sinners of my people shall die
with the sword, which say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us. For
though such do think that by professing of the name of Christ, they shall
prevent their going down to hell, yet they shall go down thither, with those
that have lived openly wicked and profane: Jer. 9.26.
Egypt, and Judah, the circumcised with them that are not; for it is not a
profession of faith that can save them. Whom do thou pass in beauty, says
God? wherein art thou bettered by the profession, than the wicked? go down, and
be thou laid wi^h the uncircumcised. Ez^k. 32.19.


This in general: But more particularly, the wrath of God manifests it self
against such kind of professors.

In that the Gospel, and means of salvation shall not be effectual for their
salvation, but that it shall work rather quite contrary effects. It shall bring
forth, as I said, quite contrary effects. 2 Cor. 2.15.16.
As,

1. The preaching of the word shall be to such, the savor of death unto death,
and that is a fearful thing.

2. Yea Christ Jesus himself shall be so far off from being a Savor unto them,
Isa. 8.13.14, 15.
that he shall be a snare, a trap and a gin to catch them by the heel withal;
chap. 28.13.
That they may go and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

3. The Lord also will chose out such delusions for such, chap. 66.3, 4. Psalm.
125.5.
as will best suite with the workings of their flesh, as will effectually bring
them down, with the Bullocks and with the Bulls to the slaughter: yea, he will
lead such forth with the workers of iniquity.

4. Such, above all, lie open to the sin against the Holy Ghost, that
unpardonable sin, that must never be forgiven. For alas, it is not the poor
ignorant world, but the enlightened professor that commits the sin that
shall never be forgiven.

I say, it is one enlightened, Heb. 6.4. 1 John 5.16.
one that has tasted the good word of God, and something of the powers of the
world to come; it is one that was counted a brother, that was with us in our
profession: it is such an one that is in danger of committing of that most black
and bloody sin. But yet all and every one of those that are such, are not in
danger of this; but those among these that take pleasure in unrig^^eousness, 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12.
and that rather than the^ will lose that pleasure, will commit it
presumptously. Presumptuously, that is, against light, against convictions,
against warnings, against mercies. Or thus, a presumptuous sin is such an one
as is committe^ in the face of the command, in a desperate venturing to run the
hazard, or in a presuming upon the mercy of God, through Christ to be saved
notwithstanding: This is a leading sin to that which is unpardonable, and will
be found with such professors that do hanker after iniquity. I say, it is
designed by the Devil, and suff^red by the just judgment of God, to catch and
overthrow the loose and carnal Gospelers. And hence it is that David cries unto
God, that he would hold him back from these sort of sins. Cleanse thou me from
my s^cret faults, says he. And then adds, keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright,
Psalm. 19.12, 13.
and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.

If there were any dread of God, or of his word, in the hearts of the men of
this generation, the consideration of this one Text is enough to shake them in
pieces: I speak of those that name the name of Christ, but do not depart from
iniquity. But the word of God must be fulfilled; In the last days, iniquity
must abound; wherefore these days will be perilous and dangerous to professors.
Mat. 24.12. 2 Timothy 3.
In the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blaspheemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy. I do the oftener harp upon this Text at this time, Verse. 5.
because it is a prediction of what shall be in the latter days, to wit, what a
Sea and Deluge of iniquity, shall in the latter days overspread and drown
those that then shall have a form of godliness, and of Religion. So that this
day is more dangerous than were the days that have been before us. Now
iniquity, even immorality, shall with professors be in fashion, be pleaded for,
be loved and more esteemed, Verse. 3.
than holiness it self. Now godliness, and self-denial shall be little set by;
even those very men that have a form of godliness, hate the life, and power
thereof; yea, they shall despise them that are good. Now therefore Ministers
must not think that what they say of the Doctrine of self denial among
professors, will be much, if at all regarded. I say, regarded, so as to be
loved and put in practice by them that name the name of Christ. For the strong
hold that iniquity shall have of their affections, will cause that but little,
effectualness to this end will be found to attend the preaching of the word
unto them.

But what will these kind of men do, when God that is just, God that is holy,
and God that is strong to execute his word, shall call them to an account for
these things?

Quest.
Now some may say, But what shall we do to depart from iniq^ity?

Answ.
I answer, 1. Labor to see the odio^sness and unprofitableness thereof; which
thou may do by the true knowledge of the excellent nature of the holiness of
God: For until thou see a beauty in holiness, thou can not see odiousness
in sin and iniquity. Danger thou may see in sin before, but odiousness thou
can not.

2. Be much in the consideration of the Power, Justice, and Faithfulness of God
to revenge himself on the workers of iniquity.

3. Be much in the consideration of the greatness and worth of thy soul.

4. Be often asking of thy self, what true profit did I ever get by the
commission of any sin.

5. Bring thy last day often to thy bed side.

6. Be often thinking of the cries, and roarings of the damned in Hell.

7. Be often considering the lastingness of the torments of H^ll.

8. Be often thinking what would those that are now in Hell give, that they
might live their lives over again.

7. Consider often of the frailty of thy life, and that there is no repentance
to be found in the Grave, whither thou go.

10. Consider that Hell is a doleful place, and that the Devils are but
uncomfortable companions.

11. Again, Consider together with these, how the patience of God has been
abused by thee; yea, how all his Attributes have been despised by thee, who art
a professor, that does not depart from iniquity.

12. Moreover, I would ask with what face thou can look the Lord Jesus in the
face, whose name thou have profaned by thine iniquity?

13. Also; how thou will look on those that are truly godly, whose hearts thou
have grieved, while they have beheld the dirt and dung that has cloven to thee
and to thy prof^ssion.

14. But especially consider with thy self, how thou will bear, together with
thine ow^, the guilt of the damnation of ^th^rs. For as I have often said, a
p^o^essor, if he perishes, seldom perishes alone, but casts others down to
hell with himself: The reason is, because others, both weak professors, and
carnal men, are spectators, and observers of his ways. Yea, and will presume
also to follow him specially in evil courses, concluding that he is right. Rev.
12.4. Isa. 9.14, 15.
We read that the Tail of the Dragon, or that the Dragon by his Tail, did draw,
and cast down abundance of the Stars of heaven to the earth: The Tail. The
prophet that speaks lies, he is the Tail. The Prophet that speaks lies,
either by opinion or practice, he is the Tail, the Dragons Tail, Isa. 9.14.15.
the Serpentin Tail of the Devil. And so in his order, every professor that by
his iniquity draws both himself and others to hell, he is the Tail. The Tail,
says the holy ghost, draws them down: draws down even the Stars of heaven. But
whither does he draw them? The answer is, from Heaven, the throne of God; to
earth, the seat of the Dragon. For he is the God of this wo^ld. The professor
then that is dishonorable in his profession, he is the Tail. The ancient and
honorable, he is the Head; and the Prophet that speaks lies, he is the Tail.
Nor can Satan work such exploits by any, as he can by unrighteous professors.
These he uses in his hand, as the Giant uses his Club; he, as it were, drives
all before him with it. ('It Is said of Behemoth, that he moves his Tail like a
Cedar: Job 40.17.
Behemoth is a Type of the Devil, but behold how he handles his Tail, even as
if a man should swing about a Cedar. Rev. 9.
) This is spoken to show the hurtfulness of the Tail: as it is also said in
another place. Better no professor than a wicked professor: better open
profane, than a hypocritical namer of the name of Christ: And less hurt shall
such an one do to his own soul, to the poor ignorant world, to the name of
Christ, and to the Church of God.

Let professors therefore take heed to themselves, that they join to their
naming of the name of Christ, an holy and godly conversation: for away they
must go else with the workers of iniquity to the pit, with more guilt, and
bigger load, and more torment by far than others. But,

Thirdly, Use 3.
My next word shall be to those that desire to be tru^, sincere professors of
the name of Christ.

First, Do you bless God, for that he has put not only his name into your lips,
Mark 9.49.
but grace into your hearts, that thereby that prof^ssion which thou make of
him, may be seasoned with that salt; Every sacrifice shall be seasoned with
salt. Now naming of the name of Christ is a sacrifice, and a sacrifice
acceptable, when the salt of the Covenant of thy God is not lacking, Heb.
13.15. Levit. 2.13.
but mixed there with. Therefore I say, since God has put his name into thy
mouth to profess the same, and grace into thy heart to season that profession
with such carriage, such behavior, such life, and such conversation as does
become the same: thou have great cause to thank God. A man into whose mouth God
has put the name of Christ to profess it, is as a man that is to act his part
upon a stage in the Marketplace; if he does it well, he brings praise both to
his Master and himself: but if he does it ill, both are brought into contempt.
No greater praise can by man be brought to God, than by joining to the
profession of the name of Christ a fruitful life and conversation. Joh. 15.8.
Herein, says Christ, is my my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so
shall ye be my Desciples. Fruitful lives God expects of all that profess the
name of Christ. And, let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. Bless God therefore if he has kept thee from blotting, and
blemishing of thy profession; if thy conversation has not been stained with the
blots and evils of the times. What thou feel, fightest with, and groanest
under by reason of the working of thine inward corruptions, with that I meddle
not, nor is thy conversation the worse for that, if thou keep them from
breaking out. Thou also shall be counted holy unto God through Christ, if thou
be of an upright conversation: though plagued every day with the working of
thine own corruption.

As Gods grace is the salt of Saints, so Saints are the salt of God. Mat. 5.13.
The one is the salt of God in the heart, and the other is the salt of God in
the world. Ye are the Salt of the earth: that is, the salt of God in the earth.
For the earth would be wholly corrupt, and would altogether stink, if
professors were not in it: But now if the professor, which is the salt, shall
inde^d lose his savor, and has nothing in his conversation, to season that
part of the earth, in which God has placed him, where with shall it be
seasoned? The place where he dwells, as well as his profession, will both stink
odiously, in the nostrils of the Lord: And so both come to ruin and desolation.

Indeed, as I have showed, the professor will come to the worst of it: for that
God does deny further to give him salt. Luke 14.35.
If the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? wherewith shall
the salt be salted? with nothing. Therefore it is thenceforth good for nothing:
No, not for the Dunghill, but to be cas^ out, and trodden under foot of men. He
tha^ has ears to hear, let him hear.

How much therefore, is the tender hearted, and he that labors to beautify
his prof^ssion with a Gospel conversation, bound to bless God for the salt of
his grace, by the which his heart is seasoned, and from his heart, his
conversation.

Secondly, As such Christians should bless God, so let them watch, let them
still watch, let them still watch and pray, watch against Satan, and pray yet
for more grace, that they may yet more and more beautify their profession of
the worthy name of Christ, with a suitable conversation. Blessed is he that
watches and keeps his garment; that is, his conversation clean, nor is their
any thing, save the overthrowing of our Faith, that Satan seeks more ^o
destroy. He knows holiness in them that rightly, as to doctrine, name the name
of Christ, is a maul and destruction to his Kingdom, an allurement to the
ignorant, and a cutting off those occasions to stumble, Levit. 19.14.
that by the dirty life of a professor is laid in the way of the blind. He
knows that holiness of lives, when they shine in those that profess the name of
Christ, does cut off his lies that he seeks to make the world believe; and
the slanders that he seeks to fasten upon the professors of the Gospel.
Wherefore as you have begun to glorify God in your body and in your spirit,
which are Gods: so I beseech you do it more and more.

Thirdly, To this end, 1 Timothy ^6.5. 2 Timothy 2.22.
shun those prof^ssors that are loose of life and conversation: From such
withdraw thy self, says Paul, and follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace
with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. If a man, if a good man
takes not good heed to himself, he shall soon bring his soul into a snare. Isa.
1.4.
Loose professors are defilers, and corrupters; a man shall get nothing but a
blot by having company with them. Besides, as a man shall get a blot by having
much to do with such; so, let him beware that his heart learn none of their
ways. Let thy company be the excellent in the earth; even those that are
excellent for knowledge and conversation. He that walks with wise men, shall
be wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.

Be content to be counted singular, for so thou shall, if thou shall follow
after righteousness, etc. in good earnest, for holiness is a rare thing now in
the world. I told thee before that it is foretold by the word, that in the last
days, perilous times shall come, and that men shall walk after their own
lusts, yea, professors, to their destruction. Nor will it be easy to keep thy
self therefrom. But even as when the Pestilence is come into a place, it
infecteth, and casts down the healthful: So the iniquity of the last times
will infect and pollute the godly. I mean the generality of them. Were but our
times duly compared with those that went before, we should see that which now
we are ignorant of. Did we but look back to the Puritans, but specially to
those that but a little before them, suffered for the word of God, in the
Marian days, we should see another life than is now among men, another manner
of conversation, than now is among professors. But I say, predictions and
prophecies must be fulfilled, and since the word says plainly, that in the last
days there shall come scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3, 17.
walking after their own lusts; and since the Christians shall be endangered
thereby, let us look to it, that we quit our selves like men, seeing we know
these things before; lest we being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from our own stedfastness.

Singularity in godliness, if it be in godliness, no man should be ashamed of.
For that is no more than to be more godly, than to walk more humbly with God
than others: and for my part, I had rather be a pattern, and example of piety:
I had rather that my life should be instructing to the Saints, and condemning
to the world, with Noah, and Lot; than to hazard my self among the multitude of
the drossie.

I know that many professors will fall short of Eternal life, and my judgment
tells me, that they will be of the slovenly sort of professors, that so do. And
for my part, I had rather run with the foremost and win the prize, 1 Cor. 9.24.
2 Timothy 2.4.5. Tit. 2.14.
than come behind, and lose that, and my labor and all. If a man also strive
for masteries, yet is he not crowned, ex^ept he strive lawfully. And when men
have said all they can, they are the truly redeemed, that are zealous of good
works.

Not that works do save us, but faith, which lays hold on Christ's
righteousness for justification, sanctifies the heart, and makes men desirous
to live in this world, to the glory of that Christ, who died in this world to
save us from death.

For my part I doubt of the faith of many, and fear that it will prove no
better at the day of God, than will the faith of Devils. For that it stands
in bare speculation, and is without life and soul to that which is good. Where
is the man that walks with his Cross upon his shoulder? Where is the man that
is zealous of moral holiness? Indeed, for those things that have nothing of the
Cross of the Purse, or of the Cross of the Belly, or of the Cross of the Back,
or of the Cross of the Vanity of household affairs; for those things I find we
have many, and those very busy sticklers: but otherwise, the Cross,
self-denial, charity, purity in life and conversation is almost quite out of
doors among professors. But man of God, do thou be singular as to these, Ephesians.
5.7.
and as to their conversation. Be not therefore partaker with them, in any of
their ways, but keep thy soul diligently; for if damage happens to thee,
thou alone must bear it.

But he that will depart from iniquity, must be well fortified with Faith, and
Patience, and the love of God, for iniquity has its beauty spots, and its
advantages attending on it: Zech. 5.7* 8.
hence it is compared to a Woman; for it allureth greatly. Wherefore, I say, he
that will depart therefrom had need have faith, that being it which will help
him to see beyond it, and that will show him more in things that are invisible,
2 Cor. 4.^^.
than can be found in sin, were it ten thousand times more intangling than it
is. He has need of patience also to hold out in this work of departing from
iniquity. For indeed to depart from that is to draw my mind off from that,
which will follow me with continual solicitations. Samson withstood his Dulilah
for a while, but she got the mastery of him at the last; why so? Because he
wanted patience, Judge. 16.15, 16, 17.
he grew angry and was vexed, and could withstand her solicitation no longer.
Many there be also that can well enough be contented to shut sin out of doors
for a while; but because sin has much fair speech, therefore it overcomes at
last. Pro. 7.21.
For sin and iniquity will not be easily said nay: Jer. 3.
It is like her of whom you read, she has a Whores forehead, and refuses to be
ashamed. Wherefore departing from iniquity is a work for length, as long as
life shall last. A work, did I say? it is a War; a continual combat: Wherefore
he that will adventure to set upon this work must needs be armed with Faith and
Patience, a daily exercise he will find himself put upon, Mat. 24.13. Revel.
3.10.
by the continual attempts of iniquity to be putting forth it self. This is
called an enduring to the end, a continuing in the word of Christ, and also a
keeping of the word of his patience. But what man in the world can do this,
whose heart is not seasoned with the love of God, and the love of Christ?
Therefore he that will exercise himself in this work, must be often considering
of the love of God to him in Christ: for the more sense, or apprehension a man
shall have of that, the more easy and pleasant will this work be to him. Yea,
though the doing thereof should cost him his hearts blood. Thy loving kindness
is before mine eyes (says David) and I have walked in thy truth. Psalm. 26.1, 2,
3.
Nothing like the sense, sight or belief of that, to the man of God, to make
him depart from iniquity.

Object.
But what shall I do, I cannot depart therefrom as I should?

Answ.
Keep thine eye upon all thy shortnesses, or upon all thy failures, for that is
profitable for thee.

1. The sight of this will make thee base in thine own eyes.

2. It will give thee occasion to see the need, and excellency of repentance.

3. It will put thee upon prayer to God for help, and pardon.

4. It will make thee weary of this world.

5. It will make grace to persevere the more desirable in thine eyes.

Also it will help thee in the things which follow.

1. It will make thee see the need of Christ's righteousness.

2. It will make thee see the need of Christ's intercession.

3. It will make thee see thy need of Christ's advocateship.

4. It will make thee see the riches of Gods patience.

5. And 'twill make Heaven and eternal life the sweeter to thee when thou
come there.

But to the question. Get more grace. For the more grace thou have, the further
is thine heart set off of iniquity, the more also set against it, and the
better able to depart from it, when it comes to thee, tempts thee, and
entreats thee for entertainment. Now the way to have more grace, is to have
more knowledge of Christ, and to pray more fervently in his name: also to
subject thy soul and thy lusts with all thy power to the authority of that
grace thou have, and to judge and condemn thy self most heartily before God,
for every secret inclination that thou find in thy flesh to sin-ward.

The improvement of what thou have, is that, as I may say, by which God judges
how thou would use, if thou had it, more; and according to that, so shall
thou have, or not have, a farther measure. He that is faithful in that which is
least, is faithful (and will be so) also in much, and he that is unjust in the
least, is (and will be) unjust also in much. I know Christ speaks here about
the unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.10, 11, 12.
but the same may be applied also unto the thing in hand.

And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who will
commit unto you that which is your own? That is a remarkable place to this
purpose in the Revelations. Behold, says he, I have set before thee an open
door (that thou may have what thou will, as was also said to the improving
Woman of Canaan) and no man can shut it: Revel. 3.8. Mat. 15.28
for thou have a little strength, and have held fast my word, and have not
denied my name.

A good improvement of what we have of the grace of God at present, pleases
God, and ingages him to give us more: but an ill improvement of what we at
present have, will not do so. Mat. 25.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
To him that has, (that has an heart to improve what he has) to him shall be
given; but to him that has not, from him shall be taken, even that which he
has. Well weigh the place and you shall find it so.

I know that to depart from iniquity so as is required, that is to the utmost
degree of the requirement, no man can; for it is a copy too fair for mortal
flesh exactly to imitate, while we are in this world. But with good Paper, good
Ink, and a good Pen, a skillful and willing man may go far. And it is well for
thee if thy complaint be sincere; to wit, that thou art troubled that thou
can not forsake iniquity, as thou should: for God accepts of thy design
and desire, and it is counted by him as thy kindness. Pro. 19.22.
But if thy complaint in this matter be true, thou will not rest, nor content
thy self in thy complaints, but wilt, (as he that is truly hungry, or greatly
burdened, uses all lawful means to satisfy his hunger, and to ease himself of
his burden) use all thy skill and power to mortify and keep them under by the
word of God. Nor can it otherwise be, but that such a man must be a growing
man. Every branch that bears fruit, Joh. 15.2.
he purges it, that it may br^ng forth more fruit. Suc^ a man shall not be a
stumbling in Religion, nor a scandal to i^, in his calling, but shall
(according to Gods ordinary way with his people) be a fruitful and flourishing
bough.

And I would to God this were the sickness of all them that profess in this
nation. For then should we soon have a new leaf turned over in most corners of
this Nation: Then would graciousness of heart, and life, and conversation be
more prized, more sought after, and better improved, and practiced, than it is.
Yea, then would the throats of ungodly men be better stopped, and their mouths
faster shut up, as to their reproaching of religion, than they are. A Christian
man must be the object of the envy of the world; but it is better, if the will
of God be so, 1 Pet. 2. and 3 chapters.
that we be reproached for well doing, than for evil. If we be reproached for
evil doing, it is our shame; but if for well doing, it is our glory. If we be
reproached for our sins, God cannot vindicate us; but if we be reproached for a
virtuous life, God himself is concerned, will espouse our quarrel, and in his
good time will show our foes our righteousness, and put them to shame and
silence. Briefly, A godly life annexed to faith in Christ, is so necessary that
a man that professes the name of Christ, is worse than a beast without it.

But thou will say unto me, Why do men profess the name of Christ, that love
not to depart from iniquity?

I answer, There are many reasons for it.

1. The preaching of the Gospel, and so, the publication of the name of Christ,
is musical and very taking to the children of men. A Savior! A Redeemer! A
loving sin-pardoning Jesus! What better words can come from man? What better
melody can be heard? Son of man, said God to the Prophet, Lo thou art to them
as a very lovely Song, Ezekiel. 33.32.
or as a Song of loves, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on
an instrument. The Gospel is a most melodious note, and sweet tune, to any that
are not prepossessed with slander, reproach and enmity against the professors
of it. Now its melodious notes being so sweet, no marvel, if it entangle some,
even of them (that yet will not depart from iniquity) to take up and profess so
lovely a profession. But,

2. There are a generation of men that are and have been frightened with the
law, and terrified with fears of perishing for their sins, but yet have not
grace to leave them. Now when the sound of the Gospel shall reach such men's
ears, because there is by that made public the willingness of Christ to die
for sin, and of God to forgive them for his sake; therefore they presently
receive and profess those notions, as the only ones that can rid them from
their frights and terrors, falsely resting themselves content with that faith
thereof, which stands in naked knowledge; yea, liking of that faith best,
that will stand with their pride, Covetousness, and leachery, never desiring to
hear of practical holiness, because it will disturb them: wherefore they
usually cast dirt at such, calling them legal preachers.

3. Here also is a design of Satan set on foot. For these carnal Gospellers,
are his Tares, the children of the wicked one. Those that he has sowed among
the wheat of purpose, if possible, that that might be rooted up by beholding
and learning to be vile and filthy of them. Mat. 13.36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.


4. Another cause hereof is this, the Hypocrites that begin to profess, find as
bad as themselves already in a profession of this worthy name: and, think they,
these do so, and so, and therefore so will I.

5. This comes to pass also through the righteous judgment of God, who through
the anger that he has conceived against some men for their sins, will lift them
up to Heaven, Mat. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
before he casts them down to Hell, that their fall may be the greater, and
their punishment the more intolerable. I have now done, when I have read to you
my Text over again; And let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity.

THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader is desired to take notice, that by the inconvenient distance of the
Author, some errors have crept into the foregoing sheets; which it is hoped the
judicious Reader will both discover and amend.


