Christian Behavior; OR THE Fruits of true Christianity. Showing the Ground
from whence they flow, in their Godlike order in the Duty of Relations, as
Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, etc. With a Word of
Direction to all Backsliders.

By John Bunyan, a Prisoner of Hope.

The Earth that drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed receives blessing from God:
But that which bears Briers and Thorns is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to
be burned, Heb. 6. 7, 8.

London, Printed for F. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving formerly writ some small matter, touching the Doctrine of Faith; as
Justification by Grace through the Faith of Christ's Blood, etc. I do here, as
the second to that Doctrine, present thee with a few lines, touching Good
Works, that I might, as at first I showed thee the Good and Glory of the one,
so now show thee the Beauty and Excellency of the other: For though we are
justified, Romans 3. 24, etc. freely by Grace through Christ before God; yet we
are justified before Men, Jam. 2. 18. by our Works: Nay, a life of Holiness
flowing from Faith in us that are saved by Grace, it does justify that Grace
before the World that justifies us before God, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 3. 2 Cor. 9. 12,
13, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.

I have not here only in general treated of this Doctrine of Good Works, but
particularly (after some discourse about Works flowing from Faith, and what
makes it truly and gospelly Good) I discourse of them as we stand under our
several relations in this World among men;

As first, The Duty of the Master of a Family: Of the Husband to his Wife; and
of hers to him: Of the Duty of Parents to their Children; and of Children to
their Parents: Of Masters also to their Servants; and of the Servant again to
his Master; with a brief touch upon Good Neighborhood; and a discovery of
Covetousness, Pride and Uncleanness, which are great Obstructions to a truly
Gospel-Conversation.

I know there are many that have treated of Good Works in large and learned
Discourses, but, I doubt, all have not so Gospelized their discourses as become
them, and as the Doctrine of the Grace of God calls for. However, I thoughtit
my duty to add this discourse to all that are past; and that for these Reasons.

First, to take away those Aspersions that the Adversaries cast upon our
Doctrine (Romans 3. 8. as also in the days of Paul) that because we preach
Justification without the Works of the Law; therefore they pretend we plead for
looseness of life, whose damnati^s just.

Secondly, Because though there be much discourse about Works in general; yet a
particular Discourse of them, as before is touched, is too much neglected, and
by this means every one too much left at uncertainties (as from them) of their
several works under their particular Relations, which I think is one reason of
that disorder in Families and Places, where God's People live, to their shame,
and the dishonor of their God.

Thirdly, Because these few Books that do particularly treat thus of Good
Works, are, I think, now so scarce, or so big, that but few have them, and few
buy them, if they may be had, especially our new Converts; for whose sakes
principally this short Discourse is intended: and indeed this is one reason of
my brevity, that the price might neither be burdensome, nor the reading long
and tedious: Multitude of words drown the Memory; and an Exhortation in few
words, may yet be so full, that the Reader may find that in the side of a
sheet, which some are forced to hunt for in a whole Quire, etc. The Lord teach
us this Wisdom.

Fourthly, I have written this Book, to show that I bear a fellow-Testimony and
Witness (with all that know God) of the Operation that Grace has, and will
have in the heart that has savingly received it.

Lastly, I have thus written, because it is amiable, and pleasant to God, when
Christians keep their Rank, Relation and Station, doing all as become their
Quality and Calling. When Christians stand every one in their places, and do
the work of their Relations, then they are like the flowers in the Garden, that
stand and grow where the Gardner has planted them, and then they shall both
honor the Garden in which they are planted, and the Gardner that has so
disposed of them: From the Hysop on the Wall, to the Cedar in Lebanon, their
Fruit is their glory. And seeing the stock into which we are planted, is the
fruitfullest stock; the sap conveyed thereout the fruitfullest sap, and the
dresser of our souls, the wisest Husbandman, John 15. 1. How contrary to
nature, to example, and expectation should we be, if we should not be rich in
Good Works.

Wherefore take heed of being painted fire, wherein is no warmth, and painted
flowers, which retain no smell, and of being painted trees, whereon i^ no
fruit. Whosoever boasts himself o^ a false gift, is like Clouds and Wind without
Rain, Prove. 25. 14.

Farewell* The Lord be with thy Spirit, tha^ thou may profit for time to
come. J. BUNYAN

Christian Behavior; OR, The Fruits of true Christianity.
Tit. 3. 7, 8. That being justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs
according to the hope of Eternal Life.

This is a faithful Saying; and these things I will that you affirm constantly,
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good Works.
These things are good and profitable unto men.


I Shall not at this time discourse of every Particular at large, included in
these words, but shall briefly fall upon those things that I judge most
necessary for the People of God: Neither shall I need to make any great
preamble to the words for their Explication, they themselves being plain, and
without tha^ ambiguity that calls for such a thing the general scop being
this, That the which have believed in God, should be care^ful to maintain Good
Works.

But yet, to prosecute what I inten^ with what clearness I may, I shall in
(...) word or two make way for what is to be the main of this Book.

[This is a Faithful Saying] This Which? Why that which goes before namely,
That being justified by Grace, w^ should be made Heirs according to the hop^ of
Eternal Life. This is a faithful saying and these things I will that thou
affirm con^stantly.

Why so?

Why, that they which have believed i^ God, might be careful to maintain Goo^
Works.

The meaning is, That the way to provoke others to Good Works, is constant^ly
(in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit) to show them the certainty of
their being by Grace made Heirs of Eternal Life.

From this Scripture therefore I do gather these things observable.

First, That Good Works do flow from Faith. Yea,

Secondly, That every one that believes should be careful that their Works be
Good.

Thirdly, That every Believer should not only be careful that their Works be
good, and for the present do them, but should also be careful to maintain them;
that is, They should carefully study to keep in a constant course of Good Works.

And lastly, That the best way to provoke both our selves and others to this
Work. It is to be often affirming to others, the Doctrine of Justification by
Grace, and to believe it our selves. This is a faithful Saying; and these
things I will, says Paul, that thou affirm constantly, that they who have
believed in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works.

I begin with the first.

That Good Works do flow from Faith.

This is evident diverse ways. First, from the impossibility of their flowing
from any other thing; they must either flow from Faith, or not at all: For
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. And again; without Faith it is impossible
to please Him, (Romans 14. 23. Heb. 11. 6.) Every man by nature, before Faith, is
an evil and a corrupt tree: And a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? (Mat. 7. 16, 17.) Now a
man is made good by Faith, and by that brings forth the Fruits that are
acceptable to God, (Heb. 11. 4. Col. 1. 4, 5, 6.) Wherefore sinners before
faith, are compared to the Wilderness, whose fruits are briers and thorns; and
whose hearts are the habitation of Dragons; that is, of Devils, (Isa. 35. 6, 7.
Heb. 6. 7, 8.) And hence again it is, that they are said to be Godless,
Christless, Spiritless, Faithless, Hopeless; without the Covenant of Grace;
without Strength; enemies in their minds by wicked works, and possessed by the
Spirit of wickedness, as a Castle by a Conqueror, Ephesians. 2. 12. Jude 19. 2
These. 3. 2. Col. 1. 21. Luke 11. 21.

Now these things being thus, it is impossible that all the men under heaven,
that are unconverted, should be able to bring forth one work rightly good; even
as impossible, as for all the Briers and Thrones under Heaven, to bring forth
one cluster of Grapes, or one bunch of Figs; for indeed they want the
qualification: A Thorn brings not forth Figs, because it wants the nature
of the Fig Tree; and so does the Bramble the nature of the Vine. Good Works
must come from a good heart.

Now, this the unbeliever wants, because he wants Faith; For it is that
which purifieth the heart (Luke 6. 45. Acts 15. 9.) Good Works must come from
love to the Lord Jesus; but this the unbeliever wants also; Because he
wants Faith: for Faith works by love, and by that means does good, as Gal.
5. 6.

And hence again it is, That though the carnal man does never so much which he
calls good, yet it is rejected, slighted, and turned as dirt in his face
again; his prayers are abominable, his plowing is sin, and all his
righteousness as menstruous rags (Prove. 15. 8. Prove. 21. 4. Isa. 60. 4.) Thus
you see, that without Faith there is no Good Works. Now then to show you that
they flow from Faith. And that,

For that Faith is a principle of Life by which a Christian lives (Gal. 2. 20,
21.) a principle of Motion by which it walks toward Heaven in the Way of
Holiness, (Romans 4. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 7.) It is also a principle of strength, by
which the soul opposes its lust, the Devil and this World, and over-comes
them; This is your victory, even your Faith, (1 John 5. 4, 5.) Faith in the
heart of a Christian, is like the Salt that was thrown into the corrupt
Fountain, that made the naughty waters good, and the Land fruitful (2 Kings 2.
19, 20, 21.) Faith, when it is wrought in the heart, it is like leaven hid in
the meal, Mat. 13. 33. or like perfume, that lights upon stinking leather,
turning the smell of the leather the savor of the perfume; it being the^
planted in the heart, and having its natural inclination to holiness. Hence it
i^ that there follows an alteration of the life and conversation, and so
brings forth fruit accordingly. A good man ou^ of the good treasure of his
heart, brings forth good fruit, Luke 6. 45. Which treasure, I say, is this
Faith (Jam. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 7.) And therefore it is, that Faith is called, The
Faith according to Godliness, and the most holy Faith, Tit. 1. 1. Jude 20.

2. Good Works must needs flow from Faith, or no way; Because, that alone
carries in it an argument sufficiently prevalent to win upon our natures, to
make them comply with holiness.

Faith shows us that God loves us, that he forgiveth us our sins, that he
counts us for his Children, having freely justified us through the Blood of
his Son, Romans 3. 24, 25. Romans 4. Heb. 11. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Faith receives the Promise, imbraceth it, and comfort the Soul unspeakably
with it. Faith is so great an Artist in arguing and reasoning with the soul,
that it will bring over the hardest heart that it has to deal with: It will
bring to my remembrance at once, both my vileness against God, and his goodness
toward me; it will show me, that though I deserve not to breath in the Air,
yet that God will have me an Heir of Glory.

Now, there is no argument greater than this: this will make a man run through
ten thousand difficulties to answer God (though it never can) for the Grace
that he has bestowed on it.

Further, Faith will show me how distinguishingly this Love of God has set it
self upon me: It will show me, that though Esan was Jacobs Brother, yet he
loved Jacob, Mal. 1. 2. that though there were thousands more besides me that
were as good as me, yet I must be the man that must be chosen.

Now this, I say, is a mavelous argument, and unspeakably prevails with the
sinner, as says the Apostle, For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we
th^^ judge, That if one dyed for all, then are all dead, and that he died for
all, that they which live (that is by Faith) should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but to Hi^^ that died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14. Love,
says the Wise man, is strong as Death; many waters cannot quench Love, neither
can the floods drown it* If a man would give all the substance of his house for
Love, it would be utterly contemned. Song. 8. 6, 7.

Oh! when the broken dying condemned sinner, can but see, by Faith, the Love of
a tenderhearted Savior; and also see what he underwent to deliver it from
under that Death, Guilt and Hell that now he feels and fears, which also it
knows it has most justly and highly deserved: Then bless the Lord, O my
soul; and what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits? Psalm. 103. 1,
2, 3. Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Thus is Faith a prevailing argument to the sinner, whereby he is fetched off
from what he was, and constrained to ^end and yield to what before it neither
would nor could, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8. ^.

And hence it is, that Gospel-obedience is called the Obedience of Faith, as
well as obedience to the Faith, (Romans 16. 26. For it must be by the Faith of
Christ in my heart, that I submit to the Word of Faith in the Bible, otherwise
^ll is to no profit, as says the Apostle* The Word preached did not profit
them, it not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it (Heb. 4. 2.) For
Faith alone can see the reality of what the Gospel says; and so I say, argue
over the heart to the embracing of it.

4. Faith is such a Grace, as will represent to the soul all things in their
proper colors: it does not (as does unbelief and ignorance) show us all things
out of order, putting darkness for light, and bitter for sweet, but will set
every thing in his proper place before our eyes, God and Christ shall be with
it, the chiefest good, the most lovely and amiable; a Heavenly Life shall be of
greater estee^ and more desirable, than all the tre^^sures of Egypt:
Righteousness and Sanct^^fication will be the thing after which (...) will most
vehemently press, because (...) sees not only Death and Damnation, (...) the
fruits of sin, but sin also in it sel^ distinct from the punishment belongin^
to it, a detestible, horrible, and odiou^ thing, Heb. 11. 25, 26, 27. Phil. 3.
7, 8, 9* 10, 11, 12. Romans 12. 9.

By Faith we see this World has n^ abiding in it for us, nor no satisfaction
if it were otherwise, Prove. 33. 5. Heb* 11. 15, 16. and 13. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 29,
30, 31* And hence it is, that the People of God have groaned to be gone from
hence, into a state that is both sinless, and temptationless: And hence it is
again, that they have run through so many Trials, Afflictions and Adversities,
even because of that Love to holiness of life, that Faith being in their hearts
did prompt them to by showing them the worth and durableness of that which was
good, and the irksomeness and evil of all things else* ^Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8. Heb. 11. 33, ^4, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

5. Faith lays hold of that which is ^ble to help the soul to bring forth
Good Works: It lays hold of, and ingageth ^e Strength of Christ, and by that
over^ometh that which oppresses. I can do ^ll things through Christ that
strengthen^th me, Phil. 4. 13.

In a word, A Life of Holiness and Godliness in this world, does so insepa^ably
follow a Principle of Faith, that (...) is both monstrous and ridiculous to
^uppose the contrary. What, shall not ^e that has life have motion? Gal. 2.
^0. He that has by Faith received the spirit of Holiness, shall not he be
Ho^y? Gal. 3. 2. And he that is called to Glory and Virtue, Shall not he add to
^is Faith Virtue? 2 Pet. 1. 4, 5. We are ^y Faith made good Trees, and shall
not ^e bring forth good Fruit? Luke 6. 43. They that believe are created in
Christ jesus unto Good ^orks; and God has, before the world was, ordained that
we should walk in them; and shall both our second Creation, and God's
fore-ordin^^tion be made frustrate? Ephesians. 1. 4. and (...) 10. Besides, the
Children of Faith (...) the Children of Light, and of the (...) 1 Timothy 5. 5.
Lights upon a Hill, and Ca^^dles on a Candle-stick, and shall not the shine?
They are the Salt of the Earth shall not they be seasoning? Mat. 5. 1^ 14.

The Believer is the alone Man, (...) whom God shows to the World the Power
of his Grace, the operation of h^ Peoples Faith, etc. The unbeliever^ read
indeed of the Power of Grace, (...) the Faith, Hope, Love, Joy, Peace, an^
Sanctification of the Heart of the Chri^stian, but they feel nothing of that
sin killing operation that is in these things these are to them as a story out
of Rom^ or Spain: Wherefore, to show them i^ others, what they find not in
themselves God works Faith, Hope, Love, etc. i^ a Generation that shall serve
him; an^ by them they shall see what they cannon find in themselves; and by
this mean^ they shall be convinced, that though sin^ and the pleasures of this
life, be sweet to them, yet there is a People otherwise-^^inded, even such a
People, that do in^eed see the Glory of that which others ^eade of, and from
that fight, take plea^ure in those things which they are most ^^verse unto. To
this, I say, are Christi^ns called; herein is God glorified; Hereby are sinners
convinced; and by ^his is the World condemned, 1 These. 4. ^. 1 Pet. 2. 12. and
3. 1. Heb. 11. 7.

Object. But if Faith does so naturally ^ause Good Works, what then is the
reason that God's People find it so hard a mat^er to be Faithful in Good Works?

I answer, First, God's People are ^ruitful in Good Works, according to the
pro^ortion of their Faith; if they be slender ^n Good Works, it is because they
are weak ^n Faith. Little faith is like small can^les, or a weak fire, which
though they shine, and have heat, yet but dim shining, and but small heat, when
compared with bigger Candles and greater Fire. The reason why Sardis had some
in it whose works were not perfect before God; (...) was because they did not
hold fast, b^ Faith, the Word that they had former (...) heard, and received,
Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, There may be a great mistak^ in our judging of our own fruitfulness^
the soul that indeed is candid, and righ^ at heart, is taught by Grace to judge
(...) self, though fruitful, yet barren upon two accounts; 1. When it compares
it life to the Mercy bestowed upon it: For when a Soul does indeed consider the
greatness and riches of the Mercy be^stowed upon it, then it must needs cr^
out, O wretched man that I am! Rom* 7. 24. for it sees it self wonderfully t^
fall short of a Conversation becomin^ one who has received so great a benefit*
2. It may also judge it self barren, because it falls so far short of that it
would attain unto; it cannot do the thing tha^ it would, Gal. 5. 17. 3. The
heart o^ a Christian is naturally very barren; up^on which, though the Seed of
Gra^ (that is the fruitfullest of all Seeds) b^^sowen, yet the heart is
naturally subjec^ to bring forth weeds, Mat. 15. 19.

Now, to have a good Crop from such ground, does argue the fruitfulness of the
Seed: wherefore I conclude upon these three things.

First, That the Seed of Faith is a very fruitful Seed, in that it will be
fruitful in so barren a soil.

Secondly, That Faith is not beholding to the heart, but the heart to it, for
all its fruitfulness.

Thirdly, That therefore the way to be a more fruitful Christian, it is to be
stronger in believing.

Now for the second thing, to wit, That every one that believes should be
careful that their Works be Good. This follows from what went just before; to
wit, That the heart of a Christian is a heart subject to bring forth weeds.

There is Flesh as ^ well as Spirit in the best of Saints: and as the Spirit*
of Grace will be always putting forth something that is good, so the Flesh
will be putting forth continually that which is evil.

For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit as the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal.
5. 17. Now, this considered, is the cause why you find so often in the
Scriptures so many items and cautions to the Christians to look to their lives
and conversations* As, Keep thy heart with all diligence, Prove* 4. 23. Watch
ye; stand fast in the Faith* quit you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13* Be
not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatever a man sows, that shall he reap*
for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption: but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.
7, 8.

All works are not good that seem to be so: It is one thing for a man's ways to
be right in his own eye; and another, for them to be right in God's. Often that
which is in high estimation with men, is abomination in the sight of God, Prove.
30. 12. Luke 16. 15.

Seeing Corruption is not yet out o^ our natures, there is a proneness in us t^
build upon the right foundation, Wood Hay and Stubble, instead of Gold and
Silver and precious Stones, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 13, 14, 15. How was both David the
King, Nathan the Prophet, and Vzza the Priest deceived, touching Good Works? 1 Chronicles. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10, 11. Peter also in both his defending
his Master in the Garden, and in diswading of him from his sufferings, though
both out of love and affection to his Master, was deceived touching Good Works,
Mat. 16. 22, 23. John 18. 9, 10.

Many have miscarried both as to Doctrine, Worship, and the prosecution of each.

1. For Doctrine. Christ tells the Jews, That they taught for the Doctrines of
God, the doctrines and traditions of men, Mat. 15. Mark 7. As also says the
Apostle* They teach things they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11.

2. Also, touching Worship, we find how frequently men have mistaken both for
time, place and matter with which they worshipped.

1. For time. It has been that which man has devised, not which God has
commanded, 1 Kings 12. 32. They change the Ordinances, says Isaiah, Isa. 24.
5. They change God's Judgments into wickedness, says Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 5. 6.

2. For place. When they should have worshipped at Jerusalem, they worshipped
at Bethel, at Gilgal, and Dan, in Gardens under Poplers and Elms, 1 Kings 12.
26, 27, 28, 29. Hos. 4. 13, 14, 15. Isa. 65. 2, 3, 4, 5.

3. For the matter with which they worshipped. Instead of bringing according to
the Commandment, they brought the lame, the torn, and the sick: they would
sanctify themselves in Gardens, with Swines-flesh and Mice, when they should
have done it at Jerusalem, with Bullucks and Lambs, Isa. 66. 17.

Again, Touching men's prosecuting their Zeal for their Worship, etc. that they
do think right: How hot has it been, though with no reason at all.
Nebuchadnezzar will have his Fiery-Furnace, and Darius his Lyons-Den for
Nonconformists, Dan. 3. 6. and 6. 7, etc.

Again, they have persecuted men even to strange Cities; have laid traps and
snares in every corner to entrap and to entangle their Words; and if they could
at any time but kill the Persons that dissented from them, they would think
they did God good service, Acts 26. 11. Luke 11. 53, 54. John. 16. 1, 2. But
what need we look so far from home, (were it not that I would seal my Sayings
with Truth) we need look no further to affirm this position, than to the
Papists and their Companions: How many have they in all ages hanged, burned,
starved, drowned, wracked, dismembered and murdered, both openly and in secret?
and all under a pretense of God, his Worship, and Good Works.

Thus you see how both Wise men and Fools, Saints and Sinners, Christians and
Heathens, have erred in the business of Good Works; Wherefore every one should
be careful to see that their works be good.

Now, then to prevent, if God will, miscarriage in this matter, I shall
propound unto you what it is for a Work to be rightly Good.

First, A Good Work must have, The Word for its authority.

Secondly, It must, as before was said, flow from Faith.

Thirdly, It must be, both rightly timed, and rightly placed.

Fourthly, It must be done, Willingly, cheerfully, etc.

1. It must have the Word for its authority.

Zeal without knowledge, is like a metled Horse without eyes, or like a sword
in a mad-man's hand: and there is no knowledge where there is not the Word; For
if they reject the Word of the Lord, and act not by that, What Wisdom is in
them? says the Prophet, Jer. 8. 9. Isa. 8. 20. Wherefore see thou have the
Word for what thou do.

2. As there must be the Word for the authorizing of what thou do, so there
must be Faith, from which it must flow, as I showed you before: For whatever is
not of faith is sin: and without faith, it is impossible to please God. Now I
say, without the Word there is no Faith; Romans 10. 17. As without Faith there is
no good, let men's pretenses be what they will.

3. As it must have these two aforementioned, so also it must have, first, right
Time, and secondly, right Place.

1. It must be rightly timed: Every work is not to be done at the same time,
every time not being convenient for such a work: There is a time for all
things; and every thing is beautiful in its time, Eccles. 31. 11. There is a
time to pray, a time to hear; a time to read, a time to confer; a time to
meditate; a time to do, and a time to suffer. Now, to be hearing when we should
be preaching, and doing, that is, yielding active obedience to that under which
we ought to suffer, is not good. Christ was very wary, that both his doings and
sufferings were rightly timed, John 2. 3, 4. and 13. 1, 2. and herein we ought
to follow his steps: To be at plow in the field, when I should be hearing the
Word, is not good; and to be talking abroad, when I should be instructing my
family at home, is as bad. Who so keeps the Commandment, shall feel no evil
thing: and a wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccles. 8. 5.
Good things mis-timed, are fruitless, unprofitable, and vain.

2. As things must have their right time, so they must be rightly placed; for
the misplacing of any work, is as bad as the mis-timing of it.

When I say, things, if good, must be rightly placed, I mean, we should not
give to any work more than the Word of God allows it; neither should we give
it less: Mint, Anise, and Cummin, are not so weighty matters, as Faith and the
Love of God, as in Mat. 23. 23. For a Pastor to be exercising the office of a
Deacon instead of the office of a Pastor, it is misplacing of works, Acts 6. 2.
For Martha to be making outward provision for Christ, when she should have sat
at his feet to hear his Word, was the mis-placing a work; and for her sister to
have done it at her request, (though the thing in it self was good) had been
her sin also, Luke 10. 39, 40, 41, 42.

Now, to prevent the misplacing of Good Works, observe,

First, They misplace them that set them in the room of Christ, Romans 10. 1, 2,
3.

Secondly, They also misplace them that make them copartners with Him, Romans 9.
31, 32. Acts 15. 1.

This is, setting up our posts by God's posts; and man's righteousness by the
righteousness of Christ, Ezekiel. 43. 7, 8. these are said to be teachers of the
Law, not knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1. 7.

Thirdly, They also misplace works, who ascribe to a work of less moment, that
honor that belongs to a work more noble: and such are, 1. Those who count
the ceremonial part of an Ordinance, as good as the doctrine and signification
of it.

2. Such who count the dictates and impulses of a mere natural conscience, as
good, as high, and divine, as the leadings and movings of the Spirit of Christ.

3. Those also who count it enough to do something of what God has commanded
(and that something, possibly the least instead of all, and the things more
necessary and weighty.

Fourthly, They also much misplac^ them, who count things indifferent, a^ high
as those that are absolutely necessary in the Worship of God.

5ly. But they grosser, who place men traditions above them.

6ly. And they greatest of all, who pu^ bitter for sweet, and darkness for
light. Al^ these things we must shun and avoid, a^ things absolutely obstructive
to Good Works*

Wherefore, touching Good Works; Obedience is better than Sacrifice; that is,
to do things according to the Word of God, is better than to do them according
to my fancy and conceit, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Wherefore let all things be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Again, as Good Works should be ordered and qualified as before is touched, so
they should be done from the heart, willingly, cheerfully, with simplicity and
charity, according to what a man has, 1 Joh^ 5. 3. 2 Cor. 9. 7. Romans 12. 8.
Col. 3. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 8. 12.

Further, There are three things that a man should have in his eye in every
work he does.

1. The honor of God, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

2. The edification of his Neighbor, 1 Cor. 14. 26.

3. The expediency or inexpediency of what I am to do, 1 Cor. 6. 12. And
always observe it, that the honor of God is wrapped up in the edification of
thy neighbor; and the edification of thy neighbor, in the expediency of what
thou do.

Again, if thou would walk to the edification of thy neighbor, and so to
God's honor, in the midst of thy observers; Beware, 1. That thou in thy words
and carriages, do so demean thy self, that Christ in his precious benefits
may be with clearness spoken forth by thee: and take heed, that thou do not
enter into doubtful points with them that are weak, Romans 15. 1. but deal
chiefly, lovingly, and wisely with their Consciences about those matters that
tend to their better establishment in the Faith of their Justification, and
deliverance from Death and Hell. Comfort the feeble-minded, confirm the weak, 1
These. 5. 14.

2. If thou be stronger than thy brother, take heed that thou do not that
before him, that may offend his weak conscience; I mean, things that in
themselves may be lawful: All that is lawful is not expedient; all that is
lawful edifieth not, 1 Cor. 6. 12. Wherefore here is thy wisdom and love, that
thou in some things deny thy self for thy brothers sake: 1 Cor. 8. 13. I will
not eat meat while the world stands, says Paul, lest I make my Brother to
offend. Wherefore have this Faith to thy self before God, Romans 14. 22. but if
thou walk otherwise, know, thou walk not charitably, and so not to
edification, and so not to Christ's honor, but do sin against Christ, and
wound thy weak brother, for whom Christ died, Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 12.

But I say, all this while keep thy eye upon the Word; take heed of going
contrary to that under any pretense what^ver; for without the Word, there is
nothing to God's glory, nor thy brothers edification. Wherefore, walk wisely in
a perfect way, Psalm. 101. 2, 3.

Having thus, in few words, showed you what are works rightly Good, I beseech
you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you put your selves into a
conscientious performance of them, that you may, while you live here, be
Vessels of Honor, and fit for the Masters use, and prepared to every Good
Work, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Study to approve things that are excellent, that you may be
sincere, and without offense, until the Day of Christ, Phil. 1. 10. Covet
communion with God; covet earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Ah! we that
are redeemed from among men, Rev. 14. 4. and that rejoice in hope of the Glory
of God, Romans 5. 2. we that look, I say, for the blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2. 13. What
manner of persons should we be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? 2 Pet.
3. 11.

To conclude; For your further edific^tion, take a plain rehearsal of your
sev^ral general Duties and Works, to whi^^ God ingageth you in his Word,
accor^ing to your places, callings, and relat^ons in this World.

Touching the Master of a Family.
If thou have under thee a Family then thou art to consider the several
re^lations thou stand under; and art t^ know, that thou in each of them
hast^ work to do for God; and that he expect^eth thy faithful Deportment under
eve^ry one of them. As,

First then in general, He that is the Master of a Family, he has, as under
that relation, a work to do for God; t^ wit, The right governing of his own
Fa^mily; and his work is twofold.

1. Touching the spiritual State there^of.

2. Touching the outward.

As touching the spiritual State of hi^ Family; He ought to be very diligen^
and circumspect, doing his utmost endeavor, both to increase Faith where it is
begun, and to begin it where it is not.

Wherefore to this end, he ought diligently and frequently to lay before his
household such things of God, out of his Word, as are suitable for each
particular: and let no man question his Rule in the Word of God for such a
practice; for if the thing it self were but of good report, and a thing tending
to civil-honesty, it is within the compass and bounds even of nature it self,
and ought to be done, much more things of a higher nature: Besides, the Apostle
exhorts us to, Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are true, just,
and of good report, to think of them, that is, to be mindful to do them, Phil.
4. 8. But to be conversant in this Godly Exercise in our Family, is very worthy
of praise, and does much become all Christians. This is one of the things for
which God so highly commended his Servant Abraham, and that with which his
heart was so much affected: I know Abraham, says God, (I know him to be a good
man in very deed) for he wi^^ command his Children and his Household af^ter him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. This was a thing als^
which good Joshua designed should b^ his practice as long as he had a breathin^
time in this world: As for me, says he and my household, we will serve the Lord
Josh. 24. 15.

Further. We find also in the New Testament, that they are looked upon a^
Christians of an inferior rank that have not a due regard to this Duty, yea, so
inferior, as not fit to be chosen to any office in the Church of God. A Pastor
mus^ be one that rules well his own house, having his Children in subjection
with all gravity For if a man knows not how to rule his own house, how shall
he take care of the Church of God? The Deacon also, says he, mus^ be the
husband of one wife; ruling their Children and their own house well, 1 Timothy 3.
Mark a little, the Apostle seems to lay down thus much, that a man that
govern^^ his family well, has one qualification belonging to a Pastor or
Deacon in the House of God (For he that knows not ^ow to rule his own house,
how shall he take ^are of the Church of God?) which thing considered, it gives
us light into the work of the Master of a Family, touch^ng the governing of his
house.

1. Then a Pastor must be sound and ^ncorrupt in his Doctrine: and indeed ^o
must the Master of a Family, Tit. 1. 9. Ephesians. 6. 4.

2. A Pastor should be apt to teach, to reprove, and to exhort: and so should
the Master of a Family, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.

3. A Pastor must himself be exemplary in Faith and Holiness: and so also
should the Master of a Family, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4. and 4. 12.

I, says David, will behave my self in a perfect way; I will walk in (or
before) my house in a perfect way, Psalm. 101. 2.

4. The Pastor is for getting the Church together, and when they are so come
together, then to pray among them, and to preach unto them: this is also
commendable in Christian Masters of Families.

Object. But my Family is ungodly (...) unruly, touching all that is good, What
sh^^ I do?

Answ. I answer, first, Though this^ true, yet thou must rule them, and n^ they
thee: Thou art set over them God, and thou art to use the authori^^ which God
has given thee, both to r^buke their vice, and to show them the evil of their
rebelling against the Lord This did Eli, though not enough; an^ thus did David,
1 Samuel 2. 24, 25. 1 Chro^^ 28. 9.

Also, thou must tell them how sad the state was when thou wast in their
cond^tion, and so labor to recover them o^ of the snare of the Devil, Mark. 5.
19^

2. Thou ought also tolabour (...) draw them forth to God's public
Wor^ship, if peradventure God may conver^ their souls. Says Jacob to his
houshol^ and to all that were about him, Let us ari^ and go to Bethel, and I
will make there a^ Altar to God, that answered me in the d^ of my distress,
Genesis 35. 3.

Hannah would carry Samuel to Sh^^^ that he might abide with God for ever, Sam.
1. 22. Indeed a soul rightly touch^d, will labor to draw, not only their
^amilies, but a whole City after Jesus christ, John 4. 28, 29.

3. If they are obstinate and will not ^o forth with thee, then do thou get
god^^ and sound Men to thy house, and there ^et the Word of God be preached,
when ^hou have, as Cornelius, gathered thy Fami^y and Friends together, Acts 10.

You know that the Jayler, Lydia, Cris^us, Gaius, Stephanus, and others, had
not ^nly themselves, but their Families made ^racious by the Word ^reached, and
that ^ome of them, if not all, by the Word preached in their houses, Acts. 16.
14, ^5, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Acts ^8. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 16. And this,
for ought ^ know, might be one reason among ma^y, why the Apostles taught in
their day, ^ot only publicly, but from house to ^ouse. I say, that they might,
if possible, ^ring in those in some family, which yet ^emained unconverted and
in their sins, Acts 5. 24. and 20. 20, 21, for some you know, how usual it was
in the day^ Christ, to invite Him to their houses, they had any afflicted, that
either wou^^ not or could not come to him; Luke^ 2, 3. and 8. 41.

If this be the way with those that have outward diseases in their Families,
ho^^ much more then where there is souls th^^ have need of Christ to save them
from Death and eternal Damnation?

4. Take heed that thou do not negle^^ family Duties among them thy self as
reading the Word, and Prayer; (...) thou have one in thy Family that is
gr^cious, take encouragement; nay, if tho^ art alone, yet know thou have both
liber^ty to go to God through Christ; and al^^ art at that time in a capacity of
having the universal Church join with thee, for the whole number of those that
shall be save^.

5. Take heed that thou suffer not an^ ungodly, profane, or heretical Books o^
Discourse in thy house: Evil Communi^cation corrupts good Manners, 1 Cor. 15^
33. I mean, such profane, or heretica^ Books, etc. as either tend to provoke
t^ ^^osness of life, or such as do oppose the ^^ndamentals of the Gospel.

I know, that Christians must be allow^d their liberty as to things
indifferent; ^ut for those things that strike at either ^aith or Holiness, they
ought to be a^andoned by all Christians, and especi^^ly by the Pastors of
Churches, and Ma^ers of Families: which practice was ^gured out by Jacobs
commanding his ^use, and all that was with him, to put away ^e strange gods
from among them, and to ^ange their garments, Genesis 35. 1, 2.

Also those in the Acts set a good ex^mple for this, who took their curious
^ooks and burned them before all men, ^^ough they was worth five thousand
pie^es of Silver, Acts 19. 18, 19.

The neglect of this fourth particular ^ath occasioned ruin in many Families,
^oth among Children and Servants. It (...) easier for vain talkers, and their
deceive^le works, to subvert whole households, than ^any are aware of, Tit. 1.
10, 11.

Thus much touching the spiritual State (...) thy Household.

And now to its outward.

Touching the outward state of thy ^^mily, thou art to consider these the
things;

First, That it lies upon thee to c^^^ for them that they have a convenie^^
livelihood. If any man provide not for (...) own, and especially for those of
his own hou^^ he has denied the Faith, and is worse the an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.
8. But mark, wh^^ the Word says, thou art to provide (...) thy house, it
gives thee no license (...) distracting carefulness, neither does (...) allow
thee to strive to grasp the World (...) thy heart or Coffers, nor to take care
f^^ years or days to come, but so to pr^^vide for them, that they may have
fo^^ and raiment; and if either they or tho^ be not content with that, you
lanch o^ beyond the Rule of God, 1 Timothy 6. (...) Mat. 6. 34. This is to labor,
that you (...) have wherewith to maintain good Works (...) necessary uses, Tit.
3. 14.

And never object, that unless you rea^ further it will never do, for that is
(...) unbelief. The Word says, That G^^ ^^edeth Ravens, cares for Sparrows,
and loatheth the Grass; in which three, to feed, loath, and care for, is as
much as heart an wish, Luke. 12. 6, 24, 27, 28.

Secondly, Therefore though thou should ^rovide for thy Family, yet let all
thy ^abour be mixed with moderation. Let our moderation be known to all men,
Phil. ^. 5. Take heed of driving so hard after his World, as to hinder thy self
and fa^ily from those Duties toward God, which thou art by Grace obliged to;
as ^rivate Prayer, reading the Scriptures, and Christian Conference. It is a
base thing for men so to spend themselves, and ^amilies after this World, as
that they ^isingage their hearts to God's Worship. (...) Christians. The time
is short: It remain^th then, that they that have Wives be as those that have
none; and they that weep, (...) though they wept not; and they that re^yce, as
though they rejoiced not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it; for
^^e fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. ^^. 29, 30, 31.

Many Christians live, and do, in this world, as if Religion were but a
by-bi^ness, and this World the one thing nece^sary; when indeed all the things
of (...) world are but things by the by; and R^^ligion only the one thing
needful, Luk^ 10. 40, 41. 42.

Thirdly, If thou would be such a M^ster of a Family as becomes thee, the
must see that there be that Christi^ Harmony among those under thee, as b^comes
that house where one rules the fears God. 1. Thou must look that t^ Children
and Servants be under subject^ on to the Word of God: for though it of God only
to rule the heart, yet he e^^pecteth that thou should rule their ou^ ward
man; which if thou do not, he m^ in short time cut off all, of thy stock,
that p^^seth against the wall, 1 Samuel 3. 11, 12, 1^ 14. See therefore that thou
keep the temperate in all things, in Apparel, (...) Language, that they be not
Glutteno^ nor Drunkards; not suffering either t^^ Children vainly to domineer
over t^^ Servants, nor they again to carry the^^selves foolishly toward each
other.

2. Learn to distinguish between that injury that in thy Family is done to
thee, and that which is done to God: and though thou ought to be very
zealous for the Lord, and to bear nothing that is open transgression to Him,
yet here will be thy wisdom to pass by personal injuries, and to bury them in
oblivion. Love covers the multitude of sins. Be not then like those that will
rage and stare like madmen when they are injured; and yet either laugh, or at
least not soberly rebuke, and warn, when God is dishonored.

Rule thy own house well, having thy Children (with others in thy Family) in
subjection with all gravity, 1 Timothy 3. 4.

Solomon was so excellent (sometimes) this way, that he made the eyes of his
beholders to dazzle, 2 Chronicles. 9. 3, 4.

But to break off from this general and to come to particulars.

First, Have thou a Wife? thou mu^^ consider how thou ought to behave the
self under that relation: And to do this ^ right, thou must consider the
condition (...) thy wife, whether she be one that indee^ believes, or not: ^
she believes, The Duty of Husbands to believing Wives.
The^ First, Thou art eng^^ged to bless God for her, For her price is far above
Rubies, an^ she is the Gift of God unto thee, and is f^^ thy adorning and
glory, Prove. 12. 4. Prov^ 31. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 7. Favor is decei^ful, and beauty
is vain; but a Woman the fears the Lord, she shall be praised, Prov^ 31. 30.

Secondly, Thou ought to love he under a double consideration; 1. As she is
thy flesh and thy bone (For ^ev^^ [Man] yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5^ 29.)
2. As she is together with thee a^ heir of the Grace of Life, 1 Pet. 3. ^ This
I say, should engage thee to lov^ her with Christian Love; to love her as
believing you both are dearly belov^ of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, an^ as
those that must be together with him in Eternal happiness.

Thirdly, Thou ought so to carry thy self to, and before her, as does
Christ, to, and before his Church; as says the Apostle, So ought men to love
their wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians.
5. 25. When husbands behave themselves like husbands indeed, then will they be
not only husbands, but such an Ordinance of God to the wife, as will preach to
her the carriage of Christ to his Spouse. There is a sweet scent wrapped up in
the relations of husbands and wives (Ephesians. 5. 32.) that believe. The wife, I
say, signifying the Church, and the husband the head and savior thereof;
Ephesians. 5. 23. For the husband is the head of the wife, even a Christ is the
head of the Church; and He is the Savior of the body.

This is one of God's chief ends in instituting Marriage, that Christ and his
Church, under a figure, might be wherever there is a couple that believe
through Grace.

Wherefore that husband that carries it undiscreetly toward his wife, he does
not only behave himself contrary to the Rule, but also makes his Wife lose the
benefit of such an Ordinance, and crosses the mystery of this Relation.
Therefore, I say, So ought men to love their Wives as their own bodies: He that
loves his Wife, loves himself; for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, Christ laid out his life for his Church; covers
her infirmities; communicates to her his Wisdom, protecteth her, and helps he
in her employments in this world: and so ought men to do for their Wives.
even as the Lord the Church, Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.

Solomon, and Pharaoh's Daughter, had the art of thus doing, as you may see in
the Book of Canticles.

Wherefore bear with their weaknesses, help their infirmities, and honor them
as the weaker vessels, and as being of a frailer constitution, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

In a word, be such a Husband to thy believing Wife, that she may say, God has
not only given me a husband, but such a Husband, as preaches to me every day
the Carriage of Christ to his Church.

2. If thy Wife be unbelieving or carnal, The duty of Husbands to unbelieving
Wives.
then thou have also a duty lying before thee, which thou art engaged to
perform under a double engagement. 1. For that she lies liable every moment to
eternal Damnation. 2. That she is thy Wife that is in this evil case.

Oh! how little sense of the worth of Souls is there in the hearts of some
Husbands, as is manifest by their unchristian carriage, to, and before their
Wives.

Now, to qualify thee for a Carriage suitable,

1. Labor seriously after a sense of her miserable state, that thy bowels may
yearn toward her soul.

2. Beware that she take no occasion from any unseemly carriage of thine, to
proceed in evil; and here thou have need to double thy diligence, for she lies
in thy bosom, and therefore is capable of espying the least miscarriage in
thee.

3. If she behave her self unseemly and unruly, as she is subject to do, being
Christless and Graceless, then labor thou to overcome her Evil with thy
Goodness, her Frowardness with thy Patience and Meekness: it is a shame for
thee who have an other principle, to do as she.

4. Take fit opportunities to convince her; observe her disposition, and when
she is most likely to bear, then speak to her very heart.

5. When thou speak, speak to purpose; it is no matter for many words,
provided they be pertinent. Job in a few words answers his Wife, and takes her
off from her foolish talking; Thou speak, says he, like one of the foolish
women; shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive
evil? Job 2. 10.

6. Let all be done without rancor, or the least appearance of anger; With
meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if peradventure they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

And how know thou, O man, but thou may save thy Wife, 1 Cor. 7. 16.

Touching Parents.
IF thou art a Parent, a Father or a Mother, then thou art to consider thy
Calling under this Relation.

Thy Children have souls, and they must be begotten of God as well as of thee,
or they perish.

And know also, that unless thou be very circumspect in thy behavior, to, and
before them, they may perish through thee: the thoughts of which should provoke
thee, both to instruct, and also to correct them.

1. To instruct them as the Scripture says, and to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord; and to do this diligently when thou sit
in thy house, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, Ephesians. 6. 4. Deuteronomy.
6. 7.

Now to do this to purpose.

First, Do it in terms and words, easy to be understood: affect not high
expressions, they will drown your Children. Thus God spoke to his Children, and
Paul to his, Hos. 12. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 2.

Secondly, Take heed of filling their heads with Whimzies, and unprofitable
Notions; for this will sooner learn them to be malepert and proud, than sober
and humble. Open therefore to them the state of man by nature: discourse with
them of Sin, of Death, and Hell; of a crucified Savior, and the Promise of
Life through Faith. Train up a Child in the Way he should go; and when he is
old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 22. 6.

Thirdly, There must be much Gentleness and Patience in all thy instructions,
lest they be discouraged, Col. 3. 21.

And fourthly, Labor to convince them by a Conversation answerable, that the
things of which thou instructest them, are not febles, but Realities, yea, and
Realities so far above what can be here enjoyed, that all things, were they a
thousand times better than they are, are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory and Worthyness of these things.

Isaac was so holy before his Children, that when Jacob remembered God, he
remembered that he was the fear of his Father Isaac. Genesis 31. 53.

Ah! when Children can think of their Parents, and bless God for that
instruction and good they have received from them, this is not only profitable
for Children, but honorable and comfortable to Parents. The Father of the
Righteous shall greatly rejoice; and he that begets a wise Child, shall have
joy of him, Prove. 23. 24, 25.

Touching Correction.
First, See if fair words will win them from evil: This is God's way with his
Children, Jer. 25. 4, 5.

Secondly, Let those words you speak to them in your reproof, be both sober,
few, and pertinent, adding always some suitable sentence of the Scripture
therewith; as if they lie, then such as Rev. 21. 8. 27. If they refuse to hear
the Word, such as 2 Chronicles. 25. 14, 15, 16.

Thirdly, Look to them that they b^ not companions with those that are rud^ and
ungodly, showing with soberness a continual dislike of their naughtiness, often
crying out to them, as God did of old unto his; Oh! do not this abominable
thing that I hate, Jer. 44. 4.

Fourthly, Let all this be mixed with such love, pity, and compunction of
Spirit, that if possible, they may be convinced, you dislike not their persons
but their sins. This is God's way, Psalm. 99. 8.

Fifthly, Be often endeavoring to fasten on their Consciences the day of their
Death and Judgment to come. Thus also God deals with his, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

Sixthly, If thou art driven to the Rod, then, 1. Strike advisedly in cool
blood; and soberly show them, 1. Their fault; 2. How much it is against thy
heart thus do deal with them; 3. And that what thou do, thou do it in
conscience to God, and love to their Souls; 4. And tell them, that if fair
means would have done, none of this severi^y should have been: This, I have
proved it, will be a means to afflict their hearts as well as their bodies; and
it being the way that God deals with his, it is the most likely to accomplish
its end.

Seventhly, Follow all this with prayer to God for them, and leave the issue to
Him.

Folly is bound up in the heart of a Child; but the Rod of Correction will
fetch it out, Prove. 22. 15.

Lastly, Observe these Cautions.

1. Take heed that the mis-deeds for which thou corectest thy Children be not
learned them by thee. Many Children learn that wickedness of their Parents, for
which they beat and chastise them.

2. Take heed thou smile not upon them to encourage them in small faults, lest
that thy carriage to them, be an encouragement to them to commit greater.

3. Take heed thou use not unsavory and unseemly words in thy chastising of
them, as railing, mis-calling, and the like; this is devilish.

4. Take heed thou do not use them to many chiding words and threatenings, mixed
with lightness and laughter; this will harden: Speak not much, nor often, but
pertinent to them with all gravity.

Of Masters to Servants.
MAsters also have a work to do as they stand related to their Servants.

And first, If possible they can, to get them that fear God. He that works
deceit, says David, shall not dwell within my House; and he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101. 7.

Secondly, But if none at the present but unbelievers can be got to do thy
labor; Then,

1. Know that it is thy duty so to behave thy self to thy Servant, that thy
service may not only be for thy good, but for the good of thy Servant, and that
both in body and soul: Wherefore deal with him, as to admonition, as with thy
Children; give him the same Bread of God thou give to them; and who knows,
but that if thou with spiritual Dilicates bring up thy Servant, but he may
become thy spiritual Son in the end, Prove. 29. 21.

2. Take heed thou do not turn thy Servants into slaves by over-charging them
in thy work, through thy greediness. To make men serve with rigor, is more like
to Isreal's enemies than Christian Masters, Exodus 1. 14.

3. Take heed thou carry not thy self to thy Servant, as he of whom it is said,
he is such a Son of Belial, that his Servants could not speak to him; 1 Samuel
25. 14, 15, 16, 17.

And the Apostle bids you forbear, to threaten them, because you also have a
Master in Heaven, Ephesians. 6. 9. as who should say, your Servants cannot be
guilty of so many miscariages against you, as you are guilty of against Christ:
wherefore do wi^h, and to your Servants, as you would have your Master do with
you.

4. Take heed that thou neither circumvent him at his coming into thy service,
^o^ at his going out.

1. Servants at their going into service, may be beguised two ways.

First, By their Masters lying unto them, saying, their work is so small, and
so easy, when it is indeed, if not too burdensome, yet far beyond what at
first was said of it. This is beguiling of them.

Secondly, The other way is, when Masters greedily seek to wier-draw their
Servants to such wages, as indeed is too little and inconsiderable for such
work and labor. Both these the Apostle opposes, where he says, Masters give
unto your Servants that which is just, just labor, and just wages, knowing
that you also have a Master in Heaven, Col. 4. 1.

2. As Servants may be circumvented at their coming into their labor, so also
they may be at their going out. Which (...) done by Masters that either change
^^eir wages, like heathenish Laban, Gen, 31. 7. or by keeping it back, like
thos^ against whom God will be a swift Wit^ess, Mal. 3. 5.

3. Take heed that thou make not a gain of thy place because thou art gracious,
or live conveniently for the means of Grace.

Servants that are truly godly, they care not how cheap they serve their
Masters, provided they may get into godly Families, or where they may be
convenient for the Word. But now, if a Master or Mistress should take this
opportunity to make a prey of their Servant, this is abominable; this is making
a gain of Godliness, and merchandise of the things of God (1 Timothy 6. 5.) and of
the soul of thy Brother.

I have heard some poor Servants say, That in some carnal families, they have
had more liberty to God's things, and more fairness of dealing, than among
Professors. But this stinketh: and as Jacob said concerning the cruelty of his
two Sons, so may I say of such Masters, they make Religion stink before the
inhabitants of the Land, Genesis 34. 30.

In a word, learn of the Lord Jesus to carry your selves well to your Servants,
that your Servants also may learn something of the kindness of Christ by your
deportment to them: Servants are g^ers as well as comers; take heed that thou
give them no occasion to scandal the Gospel when they are gone, for what they
observed thee unrighteously to do when they were with thee.

Then Masters carry it rightly toward their Servants, when they labor both in
word and life to convince them, that the things of God are the One thing
necessary.

That which Servants are commanded to do, touching their fear, their singleness
of heart, their doing what they d^ as to the Lord, and not to men; the Master
is commanded to do the same things unto them, Ephesians. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.

The Duty of Wives.
But passing the Master of the Family I shall speak a Word or two to those that
are under him.

And first to the Wife; The Wife i^ bound by the Law to her Husband, so long as
her Husband lives, Romans 7. 2. Wherefore she also has her work and place in
the family, as well as the rest.

Now there are these things considerable in the carriage of a Wife toward her
Husband, which she ought conscientiously to observe.

First, That she look upon him as her head and lord. The head of the woman is
the man. And so Sara called Abraham Lord; 1 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 6.

Secondly, She should therefore be subject to him as is fit in the Lord. The
Apostle says, That the Wife should submit her self to her Husband, as to the
Lord, 1 Pet. 3. 1. Col. 3. 18. Ephesians. 5. 22. I told you before, that if the
husband does walk toward his wife as becomes him, he will therein be such an
ordinance of God to her, besides the relation of an husband, that shall preach
to her the carriage of Christ to his Church. And now I say also, that the wife,
if she walk with her husband as becomes her, she shall preach the Obedience of
the Church to her husband. Therefore, as the Church is subject to Christ, so
let the wives be to their own husbands i^ every thing, Ephesians. 5. 24.

Now for thy performing of this work thou must first shun these evils.

1. The evil of a wandering and a go^soping spirit: this is evil in the Church
and is evil also in a wife, who is the figur^ of a Church. Christ loves to
have hi^ Spouse keep at home; that is, to be wit^ him in the Faith and practice
of hi^ things, not ranging and meddling wit^ the things of Satan: no more should
wives be given to wander and gossop a broad: You know that Prove. 7. 11. says
She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide n^ in her house.

Wives should be about their own husbands business at home: As the Apostl^
says, Let them be discreet, chaste, keepers a home, good, obedient to their
own husbands And why? because otherwise the Word (...) God will be blasphemed,
Tit. 2. 5.

2. Take heed of an idle, talking, o^ brangling tongue. This also is odious
either in maids or wives, to be like Pa^ra^s, not bridling their tongue; where
(...) the wife should know, as I said before, ^^at her husband is her lord, and
is over ^^r as Christ is over the Church. Do you ^^ink it is seemly for the
Church to par^t it against her Husband? is she not (...) be silent before him,
and to look to his ^aws rather than her own fictions? Why (...), says the
Apostle, ought the wife to car^it toward her husband. Let the woman, ^ith
Paul, learn in silence with all subjecti^^: but I suffer not a woman to teach,
or to ^urp authority over the man, but to be in ^^^ence, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.

It is an unseemly thing to see a woman, (...) much as once in all her
lifetime, to ^^fer to overtop her husband; she ought (...) every thing to be
in subjection to him, ^^d to do all she does, as having her war^^nt, license,
and authority from him. and indeed here is her glory, even to be ^ider him as
the Church is under Christ. ^ow she opens her mouth in Wisdom, and (...) her
tongue is the Law of kindness, Pro. ^1. 26.

3. Take heed of affecting immodest ^parel, or a wanton gate, this will be evil
both abroad and at home; abroad will not only give evil example, but so tend to
tempt to lust and lasciviousn^ and at home 'twill give an offense (...) godly
Husband, and be cankering to (...) godly Children, etc. Wherefore, as sa^ the
Apostle, Let women's apparel be mo^^^ as becomes women professing Godliness
(...) Good Works, 1 Timothy 2. 10. not with b^^^dered hair, or Gold or Pearls, or
co^^^aray. And as it is said again, Whose ^^^dorning, let it not be that outward
adorni^^ of plaiting the hair, and of wearing gold, (...) of putting on of
apparel; but let it be hidden man of the heart, in that which not corruptible,
even the ornament of a m^^ and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of G^^ of
great price: For after this manner in a time, the holy women also, who trusted
God, adorned themselves, being in subject^ on to their own husbands, 1 Pet. 3.
3, 4, 5, ^

But yet, do not think that by the su^^jection I have here men^^ned, that I
intend women should be their husban^ slaves. Women are their husbands yo^
fellows, their flesh and their bones; a^^ (...) is not a man that hates his
own flesh, (...) that is bitter against it, Ephesians. 5. 29. Wherefore let every
man love his wife as himself: and the wife see that she reverence her husband,
Ephesians. 5. 33.

The wife is master next her husband, and is to rule all in his absence; yea,
in his presence she is to guide the house, to bring up the Children, provided
she so (...) it, as the adversary have no occasion (...) speak reproachfully; 1 Timothy 5. 10, 13. (...) Who can find a virtuous woman; for her price is far above
Rubies. A gracious woman retains honor, and guides her affairs with
discretion, Prove. 31. 10. Prove. (...), 16. Prove. 12. 4.

Object. But my husband is an unbeliever, what shall I do?

Answ. If so then, what I have said before lies upon thee with an engagement
so much the stronger. For first, ^^y husband being in this condition, he ^^ll
be watchful to take thy slips and in^mities, to throw them as dirt in the ^^e
of God and thy Savior, 2. He will be apt to make the worst of (...) one of thy
words, carriages and gestur^ 3. And all this does tend to the po^^^sing his
heart with more hardness, p^^^dice, and opposition to his own salv^^^on.
Wherefore, as Peter says, ye w^^^ be in subjection to your own husbands; (...)
if any obey not the word, they may also w^^^out the word be won by the
conversati^^ the wives, while they behold your c^^^ conversation coupled with
fear, 1 Pet. 3^^ 2. Thy husbands salvation or dam^^^tion lies much in thy
deportment^^ behavior before him: wherefore if th^^ be in thee any fear of
God, or love thy husband, seek, by a carriage full^ meekness, modesty,
holiness, and a hu^^ble behavior before him, to win him the love of his own
salvation; and thus doing, how know thou, O wom^^ but thou shall save thy
husband, 1 Cor. ^ 16.

Object. But my husband is not only unbeliever, but one very froward, peev^^
and teasty, yea, so froward, etc. that I k^^ not how to speak to him, or behave
my^^ before him.

Answ. Indeed there are some wives ^ great slavory by reason of their ungod^y
husbands; and as such should be pit^ed and prayed for, so they should be ^o
much the more watchful and circum^pect in all their ways.

1. Therefore be thou very faithful ^o him in all the things of this life.

2. Bare with patience his unruly and ^nconverted behavior: thou art alive; ^e
is dead: thou art principled with Grace; he with Sin. Now then, see^ng Grace is
stronger than Sin, and Ver^^e than Vice, be not overcome with ^is vileness, but
overcome that with thy ^ertues, Romans 12. 21. It Is a shame for ^^ose that are
gracious, to be as lavishing (...) their words, etc. as those that are
^raceless. They that are slow to wrath, ^re of great understanding: but they
that ^re hasty in spirit, exalt folly, Prove. 14. ^9.

3. Thy wisdom therefore, if at any ^^e thou have a desire to speak to thy
^^sband for his conviction concerning ^^y thing either good or evil, it is to
observe convenient times and seasons.

There is a time to keep silence, and a (...) to speak, Eccles. 3. 7.

Now for the right timing thy inten^^ons.

Consider first his disposition, and ta^^ him when he is farthest off of those
fil^^^ passions that are thy affliction. Abig^^ would not speak a word to her
chur^^ husband tell his wine was gone fo^^ him, and he in a sober temper, 1 Sa^
25. 36, 37. The want of this observ^^^on, is the cause why so much is spok^^
and so little effected.

2. Take him at those times when (...) has his heart taken with thee, and wh^^
he shows tokens of love and deli^^^ in thee. Thus did Esther with the Ki^^
her husband, and prevailed, Est. 5. 3, ^ and 7. 1, 2.

3. Observe when convictions seize^ his conscience, and then follow the^ with
sound and grave sayings of the Scri^^tures. Somewhat like to this dealt
M^^noah's wife with her husband, Judge. 1^^ 22, 23. Yet then,

1. Let thy words be few.

2. And none of them savouring of a lording it over him, but speak thou still
as to thy head and lord, by way of entreaty and beseeching.

3. And that in such a spirit of simpathy and bowels of affection after his
good, that the manner of thy speech and behavior in speaking, may be to him an
argument that thou speak in love, as being sensible of his misery, and
inflamed in thy soul with desire after his conversion.

4. And follow thy words and behaviors with Prayers to God for his soul.

5. Still keeping thy self in a holy, chaste and modest behavior before him.

Object. But my husband is a sot, a fool, and one that has not wit enough to
follow his outward employment in the world.

Answ. First, though all this be true, yet thou must know he is, thy head, thy
lord, and thy husband.

2. Therefore thou must take heed of desiring to usurp authority over him, he
was not made for thee; that is, for thee to have dominion over him, but to be
thy husband, and to rule over thee, 1 Timothy 2* 12. 1 Cor. 1. 3, 8.

3. Wherefore, though in truth thou may have more discretion than he, ye^
thou ought to know, that thou wit^ all that is thine, is to be used as under
the husband, even every thing, Ephesians. 5. 24.

Take heed therefore, that what thou do, goes not in thy name, but his; not
to thy exaltation, but his; carrying all things so, by thy dexterity and
prudence that not one of thy husbands weaknesses be discovered to others by
thee. A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that causes shame,
is as rottennes^ to his bones. For then, as the Wise man says, She will do him
good, and not evil, (...) the days of her life, Prove. 12. 4. Prove. 31. 14.

4. Therefore act, and do still, as being under the power and authority of the
husband.

Now touching thy carriage to thy Chi^^dren and Servants.

Thou art a Parent and a Mistress, and so thou ought to demean thy self.

And besides, seeing the believing woman is a figure of the Church, she ought,
as the Church, to nourish and instruct her Children and Servants, as the
Church, that she may answer in that particular also: and truly, the wife being
always at home, she has great advantage that way; wherefore do it, and the
Lord prosper your proceeding.

Of Children to Parents.
There lies also a Duty upon Children to their Parents, which they are bound
both by the Law of God, and nature, conscientiously to observe. Children, obey
your Parents in the Lord; for this is right. And again, Children, obey your
Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord; Ephesians. 6. 1. Col.
3. 20.

There are these general things in which Children should show forth that honor
that is due to their Parents from them.

First, They should always count them better than themselves. I observe a vile
spirit among some Children; and that is, they are apt to look over their
Parents, and to have slighting and scornful thoughts of them; this is worse
than heathenish: such a one has got just the heart of a Dog or Beast, that
will bite those that begot them, and her that brought them forth.

But my Father, etc. is now poor, and I am rich, and it will be a
disparagement, or at least an hindrance to me, to show that respect to him as
otherwise I might.

I tell thee thou arguest like an Atheist, and a Beast; and stand in this,
full flat against the Son of God. Read Mark, 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Must a gift, and a little of the glory of the Butterfly, make thee that thou
shall ^ot do for, and honor to thy Father and Mother? A wise man makes a glad
Father; but a foolish son despises his Mother, Prove. 15. 20. Though thy
Parents be never so low, and thou thy self never so ^igh, yet he is thy Father,
and she thy Mother, and they must be in thy eye i^ great esteem. The eye that
mocketh at his Father, and that despises to obey his mother, the Ravens of the
valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30. 17.

Secondly, Thou ought to show thy honor to thy Parents, by a willingness to
help them with such necessaries and accommodations which they need. If any have
Nephews or Children, let them learn to show pity at home, and to requite their
parents, says Paul, for that is good and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5. 4.

And this rule Joseph observed to his poor Father, though he himself was next
the King in Egypt, Genesis 47. 12. Genesis 41. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.

But mark; Let them requite their Parents.

There are three things, for which, as long as thou live, thou will be a
debtor to thy Parents.

1. For thy Being in this World: they are they, from whom immediately under God
thou did receive it.

2. For their care to preserve thee when thou wast helpless, and could
neither care for, nor regard thy self.

3. For the pains they have taken with thee to bring thee up. Until thou have
Children of thy own, thou will not be sensible of the pains, watchings, fears,
sorrow and affliction, that they have gone under to bring thee up; and when
thou know it, thou will not easily yield, that thou have recompensed them
for their favor to thee: How often have they sustained thy hunger, clothed
thy nakedness? what care have they taken that thou might have wherewith to
live and do well when they were dead and gone; they possibly have spared it
from their own belly and back for thee, and have also impoverished themselves
that thou might live like a man. All these things ought duly, and like a
man, to be considered by thee, and care ought to be taken on thy part to
requite them; the Scripture says so; Reason says so; and there be none but
Dogs and Beasts deny it. It is the duty of Parents to lay up for their
Children; and the duty of Children to requite their Parents.

Thirdly, Therefore show by all humble and son-like carriage, that thou do to
this day, with thy heart, remember the love of thy Parents.

Thus much for obedience to Parents in general.

Again, if thy Parents be godly, and thou wicked (as thou art if thou have not
a second work or birth from God upon thee) then thou art to consider, that thou
art more strongly engaged to respect and honor thy Parents, not now only as a
father in the flesh, but as godly Parents: thy Father and Mother is now made of
God thy teachers and instructers in the Way of righteousness: Wherefore to alude
to that of Solomon, O Son hearken to the law of thy Father, and forsake not the
law of thy Mother; bind them continually upon thy heart, and ty them about thy
neck, Prove. 6. 20, 21.

Now to provoke thee here to consider,

First, That this has been the practice always of those that are, and have
been obedient Children; yea, of Christ himself to Joseph and Mary, though he
himself was God blessed for ever, Luke, 2. 51.

Secondly, Thou have also the severe Judgments of God upon those that have
been disobedient to awe thee. As 1. Ishmael, for but mocking at one good
carriage of his Father and Mother, was both thrust out of his Fathers
Inheritance, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and that with God's approbation, Genesis
21. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Gal. 4. 30.

2. Hophni and P^hinehas, for refusing the good counsel of their Father,
provoked the great God to be their enemy. They hearkened not to the voice of
their Father, because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 23, 24, 25.

3. Absalom was hanged, as I may say by God himself, for rebelling against his
Father, 2 Samuel 18. 9.

Besides, little do thou know how heart-aking a consideration it is to thy
Parents, when they do but suppose thou may be damned: how many prayers,
sighs and tears are there wrung from their hearts upon this account?

Every miscarriage of thine goes to their heart, for fear God should take an
occasion thereat to shut thee up in hardness for ever.

How did Abraham groan for Ishmael? O, says he to God, That Ishmael might live
before thee, Genesis 17. 18.

How was Is^ac and Rebekah grieved for the miscarriage of Esau, Genesis 26. 34, 35.

And how bitterly did David mourn for his Son, who died in his wickedness, 2 Samuel 18. 32, 33.

Lastly, And can any imagine, but that all these carriages of thy godly Parents,
will be to thee the increase of thy torments in Hell, if thou die in thy sins,
notwithstanding?

Again, if thy Parents and thou also be godly, how happy a thing is this? how
should thou rejoice that the same Faith should dwell both in thy Parents and
thee? thy conversion, possibly, is the fruits of thy Parents groans and prayers
for thy soul, and they cannot chose but rejoice; do thou rejoice with them.

It Is true, in the Salvation of a natural Son which is mentioned in the
Parable; This my Son was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found; and
they began to be merry, Luke 15. 24.

Let therefore the consideration of this, that thy Parents have Grace as well as
thee, engage thy heart so much the more to honor, reverence, and obey them.

Thou art better able now to consider the pains and care that thy friends have
been at, both for thy body and soul; wherefore strive to requite them: Thou have
strength to answer in some measure the Command; wherefore do not neglect it.

It is a double Sin in a gracious Son not to remember the Commandment, yea, the
first Commandment, with promise, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.

Take heed of giving thy sweet Parents one snappish word, or one unseemly
carriage. Love them because they are thy Parents; because they are godly; and
because thou must be in Glory with them.

Again, if thou be godly, and thy Parents wicked, as often it sadly falls out:

Then, first, let thy bowels yearn toward them; it is thy parents that are
going to Hell.

Secondly, As I said before to the wife touching her unbelieving husband, so
now I say to thee, Take heed of a parrating tongue; speak to them wisely,
meekly, and humbly; do for them faithfully without repining; and bear with all
child-like modesty, their reproaches, their railing, and evil speaking. Watch
fit opportunities to lay their condition before them. O! how happy a thing
would it be, if God should use a Child to beget his Father to the Faith? Then
indeed might the Father say, With the fruit of my own bowels has God converted
my soul. The Lord, if it be his will, convert our poor Parents, that they, with
us, may be the Children of God.

Concerning Servants.
Servants also, they have a work to do for God, in their place and station
among men.

The Apostles assert Masters under a threefold consideration.

1. The believing Master. 2. The unbelieving Master. 3. The froward Master.
For all which, Servants are furnished with counsel and advice in the Word, for
the demeaning of themselves under each of them.

But before I speak in particular to any of these, I will in general show you
the duty of Servants.

First, Thou art to look upon thy self as thou art; that is, as a Servant, not
a Child, nor a Wife, thou art inferior to these; wherefore count thy self under
them, and be content with that station. For three things the Earth is
disquieted* and for four which it cannot bear: one is a Servant when he
reigns, Prove. 30. 21, 22.

It is out of thy place, either to talk or do, as one that reigns.

Secondly, Consider, that thou being a Servant, what is under thy hand, is not
thy own, but thy Masters: Now, because it is not thy own, thou ought not to
dispose of it; but because it is thy Masters, thou ought to be faithful.
Thus it was with Joseph, Genesis 39. 7, 8, 9. but if thou do otherwise, know that
thou shall receive of God for the wrong that thou do; and there is with God
no respect of persons, Col. 3. 25. Wherefore,

Thirdly, Touching thy work and employment, thou art to do it as unto the Lord,
and not for man; and indeed then servants do their business as becomes them,
when they do all in obedience to the Lord, as knowing, that the place in which
they now are, it is the place where Christ has put them, and in which he
expects they should be faithful.

Servants, says Paul, be obedient to them that are your Masters -- with fear
and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; not with eye service, as
men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the
heart, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6.

Observe a little the Word of God to Servants.

1. Servants must be obedient. (...)

2. Not with that obedience that (...) serve man only: servants must have the^
eye on the Lord in the work they do (...) their Masters.

3. That their work in their service (...) the Will and Ordinance of God.

From which I conclude, that thy wo^^ in thy place and station, as thou art a
ser^vant, is as really God's Ordinance, an^ as acceptable to Him, in its kind,
as (...) Preaching, or any other work for God and that thou art as sure to
receive a re^ward for thy labor, as he that hangs, (...) is burnt for the
Gospel. Wherefore sai^ the Apostle to servants, Whatsoever (...) do, do it
heartily, as to the Lord, and not (...) men, knowing that of the Lord you shall
re^ceive the reward of inheritance; for ye serv^^ the Lord Christ, Col. 3. 22,
23, 24.

And now touching the three sorts (...) Masters mentioned before.

First, For the believing Master; Sai^^ Paul, They that have believing Master^^
let them not despise them because they (...) brethren, but rather do them
service bec^^^ they are faithful and beloved, and partakers (with the Servants)
of the heaven^^ Benefits, 1 Timothy 6. 2. (Servants, if they have not a care of
their hearts, will be so much in the consideration of the relation that is
betwixt their Masters and they, as brethren, that they will forget the relation
that is between them as Masters and Servants: now, though they ^ought to
remember the one, yet let them take heed of forgetting the other: Know thy
place as a Servant, while thou considerest that thy Master and thee are
Brethren, and do thy work for him faithfully, humbly, and with meekness,
because he is a Master faithful and beloved, and partaker of the heavenly
Benefit.) If any man teach otherwise, says the Apostle Paul, and consent not
to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
Truth, supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw thy sel^ 1. Tim. 6.
3, 4, 5.

Secondly, For the unbelieving Maste^ (for of them Paul speaks in the first
ver^^ of this 6. of Timothy) Let as many servants, says he, as be under the
yoke, cou^^ their own Masters worthy of all honor, th^^ the Word of God and
his Doctrine be not blasphemed.

Servants living with unbelieving Masters, are greatly engaged to be bot^
watchful, faithful, and trusty. Engaged* I say, 1. From the consideration of
the condition of their Master; for, he being unbelieving, will have an evil eye
upon thee, and upon thy doings, and so much the more because thou professest:
as i^ the case of Saul and David, 1. Sam. 18* 8, 9, etc.

2. Thou art engaged because of the profession thou make of the Word (...)
God; for by thy profession, thou do (...) both God and his Word before thy
M^^ster, and he has no other wit but to blas^phem them, if thou behave thy
self un^worthily. Wherefore Paul bids Tit^^ Exhort Servants to be obedient to
their own Masters, and to please them well in all things, ^ut answering again
(not giving par^at^ng answers, or such as are cross or pro^oking) not
purloining, but showing all good ^^delity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior, in all things, Tit. 2. 9, 10.

That Servant, who in an unbelievers ^amily, does his work before God, as God's
Ordinance, he shall adorn the Doctrine of God, if not save his Master ^y so
doing; but if he does otherwise, ^e shall both stumble the Unbeliever,
dishonor God, offend the Faithful, and ^^ting guilt upon his own Soul.

Thirdly, For the froward Master; though I distinguish him from the unbe^iever,
yet it is not because he may not be such, but because every unbeliever ^oth not
properly go under that name. ^ow with this froward and peevish fel^ow, thou art
to serve as faithfully for ^he time thou stand bound, as with ^e most
pleasant and rational Master in ^^e world. Servants, says Peter, be sub^^^t to
your Masters, with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
^^ward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. And if thy peev^^ Master will still be froward, either
(...) of spite to thy Religion, or because he (...) without reason concerning
thy labo^^ (thou to the utmost of thy power labou^^ing faithfully) God then
reckons the^^ a sufferer for well doing, as truly, as (...) thou wast called
upon the stage of the world before men, for the matters of the Faith. Wherefore
Peter adds this (...) couragement to Servants, to the exho^^tation he gave them
before, This is tha^ worthy, says he, if a man for Conscien^ toward God
endures grief, suffering wro^^fully; for what glory is it, if when ye be bu^
feted for your faults you take it patiently* but if when you do well, and
suffer for it, (...) take it patiently, this is acceptable wit^ God, 1 Pet. 2.
19, 20.

Wherefore be comforted concerni^^ thy condition, with considering, that G^^
looks upon thee, as on Jacob in the fa^^^ly of Laban; and will right all thy
wrong and recompense thee for thy faith^^^ wise, and godly Behavior, before,
(...) the service of thy froward Master.

Wherefore be patient, I say, and abound (...) thy faithfulness in thy place
and cal^^g, till God make a way for thy escape ^^om this place; and when thou
may (...) made free, use it rather, 1 Cor. 7. 21.

Of Neighbors each to other.
Having thus in few words showed you ^^at is duty under your several Relati^^s,
I shall now at last speak, in a word (...) two, touching Good Neighborhood,
and ^^en draw toward a conclusion.

Touching Neighborhood, there are ^^ese things to be considered, and
pra^^ised, if thou will be found in the pra^^ical part of Good Neighborhood.

First, Thou must be of a good and sound ^onversation in thy own family, place
and ^^^tion, showing to all, the power that the Gospel and the things of
another World ^^th in thy heart, that ye may be blame^^ and harmless, the Sons
of God, without ^uke in the midst of a crooked and perverse ^^tion, among whom
ye shine as lights in (...) World, Phil. 2. 15, 16.

Secondly, As persons must be of (...) behavior at home, that will be go^^
neighbors, so they must be full of co^^tesie and charity to them that have
(...) about them, Luke, 10. 36, 37.

Right good Neighborhood, is (...) men readily to communicate, as of the
spirituals, so of their temporalities, (...) food, raiment, and help to those
that ha^^ need, to be giving to the poor as th^^ see them go by thee, or to
enquire a^^ther their condition, and according (...) thy capacity to send unto
them, Job 3^* 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Thirdly, Thou must be always humble and meek among them, as also Gra^ and
Gracious, not light and frothy, (...) by thy words and carriage, ministri^
Grace to the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29.

Thus also Job honored God amo^^ his Neighbors, Job 30. 6, 7, 8, 9, 1^* 11.

Fourthly, Thy wisdom will be, right^ to discountenance sin, and to repro^ thy
neighbor for the same, Levit. 1^* 17. denying thy self in some things, (...)
(...) preventing an injury to thy Neigh^^ur, that thou may please him for
his ^^ification, Romans 15. 2.

Fifthly, If thou would be a good neigh^^^r, take heed of thy tongue upon two
^^counts.

^1. That thou with it give no offensive ^^guage to thy Neighbor, to the
pro^^king of him to anger: bear much, put ^wrongs, and say little: It is an
honor (...) a man to cease from strife: but every (...) will be meddling, Prove.
20. 3. And a^^in, He loves transgression that loves ^ife, Prove. 17. 19.

And as thou should take heed that ^^ou be not be original of contention
(...) anger, so also take heed that thou be (...) an instrument to beget it,
between ^^ties, by a tale-bearing and gossopping^it: He that passes by, and
medleth with (...) belonging not to him, is like one that ^^th a Dog by the
ears. As coals are to ^^ning coals, and wood to fire; so is a con^^ious man to
kindle strife, Prove. 26. 17,

I do observe two things very odious in many Professors; the one is a (...)
strong and stiff-necked spirit, that (...) have its own way: and the other i^
great deal of tatling and talk about ^^ligion, but a very little, if any things
those Christian deeds that carry in (...) the cross of a Christian in the doing
(...) of, and profit to my Neighbors.

1. When I say a headstrong, and (...) necked spirit, I mean they are for
pl^^sing themselves, and their own fanc^^ in things of no weight, though their^
doing, be as the very slaughter-knif^ the weak Conscience of a Brother^
Neighbor. Now this is base: a Ch^^stian in all such things, as entrench (...)
the matters of Faith and Worship, sho^^ be full of Self-denial, and seek to
ple^^ others rather than themselves; giv^ none offense to the Jew, nor to the
Greek* to the Church of God; not seeking their (...) profit, but the profit of
many, that they (...) be saved, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33.

And the second is as bad, to wit, (...) Professors are great pratlers, and
ta^^ers, and disputers, but do little of (...) thing that bespeaketh Love to
the Poor, ^r Self-denial in outward things. Some people think Religion is made
up of words; a very wide mistake: Words without deeds is but a half-faced
Religi^n: Pure Religion, and undefilled before God, and the Father, is this, to
visit the fa^herless and widows in their affliction, and to keep thy self
unspotted from the World, ^am. 1. 27. Again, If a Brother or a Si^^er be
destitute of daily food, and one of you ^ay unto them, depart in peace, be
warmed and filled (which are very fine words) yet ^f you give them not those
things that are ne^essary to the body, what does it profit? Jam. ^2. 15, 16.

Now then, before I go any further, I will hear take an occasion to touch a
little upon those sins that are so rife in many Professors in this day; and
they ^^re Covetousness, Pride, and Uncleanness; (...) would speak a word to
them in this place the rather, because they are they which spoil both
Christian Brother-^ood, and civil Neighborhood, in too ^reat a measure.

First for Covetousness.

1. Covetousness, it is all one wi^^ Desire; he that desires, covets, whither
the thing he desires be evil (...) good. Wherefore that which is called
coveting in Exodus 20. 17. is called desire in Deuteronomy. 5. 21. As the Apostle also
says, I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet,
Romans 7. 7. that is, I had not known lust to be a sin, unless the Law had forbid
it. Wherefore, though lawful desires are good* 1 Cor. 12. 31. and to be
commended yet Covetousness, as commonly understood* is to be fled from, and
abhorred, as of the Devil.

2 Covetousness or evil desire, it is the first mover, and gives to every sin
it^ call, as I may say, both to move, and act: as was said before, the Apostle
had not known sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall not desire, or covet:
for^ where there is no desire to sin, there appears no sin.

3. Therefore Covetousness carries in it every sin (we speak of sins against
the second Table) even as a Serpent carri^eth her young ones in her belly. This
the Scripture affirms, where it says, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, ^nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that (...) is thy Neighbors, Exodus 20. 17. Covetousness will meddle
with any thing.

Now there are in my mind at present, these eight notes of covetousness, which
hinder Good Works, and a Christian Conversation among men, wherever they are
harbored.

First, When men, to whom God has given a comfortable livelihood, are yet not
content therewith: This is against the Apostle, where he says, Let your
conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things as you
have; for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5.

Secondly, It is covetousness in the Seller, that puts him to say of his
traffic, it is better than it is, that he may heighten the price of it: and
covetousness in the Buyer, that prompts him to say worse of a thing, than he
thinks in his Conscience it is, and that for an abatement of a reasonable price.

This is that which the Apostle forbids, under the name of defraud, 1 Cor. 6.
7, 8. and that which Solomon condemns, Prove. 20. 14.

Thirdly, It is through covetousness, that men think much of that which goes
beside their own mouth, though possibly, it goes to those that have more need
than themselves, and also that better deserve it than they.

Fourthly, It argues covetousness when men will deprive themselves, and those
under them, of the privileges of the Gospel, for more of this world, and is
condemned by Christ, Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.

Fifthly, It argues covetousness, when men that have it, can go by, or hear of
the poor, and shut up their bowels and compassions from them, 1 John 3. 17.

Sixthly, Also when men are convinced it is their duty to communicate to such
and such that have need, yet they defer it, and if not quite forget it yet
linger away the time, as being loath to distribute to the necessities of those
in want. This is forbidden by the holy Ghost; Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it. Now, it is due
from thee to the poor by the Commandment of God; if they want, and thou have
it, Say not then to thy Neighbor, Go, and come again to morrow, and I will
give, when thou have it by thee, Prove. 3. 27, 28.

Seventhly, It argues a greedy mind also, when after men have cast in their
minds at the first what to give, they then from that will be pinching, and
cliping, and taking away; whereas the holy Ghost says, Every one, as he
purposes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, nor of necessity; for
God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7.

Lastly, It argues a filthy greedy heart also, when a man, after he has done
any good, then in his heart to repent, and secretly wish that he had not so
done, or at least, that he had not done so much* this is to be weary of
well-doing (I spe^^ now of communicating) and carries in it two evils. First,
It spoileth the work done; And secondly, It (if entertained) spoileth the heart
for doing any more so. The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the
Churl said to be bountiful; for the liberal devises liberal things, and by
liberal things he shall stand, Isa. 32. 6, 8.

Now then, to diswade all from this poisonous Sin, observe that above all sins,
in the New Testament, this is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. And
therefore God's People should be so far from being taken with it, that they
should be much afraid of the naming of it one among another, lest it should, as
adultrous thoughts, infect the heart by the talking of it, Ephesians. 5. 3.

Quest. But why is Covetousness called Idolatry?

Answ. 1. Because it ingageth the very heart of a man in it, to mind earthly
things: it gets our love which should be set on God, and sets it upon poor
empty creatures: it puts our affections out of Heaven, where they should be,
and sets them on Earth, where they should not be, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Phil. 3. 18,
19. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3.

Thus it changes the object on which the heart should be set, and sets it
on that on which it should not: it makes a man forfake God, The Fountain of
living water, and causes him to hew to himself cisterns, broken cisterns,
which can hold no water, Jer. 2. 11, 12, 13. For,

2. It rejects the care, government, and providence of God toward us, and
causes us to make of our own care and industry, a god; to whom, instead of
God, we fly continually, both for the keeping that we have, and for getting
more.

This was Isreal's Idolatry of old, and the original of all her idolatrous
practices, Hos. 2. 5. For their Mother has played the Harlot (that is,
committed idolatry) she that conceived them, has done shamefully: for she
said, I will go after my lovers that gave me my bread, and my waters, my wool,
and my flax, my oil, and my drink.

3. It disalloweth of God's way of disposing his Creatures, and would have them
ordered and disposed of otherwise then his heavenly Wisdom sees meet: and
hence arises all those discontents about God's dealing with us. Covetousness,
never yet said, It is the lord, let him do what he pleases; but is ever
objecting, like God, against every thing that goes against it; and it is that
which, like a god, draws away the heart and soul from the true God, and his
Son Jesus Christ: And he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions,
Mat. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Now then, that which engages the heart, that rejects the providence of God,
and that is for ordering and disposing of things contrary to God; and for
breaking with God upon these terms, is Idolatry: and all these do Covetousness.
The wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous, whom the
Lord abhors, Psalm. 10. 3.

Now the way to remedy this disease, it is to learn the lesson which Paul had
got by heart; to wit, In whatsoever state you are, therewith to be content,
Phil. 4. 11, 12, 13.

I come in the second place to speak a word of Pride, and loftiness of heart
and life.

Of Pride.
1. Pride in general, it is, That which causes a man to think of man, and his
things, above what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6.

2. It has its seat in the heart among these inormities, Fornications,
Adulteries, Lasciviousness, Murders, Deceit, etc. Mark 7. 21, 22, 23. and
shows it self in these following particulars.

First, When you slight this or that person, though gracious; that is, look
over them, and shun them for their poverty in this world, and choose rather to
have converse with others, that possibly are less gracious, because of their
greatness in this World.

This the Apostle James writes against, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3. under the name of
partiality; for indeed the fruits of a puffed-up heart, is to deal in this
manner with Christians, 1 Cor. 4. 6, 7.

Now this branch of Pride flows from ignorance of the vanity of the creature,
and of the worth of a gracious heart: Wherefore get more of the knowledge of
these two, and this sprig will be nipt in the head, and you will learn to
condescend to men of low degree, Romans 12. 16.

Secondly, It argues pride of heart, when men will not deny themselves in
things that they may, for the good and profit of their Neighbors. And it
argues now, that pride is got so much up into self-love, and self-pleasing,
that they little care who they grieve or offend, so they may have their way,
Obad. 12. 13, 14, 15.

Thirdly, It argues pride of heart, when sober reproofs for sin, and
unbeseeming* carriages, will not down with thee, but that rather thou snuffest,
and give way to thy spirit to be peevish, and to retain prejudice against
those that thus reprove thee. Says the Prophet, hear ye, and give ear, be not
proud; for the Lord has spoken; that is, hear the reproofs of God for your
sins, and break them off by repentance: But if ye will not hear, my soul shall
weep in secret for your Pride, etc. Jer. 13. 15, 16, 17. So also in Hosea, They
will not frame their doing to turn unto their God; for the spirit of whoredoms
is in the midst of them; they have not known the Lord; and the pride of Israel
does testify to his face, etc. Hos. 5. 4, 5.

This argues great senslesness of God, and a heart greatly out of frame.

Fourthly, It argues Pride also, when a reproof or admonition will not down
as well from the poorest Saint, as from the greatest Doctor; and it argues a
glorying in men, 1 Cor. 3. 21. and that they would, that their faith should
stand in their wisdom, and not in the Power of God, that is, of naked Truth, 1
Cor. 2. 5.

Fifthly, It argues pride of heart, when a man that has this or that in his
heart to do, in reference to God, but yet will slight a sober asking counsel
and direction of God in this matter. The wicked, through the pride of his
countenance* will not seek after God, says David, Psalm. 10. 4.

Sixthly, It argues pride of heart, when persons are tickled with the thoughts
of their own praise, and that secretly lust after it; that think of themselves
and others above what is written; which those do, who do not acknowledge that
man in his best estate is altogether vanity: But such kind of people have
forgot the Exhortation; Be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20. And also,
that there is a knowledge that puffs up, and edifieth neither themselves nor
others, 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2.

Wherefore, to such the Apostle says, Be not desirous of vain glory, but in
holiness of mind, let each esteem others better than themselves, Phil. 2. 3.
Gal. 5. 26.

Pride also there is in the outward carriage, behavior and Gesture, which is
odious for Christians to be tainted with; and this pride is discovered by
mincing words, a made carriage, and an affecting the toys and baubles that
Satan and every lightheaded fool brings into the world. As God speaks of
the Daughters of Zion, They walk with stretched-out necks, wanton eyes, mincing
as they go, and making a tinckling with their feet, Isa. 3. 16. A very
unhansome carriage for a people that profess Godliness, and that use to come
before God to confess their sins, and to bemove themselves for what they have
done: How can a sense of thy own baseness of the vileness of thy heart, and of
the holiness of God, stand with such a carriage? do thou see the vileness of
thy heart, the fruit of sin? and art thou afflicted with that disagreement that
is between God and thy heart, that layest the reins on the neck of thy lusts,
and letest them run whither they will? Be not deceived; Pride arises from
ignorance of these things, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. A sense of my vileness, of what I
have deserved, and of what continually in my heart opposes God, cannot stand
with a foolish, light and wanton carriage: thou will then see, there is other
things to mind than to imitate the Butter-fly: alas, all these kind of things,
are but a painting the Devil, and a setting a carnal gloss upon a Castle of
his; thou art but making gay the spider; is thy heart ever the sounder for thy
fine gate, thy mincing words, and thy lofty looks? nay, does not this argue,
that thy heart is a rotten* cankered, and besotted heart? Oh! that God would
but let thee see a little of thy own inside, as thou have others to behold thy
outside: thou painted Sepulcher; thou whited Wall, will these things be found
virtues in the day of God? or, is this the way that thou take to mortify
sin? A high look, a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is sin, Prove.
21. 4. Pride is the ringleader of the seven abominations that the Wise man
names, Prove. 6. 16, 17. and is that above all, that causes to fall into the
condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

Of Adultery or Uncleanness.
Now I come in the last place to touch a word or two of Adultery, and then to
draw toward a conclusion.

Adultery, it has its place in the heart among the rest of those filthinesses,
I mentioned before Mark 7. 21, 22. of which sin I observe two things.

First, That almost, in every place where the Apostle lays down a catalogue
of wickednesses, he lays down Adultery, Fornication, and Uncleanness in the
front; as that in Mark 7. 21. Romans 1. 29. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 19. Ephesians. 5. 3
1 These. 4. 3, 4, 5. Heb. 12. 16. Jam. 2. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 10.

From this I gather, that the Sin of Uncleanness is a very predominant and
master Sin, easy to overtake the sinner, as being one of the first that is
ready to offer it self at all occasions, to break the Law of God.

Secondly, I observe, that this sin is committed unawares to many, even so soon
as a man has but looked upon a woman. I say unto you, says Christ, that
whosoever looks on a woman to lust, or desire after her, he has already
committed Adultery with her in his heart, Mat. 5. 28.

This sin of uncleanness, I say, is a very taking sin, it is natural above all
sins to mankind; and as it is most natural, so it wants not tempting
occasions, having objects for to look on in every corner: wherefore there is
need of a double and trible watchfulness in the soul against it. It is better
here to make a covenant with our eyes, like Job, (Job 31. 1.) than to let them
wander to God's dishonor, and our own discomfort.

There are these three things which discover a man or woman too much inclining
to the uncleanness of their own heart.

The first is a wanton eye, or an eye that does secretly effect it self with
such objects as are tickling of the heart with the thoughts of immodesty and
uncleanness. Isaiah calls this a wanton eye; and Peter, an eye full of
adultery, that cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Isa. 3. 16. This is that
also which Christ calls, an evil eye; and John, the lust of the flesh, and of
the eyes, and does defile those who are not very watchful over their own
hearts, Mark 7. 22. 1 John 2. 16.

This wanton eye, is that which the most holy Saints should take heed of,
because it is apt to seize upon them also. When Paul bids Timothy beseech the
younger women to walk as becomes the Gospel, ^e bids him do it with all Purity:
as who should say, take heed that while thou instructest them to holiness, thou
thy self be not corrupted with the lust of thy eye, 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2.

Oh! how many souls in the day of God, will curse the day that ever they gave
way to a wanton eye!

2. The second thing that discovers one much inclining to the lusts of
uncleanness, it is wanton and immodest talk; such as that brazen-faced Whore,
in the seventh of the Proverbs, had; or such as they in Peter, who allured,
through the lust if the flesh, through much wantonness, those who were clean
escaped from them, who live in error, 2 Pet. 2. 18. Out of the abun^ance of the
heart the mouth speaks: wherefore if we be Saints, let us take heed, as of
our eye, so of our tongue, and let not the lust of uncleanness, or of adultery,
be once named among us, named among us as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. Mark:
let it not be once named. This implies, that the lusts of uncleanness are
devilishly taking; (...) will both take the heart with eyes (...) tongue; Let
it not be once named amo^^ you, etc.

Thirdly, Another thing that bespea^^ a man or a woman inclining to wantonness
and uncleanness, it is an adornin^ themselves in light and wanton Appar^^ The
attire of an Harlot is too frequentl^ in our day, the attire of Professors;
(...) vile thing, and argues much wantonness and vileness of affections. If
those that give way to a wanton eye, wanton words, and immodest apparel, be no^
Whores, etc. in their hearts, I know n^^ what to say. Does a wanton eye argue
shamfacedness? does wanton talk argue chastity? and does immodest apparel with
stretched-out necks, naked breasts a made speech, and mincing gates, etc. argue
mortification of lusts?

If any say that these things may argue pride as well as carnal lusts. We^^ but
why are they proud? is it not (...) trick up the body? And why do they (...)
pride trick up the body, if it be no^ (...) provoke both themselves and others
(...) lusts: God knows their hearts without their outsides; and we know their
hearts by their outsides.

My Friends, I am hear treating of Good Works, and persuading you to fly those
things that are henderances to them: wherefore bear with my plainness when I
speak against Sin; I would strike it through with every word, because else it
will strike us through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

I do not treat of Good Works, as if the doing of them would save us (for we
are justified by his Grace according to the hope of Eternal Life) yet our sins
and evil works will lay us obnoxious to the Judgments both of God and man. He
that walks not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, is like to
have his peace assaulted often, both by the Devil, the Law, Death and Hell;
yea, and (...) like to have God hide his face from him also, for the iniquity
of his covetousness, Isa. 57. 17.

How can he that carries himself basely in the sight of men, think he yet we^^
behaveth himself in the sight of God and if so dim a light as is in man, (...)
justly count thee as a transgressor, (...) shall thy sins be hid from Him,
whose ey^^ lids try the Children of men? Psalm. 11. (...).

It Is true, Faith without works justifies us before God: yet that Faith the is
alone, will be found to leave us sinne^ in the sight both of God and man, Rom^
28. and 4. 5. Jam. 2. 18. And though the addest nothing to that which saves
the by what thou can do, yet thy righteousness may profit the Son of man,
(...) also says the Text; but if thou shall (...) so careless as to say, what
care I for bei^^ righteous to profit others; I tell thee that the love of God
is not in thee, J^^ 35. 18. 1 John 3. 17. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.

Walk therefore in Gods ways, and (...) them, for this is your wisdom and y^^
understanding in the sight of the N^^ons, which shall hear of all these statut^
and say, This great Nation is a wise (...) understanding People, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

The Third Observation.
Every Believer should not only take ^^ed that their works be good, and so for
(...) present do them, but should careful^^ study to maintain them; that is, to
^^ep in a continual exercise of them.

It is an easier matter to begin to do ^od, than it is to continue therein: and
(...) reason is, there is not so much of (...) Christians cross in the
beginning of a ^ork, as there is in a continual, hearty, ^^nscientious practice
thereof. There^^^e Christians have need, as to be pres^^^ to do good, so to
continue the work; ^an by nature, is rather a hearer than a ^er, Athenian like,
continually listing after some new thing; seeing ma^y things, but observing
nothing, Acts, (...) 20, Isa. 42. 20. It is observable, that ^er Christ had
divided his hearers into ^^u parts, he condemned three of them (...) fruitless
hearers, Luke, 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. ^h! it is hard continuing believing, con^^nuing
loving, continuing resisting all that opposes: we are subject to be we^ry of
well-doing, Gal. 6. 9. to pluck o^ right eyes, to cut of right hands (...)
right feet, is no pleasant thing to fle^^ and blood; and yet none but these
sh^^ have the Promise of Life, because no^ but these will be found to have the
effectual work of God's Grace in their soul^ If ye continue in my Word, then
are you (...) Disciples [indeed] Mat. 18. 8, 9. and 24. (...) John 8. 31. And
hence it is that you (...) so many ifs in the Scripture about me^ happiness; as
if you be Sons, then He^^ and if you continue in the Faith; and we hold the
beginning of our confiden^ steadfast to the end, Romans 8. 17. Col. 1. 2^ Heb. 3.
14. not that their continuing the way of God is the cause of the (...) being
right, but the work being right ca^seth the continuance therein: As (...) says
in another place, They went out (...) us, because they were not of us; for had
(...) been of us, [no doubt] says he, they (...) have continued with us, 1
John 2. 19.

But I say, where the work of God (...) deed is savingly begun, even there
(...), corruption, and the body of death ^oppose it: Therefore should
Christi^^s take heed, and look that against these ^^posites, they maintain a
continual ^^urse of Good Works among men.

Besides, as there is that in our own ^^wels that opposes goodness, so there
is (...) Tempter, the wicked one, both to ^^imate these lusts, and to join with
^^em in every assault against every ap^^rance of God in our souls. And hence
^is that he is called the Devil, the Ene^^, the Destroyer, and him that seeks
con^^nually to devour us, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

I need say no more but this, He that ^ill walk like a Christian indeed, as he
^all find it is requisite, that he continue (...) Good Works; so his continuing
there^^, will be opposed: if therefore he will ^^ntinue therein, he must make
it his ^^finess, to study how to oppose those ^at oppose such a life, that he
may con^^nue therein.

Now then to help in this, here fitly ^^mes in the last Observation; to wit,
(...) That the best way both to provoke our selves and others to Good Works, it
(...) be often affirming to others, The Doc^^^ of Justification by Grace, and
to believ^ our selves. This is a faithful Saying (...) these things I will that
thou affirm const^^^ly, that those which have believed in (...) might be
careful to maintain Good Work^^

I told you before, that Good Works (...) flow from Faith: and now I tell (...)
that the best way to be fruitful in th^^ is to be much in the exercise of the
^^^ctrine of Justification by Grace; and (...) both agree: for as Faith
animate^ Good Works, so the Doctrine of Grace ^^^mates Faith: Wherefore, the
way t^ rich in Good Works, it is to be ric^ Faith; and the way to be rich in
Fa^^ is to be conscientiously affirming the ^^^ctrine of Grace to others, and
believing (...) our selves.

First, To be constantly affirming i^ others. Thus Paul tells Timothy, th^^ he
put the Brethren in mind of the Tr^^ of the Gospel, he himself should not ^^^ly
be a good Minister of Christ, but sh^^^ be nourished up in the words of Faith
(...) of good Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 6.

It is the Ordinance of God, that Chri^^^ans should be often asserting the
things (...) God each to others; and that by their (...) doing, they should
edify one ano^^^r, Heb. 10. 24, 25. 1 These. 5. 11.

The Doctrine of the Gospel is like the (...), and the small Rain, that
distilleth ^n the tender grass, wherewith it does ^rish, and is kept green,
Deuteronomy. 32. 1^ Christians are like the several flowers (...) Garden, that have
upon each of them (...) Dew of Heaven, which being sha^^ with the Wind, they
let fall their (...) at each others roots, whereby they (...) jointly
nourished, and become nou^ers of one another.

For Christians to commune savorily of (...)'s matters one with another, it is
as ^hey opened to each others Nostrils ^^es of perfume. Says Paul to the ^^rch
at Rome, I long to see you, that I (...) impart unto you some spiritual Gift,
to and you may be established; that is, that (...) be comforted together with
you, by the ^^al Faith both of you and me, Rom 1. ^^2.

Christians should be often affirm^^^ the Doctrine of Grace, and Justification
(...) it, one to another.

Secondly, As they should be thus do^ing, so they should live in the power of
i^ themselves; they should by Faith suc^ and drink in this Doctrine, as the
goo^ ground receives the Rain; which being done, forthwith there is proclaimed
G^^ Works. Paul to the Colossians says th^^ We give thanks to God, and the
Father our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always f^^ you, since we heard of your
Faith in the L^^ Jesus, and love to all the Saints: (...) the hope which is
laid up in Heaven for y^^ whereof ye heard before in the Word of (...) Truth of
the Gospel, which is come un^^ you, as it is also in all the World, and
brin^^eth forth fruit as it does also in you. (...) how long ago? Why, since
the day ye h^^ it, says he, and knew the Grace of God Truth, Col. 1. 3, 4, 5,
6.

Aples and Flowers are not made the Gardner, but are an effect of (...)
planting and watering: plant in the ^^^ner good Doctrine, and let it be wa^^^d
with the Word of Grace; and as the effect of that, there is the fruits of
Holiness, and the end everlasting Life, Romans 6. 22.

Good Doctrine is the Doctrine of the Gospel, which shows to men that God
cloatheth them with the * Righteousness of his Son, freely, and makes him with
^ll his benefits over to them; by which free gift the sinner is made righteous
before God; and because he is so, therefor there is infused a principle of
Grace * unto the heart, whereby it is both quick^ed, and brings forth fruit *
Romans 3. ^1, 22, 23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. ^1. * John 1. 16.

Now then, seeing Good Works do flow ^om Faith, and seeing Faith is nourished
(...) an affirming of the Doctrine of the ^ospel, etc. take here these few
Consi^rations from the Doctrine of the Gos^^l, for the support of thy Faith,
that ^ou may be indeed fruitful and rich (...) Good Works.

First, The whole Bible was given for (...) very end, that thou should both
believe this Doctrine, and live in the comfort and sweetness of it: For wha^
soever things was written afore-time, w^^ written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15. 4.
John 20. 31.

Secondly, That therefore every Promise in the Bible is thine, to strengthen,
quicken, and encourage thy heart in believing.

Thirdly, Consider that there is nothing that thou do, can so please God as
believing: The Lord takes pleasure in tho^ that fear him, in them that hope in
his me^cy, Psalm. 147. 11.

They please him, because they imbrac^ his Righteousness, etc.

Fourthly, Consider that all the with drawings of God from thee, are not f^^
the weakening, but for the trial of the faith; and also, that whatever he
su^fereth Satan, or thy own heart, to do, (...) is not to weaken Faith, Job 23.
8, 9, ^ 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Fifthly, Consider, that believing^ that which will keep in thy view (...)
things of Heaven, and Glory; and that ^t which the Devil will be discouraged,
sin weakened, and thy heart quickened and sweetened, Heb. 11. 27. Jam. 4. 7. 1
Pet. 5. 9. Ephesians. 6. 16. Romans 15. 13.

Lastly, By believing, the Love of God is kept with warmth upon the heart, and
that this will provoke thee continually to bless God for Christ, for Grace, for
Faith, Hope, and for all these things, either in God, or thee, that does
accompany Salvation, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The Doctrine of the forgiveness of sins received by Faith, will make notable
work in the heart of a sinner, to bring forth Good Works.

But secondly, For as much as there is body of Death and Sin in every one that
has the Grace of God in this world; and because this body of death will be
even opposing that which is good, as the ^postle says, Romans 7. 21. therefore
take these few particulars further, for the suppo^sing that which will hinder a
fruitful life.

^ Keep a continual wa^th over the wretchedness of thy own heart (not to be
discouraged at the sight of thy vileness) but to prevent its wickedness; for
that will labor either to hinder thee from doing Good Works, or else will
hinder thee in the doing thereof; for evil is present with thee for both these
pu^poses; take heed, then, that thou do not ^^sten to that at any time, but
deny, though with much struggling, the workings of (...) to the contrary.

2. Let this be continually before thy heart, that God's eye is upon thee, and
sees every secret turning of thy heart* either to or from him: All things are
^^ked and bare before the eyes of Him w^^ whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13.

3. If thou deny to do that good which thou ought, with what thy God (...)
given thee; then consider, that though^ (...) love thy soul, yet he can
chastise; (...) thy^inward man with such troubles, (...) thy life shall be
restless and comfort^^ 2dly. And can also so blow upon thy (...) ward man, that
all thou gettest, sh^^ put in a Bag with holes, Psalm. 89. 31,^^ 33. Hag. 1. 6.

And set the case he should license but one Thief among thy Substance, or one
spark of Fire among thy Barns, how quickly might that be spent ill, and against
thy will, which thou should have spent to God's glory, and with thy will? and
I tell thee further, that if thou want a heart to do good when thou have about
thee, thou may want comfort in such things thy self from others, when thine
is taken from thee. See Judge. 1. 6, 7.

4. Consider that a life full of Good Works, is the only way, on thy part, to
answer the Mercy of God extended to thee; God has had mercy on thee, and has
saved thee from all thy distresses; God has not stuck to give thee his Son,
his Spirit, and the Kingdom of Heaven: says Paul, I beseech you therefore by
the Mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living Sacrifice to God,
holy, acceptable, which is your reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. See Mat. 18.
32, 33.

5. Consider that this is the way to convince all men, that the Power of God's
things has taken hold of thy heart (I speak to them that hold the head) and
say what thou will, if thy faith be not accompanied with a holy Life, thou
shall be judged a withered branch, a wording professor, salt without savor,
and as lifeless as a sounding Brass, and a tinckling Cymbal, Joh. 15. Mat. 5.
13. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. For, say they, show us your faith by your works, for we
cannot see your hearts, Jam. 2. 18.

But I say on the contrary, if thou walk as becomes thee who art saved by
Grace, then thou will witness in every man's Conscience, that thou art a good
Tree; now thou leavest guilt on the heart of the wicked, 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. now
thou take off occasion from them that desire occasion, and now thou art clear
from the blood of all men, 2 Cor. 11. 12. Acts 20. 26, 31, 32, 33, 34.

This is the Man also that provokes others to Good Works: The ear that hears
such a man, shall bless him; and the eye that sees him, shall bear witness to
him.

Surely, says David, he shall never (...) moved: The Righteous shall be had in
eve^ lasting remembrance, Heb. 10. 24. Job 29. 11. Psalm. 112. 6.

6. Again, the heart that is fullest of Good Works, has in it least room for
Satan's temptations; and this is the meaning of Peter, where he says, Be sober,
be vigilant; that is, be busying thy self in Faith and Holiness, for the Devil,
your adversary, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5. 8. He that walks uprightly, walks safely; and they that add to
Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance,
Brotherly-kindness; and to ^hese Charity, and that abounds therein, he shall
neither be barren nor unfruitful; he shall never fall, but so an entrance shall
be ministered to him abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Prove. 10. 9.

7. The Man who is fullest of Good Works, he is fittest to live, and fittest to
die: I am now (at any time) ready to be offered up, says fruitful Paul, 2 Timothy
4. 6. Whereas he that is barren, he is neither fit to live, nor fit to dye: to
dye, he himself is convinced he is not fit; and to live, God himself says he
is not fit; Cut him down, why does he cumber the ground? Luke 13. 7.

Lastly, Consider, to provoke thee to Good Works, thou shall have of God, when
thou come to Glory, a reward for every thing thou do for him on Earth.
Little do the People of God consider, how richly God will reward, what from a
right principle, and to a right end, is done for Him here; not a bit of bread
to the poor, nor a draught of water to the meanest of them that belong to
Christ, or the loss of a hair of your head, shall in that day go without its
reward, Luke 14. 13, 14. Mat. 10. 42.

For this light affliction (and so all other pieces of self-denial) which is
but for a moment, works out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

I tell thee Christian, be but rich in Good Works, and thou shall have more
then Salvation; thy Salvation thou have freely by Grace through Christ, without
works, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. but now being justified and saved, and as the fruits
hereof, reviewed by the holy Ghost; after this, I say, thou shall be rewarded
for every work that proves good; For God is not unrighteous to forget your
works and labor of love, which you have showed to his Name, in that you have
ministered to his Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 14.

Moses counted the reward that he was to have, for a short suffering with the
People of God, of greater worth, than the Treasures of Egypt, the smiles of the
King, or the honor of his Kingdom, Heb. 11. 25, 26, 27.

In a word, The fruitless Professor must meet with disappointments.
Let the disappointments that do and shall most surely befall the fruitless
Professors, provoke thee to look with all diligence to thy standing.

For First, Such a one is but deceived and disappointed touching the Work of
Grace he supposes to be in his heart, he thinks he is a Christian, and has
Grace, as Faith, Hope, and the like, in his soul, yet no fruits of these things
manifest themselves in him; indeed his tongue is tipped with a talk and tattle of
Religion; poor man, poor empty man! faith without works is dead; thy hope shall
be as the giving up of the Ghost; thy gifts with which thy soul is possessed,
are but such as are common to Reprobates; thou art therefore disappointed, God
reputeth thee still but wicked, though thou come and go to the place of
the Holy, Jam. 2. 19, 20. Job 11. 20. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.

Secondly, Therefore all thy joy and comfort must needs fall short of saving
comfort, and so leave thee in the su^^ notwithstanding; thy joy is the joy
(...) the * Pharisees, and thy gladness as th^^ of * Herod; and the longest
time it can last, it is but a Scripture * moment * Joh. 5. 33. * Mark 6. 20. *
Job 20. 5. Alas, in all thy gladness and content with thy Religion, thou art
but like the Boy that plays with Brass instead of Gold; and with Counters
instead of that which will go for current Coin: Thus, if a man think himself to
be something, when he is nothing, he deceives or disappoints himself, Gal. 6.
3.

Thirdly, This is not all, but look thou certainly for an eternal
disappointment in the Day of God, for it must be; thy lamp will out at the
first sound the trump of God shall make in thine ears; thou can not hold up
at the appearance of the Son of God in his Glory; His very looks will be to thy
profession, as a strong wind is to a blinking candle, and thou shall be left
only to smoke.

Oh the alteration that will befall a foolish virgin! she thought she was
happy, and that she should have received happiness with those that were right
at the heart; but behold the contrary, her lamp is going out, she is now to
seek for saving Grace, when the time of Grace is over; her Heaven she thought
of* is proved a Hell, and her God is proved a Devil; God has cast her out of
his presence, and claps the door upon her; she pleads her profession, and the
like, and she has for her answer repulses from Heaven: So are the pat^ of all
that forget God, and the Hypocrit^ hope shall perish; whose hope shall be cut
off, and whose trust shall be the Spiders web; though he lean upon his house,
it shall not stand, he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure, Mat. 25. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27, 28. Job 8. 13, 14, 15.

Take heed therefore; thy Soul, Heaven and Eternity, lies at stake; yea, they
turn either to thee or from thee upon the hinge of thy Faith; if it be right,
all is thine; if wrong, then all is lost, however thy hopes and expectations
are to the contrary; For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love: Let no man
therefore deceive you with vain words, for because of these things, comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of unbelief: For the Earth that drinks in the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it
is dressed, receives blessing from God; but that which bears Briars and
Thorns, is [rejected] and is nigh unto cursing, whose and is to be burned,
Gal. 5. 6. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 6. 7, 8.

Objection.
But what shall I do, who am so cold, slothful and heartless, that I cannot
find any heart to do any work for God in this World; indeed time was when his
Dew rested all ^ight upon my branches, and when I could with desire, with
earnest desire, be doing and working for God; but alas now it is ^therwise.

Answer.
If this be true, thy case is sad, thou art to be pitied, the Lord pity thee;
and for thy recovery out of this condi^ion, I would give thee no other counsel
than was given to Ephesus, when she ^ad lost her first Love; Remember, ^aith
Christ, from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works, etc.
Rev. 2.5.

Mark: Thy first Works, is, to enter into a serious considering and remembrance
from whence thou art fallen: remember that thou have left thy God, the stay of
thy Soul, and Him without whom there is no stay, comfort, or strength, for thee
to either do or suffer any thing in this World: Without me, says He, you can
do nothing, John 15. 5. A sad condition; the remembrance of this, for certain,
is the first step to the recovering a backsliding heart; for the right
remembrance of this does bring to mind, what loss that sou^ has sustained that
is in this condition, how it has lost its former visits, smiles and
consolations of God: when thy Conscience was suppled with the Blood of thy
Savior; when every step thou tookest, was, as it were, in Honey and Butter,
and when thy heart could meditate terror with comfort, Job 29* 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Isa. 33. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18* Instead of which, thou feel darkness hardness
of heart, and the thoughts o^ God are terrible to thee, Psalm. 77. 3* now God
never visits thee, or if h^ does, it is but as a wayfaring-man, the tarryeth
but for a night, Jer. 14, 8, 9.

This also brings to mind, how the case (...) altered with thee, touching thy
confidence in God for thy future happiness, ^ow uncertain thou now art of thy
hopes for Heaven, how much this life does ^ang in doubt before thee, Deuteronomy. 28.
65, 66.

2. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent.] These are
words well put together; for a solid considering of what I have lost in my
declining, will provoke in my heart a sorrow and godly heaviness, whereby I
shall be forced to bemoan my condition, and say, I will go and return to my
first Husband, for then it was better with me than now, Hos. 2. 7.

And believe it, the reason of God's standing off from giving thee comfortable
communion with himself, it is, that thou might first see the difference
between sticking close to God, and forsaking of him; and next, that thou
might indeed acknowledge thy offense, and seek his face, Hos. 5. 15. he
takes no pleasure in thy forlorn condition; he had rather thou should have
Him in thy bosom, only he will have it i^ his own Way: He looks down upon
men, and if any say, I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and i^
profits me not, then he will deliver his soul from going down into the Pit,
and his life shall see the Light, Job 33. 27, 28.

3. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works.]
As there should be a remembering and a repenting, so there should be a hearty
doing our first Works; a believing as before; a laying hold of the things of
Heaven and Glory, as at the first; for now is God returned to thee as before,
Zech. 1. 16. and though thou may, through the loss of thy locks, with
Sampson, be weak at the first, yet in short time thy hair will grow again; that
is, thy former experience will in short space be as long, large and strong as
in the former times; indeed at the first thou will find all the wheels of thy
soul rusty, and all the strings of thy heart out (...) tune; as also, when thou
first beginnest to stir, the dust and filth of thy ^art will, like smoke,
trouble thee ^m that clear beholding the Grace of thy God, and his Love to thy
Soul; ^t yet wait, and go on, and though you find thy self as unable to do
^y thing as thou formerly could, ^t I say, up and be doing, and the lord will
be with thee, for he has ^t despised the day of thy small things, (...) Chron.
22. 16. Zech. 4. 10.

I know thou will be afflicted with a thousand temptations to drive thee to
despair, that thy Faith may be faint, etc. ^t against all them set thou the
Word (...) God, the Promise of Grace, the blood of Christ, and the Examples of
God's Goodness to the great Back^^ders, that are for thy encouragement ^corded
in the Scriptures of Truth; ^d remember, that turning to God ^er backsliding,
is the greatest piece (...) service thou can do for him, and (...) greatest
honor thou can bring to (...) Blood of Christ; and know further, that God,
to show his willing re^ception of so unworthy a creature, says There shall be
joy in Heaven at thy Co^^version to him again, Luke 15. 7, 10.

To Conclude.
If thou yet, notwistanding wh^ has been said, do remain a Bac^^slider.

First, Then remember that tho^ must die; and remember also, the when the
Terrors of God, ^ Death, and a Backslidden hear^ meet together, there will be
s^ work in that Soul; this is the m^ who hangs tilting over the mou^ of Hell,
while Death is cutting t^ thread of his life.

Secondly, Remember, that thou^ God does sometimes, yea, often receive
Backsliders, yet it is n^ always so: Some draw back (...) ^erdition, for
because they have ^ung up God, and would none of ^im, he in Justice flings up
them and their Souls for ever, Prove. 1. 24, ^5, 26, 27, 28.

I have observed, that sometimes God, as it were in revenge for in^ry done him,
does snatch away ^oules in the very nick of their ^acksliding; as he served
Lot's ^ife when he turned her into a Pil^r of Salt, even while she was ^oking
over her shoulder to So^om, Genesis 19. 26. an example that ^very Backslider
should remember ^ith astonishment, Luke 17. 32.

Thus have I in few words, writ^en to you (before I die) a word (...) provoke
you to Faith and Holi^ess, because I desire that you may ^ave the Life that is
laid up for all them that believe in the Lord Jesus, and love one another when
I am deceased; though ther^ I shall rest from my labors, an^ be in Paradise,
as through Grace I comfortably believe, yet it is no^ there, but here, I must
do yo^ good; wherefore I not knowin^ the shortness of my life, nor the
hinderance that hereafter I man have of serving my God and you^ I have taken
this opportunity t^ present these few lines unto you for your edification.

Farewell. From my place of Confineme^ in Bedford, this 17th the 4th Month, 1663.
THE END.
Prison-Meditations, Directed to the Heart of SUFFERING SAINTS And REIGNING
SINNERS:
By JOHN BUNYAN, a Prisoner.
(...) FRiends, I salute you in the Lord,
and wish you may abound, (...)
faith and love, that you may ward
your selves from Satan's wound.
(...) Friends write to me, that I would hold
my Head above the Flood.
and I do wish you also bold
in holding fast the good.
(...) I am (indeed) in Prison (now)
in Body, but my Mind
(...) free to study Christ, and how
unto me he is kind.
4.
For though men keep my outward man
within their locks and bars;
Yet by the Faith of Christ I can
mount higher than the (...).
5.
Their Fetters cannot Spirits tame,
nor tie up God from me:
My Faith and Hope they cannot lame,
above them I shall be.
6.
I here am very much refresht,
to think when I was out,
I preached Life, and Peace, and Rest,
to Sinners round about.
7.
My business then, was souls to save,
by preaching Grace and Faith,
Of which the comfort now I have,
and have it shall till death.
8.
They were no Fables that I taught
devil'd by cunning men,
But God's own Word, by which were caught,
some sinners how and then.
9.
Whose souls by it were made to see
the evil of their sin;
And need of Christ to make them free
from death, which they were in*
10.
And now those very hearts, that then
were foes unto the Lord,
Embrace his Christ and Truth, like men
conquered by his Word.
11.
I hear them sigh, and groan, and cry,
for grace to God above:
They loath their sin, and to it die
it is holiness they love.
12.
This was the work I was about
when hands on me they laid
'Twas this from which they plucked me out
and vilely to me said,
13.
You Heretic, Deceiver, come
to Prison you must go,
You Preach abroad, and keep not home,
you are the Churches foe.
14.
But having peace within my soul,
and truth on every side,
I could with comfort them control,
and at their charge deride.
15.
Wherefore to prison they me sent,
where to this day I lie;
And can with very much content
for my profession die.
16.
The prison very sweet to me
has been, since I came here,
And so would also hanging be,
if God will there appear.
17.
Here dwells good Conscience, also Peace
here be my garments white,
Here, though in Bonds, I have Release
from Guilt, which else would bi^e.
18.
When they do talk of Banishment,
of Death, or such like Things,
Then to me God sends hearts content,
that like a Fountain springs.
19.
Alas, they little think what peace
they help me to, for by
Their rage my comforts do increase;
bless God therefore do I.
20.
If they do give me gall to drink,
then God does sweetning cast,
So much thereto, that they cannot think
how bravely it does taste.
21.
For as the Devil sets before
me heaviness and grief,
So God sets Christ and Grace much more,
whereby I take relief.
22.
Though they say then, that we are fools,
because we here do lie;
I answer, Goals are Christ his Schools,
in them we learn to die.
23.
It Is not the baseness of this state
does hide us from God's face,
He frequently, both soon and late
does visit us with grace.
24.
Here comes the Angels, here come Saints,
here comes the Spirit of God
To comfort us in our restraints
under the wickeds Rod
25.
God sometime visits Prisons more
than Lordly Palaces.
He often knocks at our door,
when he their houses miss.
26.
The truth and life of heavenly things,
lists up our hearts on high,
And carries us on Eagles wings,
beyond carnality.
27.
It takes away those clogs that hold
the hearts of other men,
And makes us lively strong and bold
thus to oppose their sin.
28.
By which means God does frusturate,
that which our foes expect;
Namely our turning the Postate,
like those of Judas sect.
29.
Here comes to our rememberance,
the troubles good men had;
Of old, and for our furtherance,
their joys, when they were sad.
30.
To them that here for evil lie,
the place is comfortless,
But not to me, because that I,
lie here for righteousness.
31.
The Truth and I, were both here cast
together, and we do
Lie arm in arm, and so hold fast,
each other; This is true.
32.
This Goal to us, is as a Hill,
from whence we plainly see
Beyond this World; and take our fill,
of things that lasting be.
33.
From hence we see the emptiness,
of all this World contains;
And here we feel the blessedness,
that for us yet remains.
34.
Here we can see how all men play
their parts, as on a Stage:
How good men suffer for God's way,
and bad men at them rage.
35.
Here we can see, who holds that ground,
which they in Scripture find;
Here we see also, who turns round,
like Weathercocks with' Wind.
36.
We can also from hence behold
how seeming Friends appear
But Hypocrites, as we are told
in Scripture every where.
37.
When we did walk at liberty,
we were deceived by them,
Who we, from hence, do clearly see
are vile deceitful men.
38.
These Policitians that professed
for base and worldly ends,
Do now appear to us at best
but Machivilian friends.
39.
Though men do say, we do disgrace
our selves by lying here,
Among the Rogues, yet Christ our face
from all such filth will clear.
40.
We know there is neither flout nor frown
that we now for him bear
But will add to our heavenly Crown,
when he comes in the air.
41.
When he our righteousness forth brings
bright shining as the day,
And wipeth off those slandrous things,
that scorners on us lay.
42.
We sell our earthly happiness
for heavenly house and home;
We leave this world because it is less,
and worse than that to come.
43.
We change our drossie Dust for Gold,
from Death to Life we fly:
We let go Shadows, and take hold
of Immortality.
44.
We trade for that which lasting is,
and nothing for it give;
But that which is already his;
by whom we breath and live.
45.
That liberty we lose for him,
sickness might take away:
Our goods might also, for our sin,
by Fire or Thieves decay.
46.
Again, we see what Glory it is,
freely to bear our Cross
For him, who for us took up his,
when he our Servant was.
47.
I am most free, that men should see
a hole cut through mine ear;
If others will ascertain me,
they will hang a Jewel there.
48.
Just thus it is, we suffer here
for him a little pain.
Who, when he does again appear,
will with him let us reign.
49.
If all must either die for sin,
a death that is natural;
Or else for Christ, it is best with him,
who for the last does fall.
50.
Who now dare say, we throw away
our goods or liberty,
When God's most holy Word does say,
we gain thus much thereby.
51.
Hark yet again, you carnal men,
and hear what I shall say,
In your own dialect, and then
I Will you no longer stay.
52.
You talk sometimes of valor much,
and count such bravely manned,
That will not stick to have a tu^ch
with any in the land.
53.
If these be worth commending, then,
that vainly show their might;
How dare you blame those holy men
that in God's quarrel fight?
54.
Though you dare crack a cowards crown,
or quarrel for a pin;
You dare not on the wicked frown,
nor speak against their sin.
55.
For all your spirits are so stout,
for matters that are vain:
Yet sin besets you round about,
you are in Satan's chain.
56.
You dare not for the truth engage,
you quake at prisonment;
You dare not make the Tree your stage
for Christ that King potent.
57.
Know then true valor there does dwell,
where men engage for God.
Against the Devil, Death and Hell,
and bear the wickeds rod,
58.
These be the men that God does count
of high and noble mind;
These be the men that do surmount
what you in nature find.
59.
First, they do conquer their own hearts,
all worldly fears, and then,
Also the Devils fiery darts,
and persecuting men.
60.
They conquer when they thus do fall.
they kill when they do die:
They overcome then most of all,
and get the victory.
61.
The worldling understands not this,
it is clear out of his sight:
Therefore he counts this world his bliss,
and does our glory slight.
62.
The Lubber knows not how to spring
the nimble Footmans stage;
Neither can Owls, or Jack-daws sing,
if they were in the Cage.
63
The Swine does not the Pearls regard,
but them does slight for Grains,
Though the wise Merchant labors hard
for them with greatest pains.
64
Consider man, what I have said,
and judge of things aright;
When all men's Cards are fully played,
whose will abide the light?
65
Will those, who have us hither cast?
or they who do us scorn?
Or those who do our houses wast?
or us, who this have born?
66.
And let us count those things the best,
that best will prove at last;
And count such men the only blessed,
that do such things hold fast.
67.
And what though they, us dear do cost,
yet let us buy them so;
We shall not count our labor lost,
when we see others woe.
68.
And let Saints be no longer blamed,
by Carnal Policy;
But let the wicked be ashamed,
of their Malignity.
FINIS.

