The HOLY CITY: OR, The New-Jerusalem: WHEREIN Its Goodly Light Walls, Gates,
Angels, and the manner of their standing, are EXPOUNDED. ALSO, Her Length and
Breadth, together with the Golden Measuring - Reed, EXPLAINED: AND The Glory of
all Unfolded. As also, The Numerousness of its Inhabitants: And what the Tree
and Water of Life are, by which they are sustained. By John Bunyan, a Servant
of Christ.

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Ps. 87. 3. And the Name of
the City from that day shall be called, THE LORD IS THERE. Ezekiel. 38. 35.
London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without
Temple-Barr 1669.

THE EPISTLE To Four Sorts of READERS.
I. To the Godly Reader.
Friend,
THough the Men of this World, at the sight of this Book, will not only
deride, but laugh in conceit, to consider that one so low, contemptible, and
inconsiderable, as I, should busy my self in such sort, as to meddle with the
exposition of so hard and knotty a Scripture, as here they find the subject
matter of this little Book; yet do thou remember that God has chosen the
foolish things of this World to confound the wise, and things that 1 Cor. 1.
27, 28. Mat. 11. 25. and 21 15, 16.
are not, to bring to naught things that are: Consider also, that even of old
it has been his pleasure to hide these things from the wise and prudent, and
to reveal them unto Babes.

I tell you that the operation of the Word and Spirit of God (without depending
upon that Idol so much adored) is sufficient of it self to search out all
things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

The occasion of my first meddling with this matter, was as follows:

Upon a certain First day, I being together with my Brethren, in our
Prison-Chamber, they expected that, according to our Custom, something should
be spoken out of the Word, for our mutual Edification; but at that time I felt
my self (it being my turn to speak) so empty, spiritless, and barren, that I
thought I should not have been able to speak among them so much as five words
of Truth, with Life and Evidence: but at last, it so fell out, that
providentially I cast mine Eye upon the eleventh Verse of the one and twentieth
Chapter of this Prophecy; upon which, when I had considered a while, methought
I perceived something of that JASPER in whose Light you there find this HOLY
CITY is said to come or descend; wherefore having got in my Eye some dim
glimmerings thereof, and finding also in my heart a desire to see further
thereinto; I with a few groans did arry my Meditatious to the Lord JESUS for a
Blessing, which he (...) forthwith grant according to his Grace; and helping me
to set before my Brethren, we did all eat, and were well refreshed; and behold
also that while I was in the distributing of it, it so increased in my hand,
that of the Fragments that we left, after we had well dined, I gathered up this
Basket-full. Methought the more I cast mine Eye upon the whole Discourse, the
more I saw lie in it: Wherefore setting my self to a more narrow search,
through frequent Prayer to God, (what first with doing, and then with undoing,
and after that with doing again) I thus did finish it.

But yet, notwithstanding all my labor and travel in this matter, I do not,
neither can I expect that every Godly Heart should in every thing see the Truth
and Excellency of what is here discoursed; neither would I have them imagine
that I have so thoroughly viewed this Holy City, but that much more then I do
here crush out, is yet left in the Cluster: Alas! I shall only say thus, I
have crushed out a little Juice to sweeten their Lips withal; not doubting but
in little time more large measures of the Excellency of this City, and of its
sweetness and glory, will by others be opened and unfolded; yea, if not by the
Servants of the Lord JESUS, yet by the Lord Himself, who will have this City
builded and set in its own place.

But, I say, for this DISCOURSE, if any of the Saints that read herein, think
they find naught at all but words, (as many times it falls out even in their
reading the Scriptures of God themselves) I beg, I say, of such, that they
read charitably, judge modestly, and also that they would take heed of
concluding, that because they for the present see nothing in this or that
passage, that therefore there is nothing in it: Possibly from that which thou
may cast away as an empty Bone, others may pick both good and wholesome Bits;
yea, and also out of that suck much nourishing Marrow. You find by experience
that that very bit that will not down with One, may yet not only down, but be
healthful and nourishing to another. Babes are more for Milk than strong Meat,
though Meat will well digest with those that are of riper Years, 1 Cor. 2. 1,
2, 3. Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.

Wherefore that which thy weakness will not suffer thee to feed on, leave; and
go to the Milk and Nourishment that in other places thou shall find.

II. To the Learned Reader.
MY second Word is to my wise and learned Reader.

Sir, I suppose in your reading of this DISCOURSE, you will be apt to blame me
for two things: first, because I have not so beautified my Matter with
acuteness of Language as you could wish or desire: Secondly, Because also I
have not given you, either in the Line, or in the Margent, a Cloud of Sentences
from the Learned FATHERS, that have according to their Wisdom (possibly)
handled these Matters long before me.

To the first, I say, The Matter indeed is excellent and high; but for my part,
I am weak and low; it also deserves a more full and profound Discourse than my
small parts will help me to make upon the matter: But yet, seeing the Lord
looks not at the outward appearance, but on the Heart; neither regards high
swelling words of vanity, but pure and naked Truth; and seeing also that a
Widows Mite being all, even Heart as well as substance, is counted more, and
better, then to cast in little out of much, and that little too perhaps the
worst: I hope, my little being all, my Farthing (seeing I have no more) may be
accepted and counted for a great deal in the LORD'S Treasury. Besides, Sir;
Words easy to be understood do often hit the Mark; when high and learned ones
do only pierce the Air: He also that speaks to the weakest, may make the
Learned understand him; when he that striveth to be high, is not only for the
most part understood but of a sort, but also many times is neither understood
by them, nor by himself.

Secondly, The Reason why you find me empty of the Language of the Learned, I
mean their Sentences and Words, which others use, is, because I have them not,
nor have not read them: had it not been for the BIBLE, I had not only not thus
done it, but not at all.

Lastly, I do find in most such a Spirit of Whoredom and Idolatry concerning
the Learning of this World, and Wisdom of the Flesh, and GOD'S Glory so much
stained and diminished thereby; that had I all their aid and assistance at
command, I durst not make use of ought thereof, and that for fear lest that
Grace, and those Gifts that the LORD has given me, should be at^ributed to
their Wits, rather then ^he Light of the Word and Spirit of GOD: Wherefore I
will not take of them from a thread to a shoo-latchet, lest they should say, We
have made Abraham rich, Genesis 14. 23.

Sir, What you find suiting with Scriptures, take; though it should not suit
with Authors: but that which you find against the Scriptures, slight; though it
should be confirmed by Multitudes of them. Yea further, Where you find the
Scriptures and your Authors jump, yet believe it for the sake of Scriptures
Authority. I honor the Godly, as Christians, but I prefe^ the BIBLE before
them; and having that still with me, I count my self far better furnished than
if I ha^ (without it) all the Libraries of the two Universities: Besides, I am
for drinking Water out of my own C^stern; what GOD makes mine by the evidence
of his Word and Spirit, that I dare make bold with Wherefore seeing, though I
am without their Learned Lines; yet well furnished with the Words of GOD, I
mean the BIBLE, I have contented my self with what I there have found: And
having set it before your Eyes,

I pray read and take, Sir, what you like best; And that which you like not,
leave for the rest.

III. To the Captious Reader.
MY third word is to the Captious and wrangling Reader. Friend, However thou
came by this Book, I will assure thee thou wast least in my thoughts when I
writ it; I tell thee, I intended this Book as little for thee, as the Goldsmith
intends his Jewels and Rings for the Snowt of a Sow: Wherefore put on Reason,
and lay aside thy Frenzy; Be sober, or lay by the Book; Mat. 7. 6.

IV. To the Mother of Harlots, etc.
MY fourth word is to the Lady of Kingdoms, the Well-favoured Harlot, the
Mistress of Witchcrafts and the Abominations of the Earth.

Mistress, I suppose I have nothing here that will either please your wanton
Eye, or go down with your voluptuous Palate: here is Bread indeed, as also Milk
and Meat; but here is neither paint to adorn thy wrinkled face, nor Crutch to
uphold or undershore thy shaking, tottering, staggering Kingdom of ROME; but
rather a certain presage of thy sudden and fearful final downfall, and of the
Exaltation of that holy Matron, whose Chastity thou do abhor, because by it
she reproves and condemns thy lewd and stubborn Life. Wherefore, Lady, smell
thou may of this, but taste thou will not: I know that both thy Mal. 1. 12
13. Ezekiel. 8. 17.
wanton Eye, with all thy mincing Brats that are intoxicated with thy Cup, and
enchanted with thy Fornications, will at the sight of so homely and plain a
Dish as this, cry, Foh! snuff, put the Branch to the Nose, and say,
Contemptible! But Wisdom Mat. 11. 19
is justified of all her Children. The Isa. 37. 22. Ezekiel. 22. 7, 8, 9, 10 11,
etc.
Virgin Daughter of Zion has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn;
Jerusalem has shaken her Head at thee; yea, her GOD has smitten his Hands at
thy dishonest Gain and Freaks. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad for her,
all ye that love her; rejoice for Joy with her all ye that mourn for her; that
ye may suck and be satisfied with (...) Isa. 66. 10 11.
Breasts of her Consolations, that ye may milk out and be delighted with the
abundance of her Glory.

JOHN BUNYAN.

Reader,
By reason of the Authors distance from the Press, some Faults have escaped,
(notwithstanding the Printers care) which thou art desired to correct thus:

ERRATA.
Page 7. line 10 and 11. for deserve read discern. Page 78. lin. 12. for
the other, read together. Page 186. lin. 22. for by Laws, read by-Lanes. Page 217.
lin. 2. for contiaually, r. continually. P. 234. l 22. for Sanctuar;y the r.
Sanctuary; the. P. 270. l. 12. for he, read the. P. 271. l. 2. for iver, read
River. P. 277. l. 28. for wandering by, read wonderingly.
The Holy City: Or, The New Jerusalem.
Revelations XXI.
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed
me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God,



































CHAP. XXII.


Fruit every month: and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations.





IN my dealing with this Mystery, I shall not meddle where I see nothing,
neither shall I hide from you that which at present I conceive to be wrapped up
therein: only you must not from me look for much enlargement, though I shall
endeavor to speak as much in few words, as my Understanding and Capacity will
enable me, through the help of Christ.

In this Description of this Holy City, you have these five general Heads:

First, The Vision of this City in general.

Secondly, A discovery of its Defense Entrances, and Fashion, in particular.

Thirdly, A relation of the Glory of each.

Fourthly, A discovery of its Inhabitants, their quality and numerousness.

Fifthly, A relation of its Maintenance, by which it continues in Life, Ease,
Peace, Tranquillity and Sweetness for ever.

To all which I shall speak something in their proper places, and shall open
them before you.

But before I begin with any of them, I must speak a word or two concerning
John's qualification, whereby he was enabled to behold and take a view of this
City; which qualification he relates in these words following.

Verse. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain,
and showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
from God.
The Angel being to show this holy John qualified for this Vision.
man this great and glorious Vision, he first (by qualifying of him) puts him
into a suitable Capacity to behold and take the view thereof; He carried me
away in the Spirit: When he says, He carried me away in the Spirit, he means
he was taken up into the Spirit, his Soul was greatly spiritualized: Whence
take notice, That an ordinary frame of Spirit is not able to comprehend, nor
yet to apprehend extraordinary things: Much of the Spirit, deserves much of
Gods matters; but little of the Spirit, deserves but little of them: I could
not speak to you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in
Christ; I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat; for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, nor yet are ye able, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.

And he carried me away in the Spirit, etc. Thus it was with the Saints of old,
when God had either special Work for them to do, or great things for them to
see: Ezekiel, when he had the vision of this City in the old Law, in the
Captivity at Babylon, he must be first fore-fitted with a competent measure of
the Spirit, Ezekiel. 40. 2. John also, when he had the whole matter of this
Prophecy revealed unto him, he must be in the Spirit; I was (says he) in the
Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great Voice, as of a Trumpet,
talking with me, etc. Rev. 1. 10, 11. Whence note again, That when God calls a
man to this or When God calls to Work, he fits for Work.
that Work for him, he first fits him with a suitable Spirit: Ezekiel says,
when God bid him stand upon his Feet, That the Spirit entered into him, and set
him upon his Feet, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2.

And he carried me away, etc. Mark, And he carried me [ away] etc. As a man
must have much of the Spirit that sees much of God, and his goodly matters; so
he must be also carried AWAY with it; he must by it be taken off from things
carnal and earthly, and taken up into the glory of things that are spiritual
and heavenly: the Spirit loves to do what it does in private; that man to whom
God intends to reveal great things, he takes him aside from the lumber and
cumber of this World, and carries him away in the solace and contemplation of
the things of another World; And when they were alone, he expounded Mark 4. 34.
all things to his Disciples; mark, And when they were ALONE; according to that
of the Prophet, Whom shall he teach Wisdom, and whom shall he make to
understand Doctrine? they that are WEANED from the Milk, and DRAWN from the
Breasts, Isa. 28. 9. Whence observe also, He is the man that is like to know
most of God, that is oftenest in Luke 2. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 34,
35, 36 37, 38.
private with him: He that obeys, when God says, Come up hither, he shall
see the Bride, the Lambs Wife: For a man through desire having SEPARATED
himself, seeks and intermedleth with all Wisdom, Prove. 18. 1.

And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain. Thus having
showed his frame, and inward disposition of Spirit; he now comes to tell us
also of the Place or Stage on which he was set; to the end that now being
fitted by illumination, he might not be hindered of his Vision by ought that
might intercept: He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain.
Thus did God of old also; for when he showed to Moses the Patterns of the Exodus
19. 3.
heavenly things, he must ascend into the Mount Sinai; he must into the Mount
also, when he has the view of the holy Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
Land, and of that goodly Mountain Lebanon: Whence we may learn, That the
things of God are far from man as he is natural; and also that there are very
great things between us and the sight of them; none can see them but such as
are carried away in the Spirit, and set on high.

-- To a great and high Mountain. This Mountain therefore signifies the Lord
Christ, on which the Soul must be placed, as on a mighty Hill, whereby he may
be able (his Eyes being anointed with spiritual Eye Salve) to see over the 2
Cor. 10. ^, 6.
tops of those mighty Corruptions, Temptations, and spiritual Enemies, that
like high and mighty Towers are built by the wicked one, to keep the view of
Gods things from the sight of our Souls: wherefore Christ is called, The
Mountain of the Lords House, or that on which the House of God is placed; he is
also called, The Rock of Ages; and, The Rock that is higher than we: The Hill
of God is an high Hill, as Bashan; an high Hill, as the Hill of Bashan, Psalm.
68. 15. This is the Hill from whence the Prophet Ezekiel had the Vision of this
City: And upon this Rock (says Christ) will I build my Church, and the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it, Ezekiel. 40. 2. Mat. 16. 18.

And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain, and showed
me that great City, the holy Jerusalem. Having thus told us how, and with
Jerusalem considered in general.
what he was qualified, he next makes relation of what he saw, which was, that
great City, the holy Jerusalem.

Jerusalem in the Language of the Scripture is to be acknowledged for the
Church and Spouse of the Lord Jesus; and is to be considered either generally,
or more particularly: Now as she is to be taken generally, so she is to be
understood as being Ephesians. 3. 15.
the whole Family in Heaven and Earth; and as she is thus looked upon, so she
is not considered with respect to this or that state and condition of the
Church here in the world, but simply, as she is the Church: therefore it is
said, when at any time any are converted from Satan to God, That they are come
to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; to an
innumerable Company of Angels; to the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn that are written in Heaven; to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of Just men made perfect; to Jesus, and to the Blood of sprinkling,
Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

But again, As Jerusalem is thus generally Jerusalem is to be considered more
particularly.
to be understood, so also she is to be considered more particularly: 1. Either
as she relates to her first and purest state; or, 2. As she relates to her
declined and captivated state; or, 3. With reference to her being recovered
again from her apostatized and captivated condition: Thus it was with Jerusalem
in the Letter; which threefold state of this City shall be most exactly
answered by our Gospel-Jerusalem, by out New-Testament-Church. Her first state
was in the days of Christ and his Apostles, and answered to Jerusalem in the
days of Solomon; her second state is in the days of Antichrist, and answers
to the carrying away of the Jews from their City into Babylon; and her third
state is this in the Text, and answers to their return from Captivity, and
rebuilding their City and Walls again: All which will be fully manifest in this
Discourse following.

Besides, That this holy City that here you read of, is the Church, the
Gospel Church, returning out of her long and Antichristian Captivity; consider,

First, She is here called a City, the very name that our Primitive Ephesians. 3.
19.
Church went under; which name she loses all the while of her Apostatizing and
Captivity under Antichrist: for observe, I say, all the while she is under the
scourge of the Dragon, Beast, and the Woman in Scarlet, etc. she goes under
the name of Rev. 13.
a Woman, a Woman in travel, a Woman flying before the Dragon, a Woman flying
into the Wilderness, there to continue in an afflicted and tempted condition,
and to be glad of Wilderness-Nourishment, until the time of her Enemies were
come to an end, Rev. 12.

Now the reason why she lost the title of City, at her going into Captivity,
is, Because then she lost her situation and strength; she followed others then
Christ, wherefore he suffered her Enemies to scale her Walls, to break down her
Battlements; he suffered, as you see here, the great Red Dragon, and Beast with
seven Heads and ten Horns, to get into her Vineyard, who made most fearful work
both with her and all her Friends: her Gates also was now either broken down,
or shut up, so that none could according to her Laws and Statutes enter into
her; her Charter also, even the Bible it self, was most grossly abused and
corrupted, yea, sometimes burned and destroyed almost utterly: wherefore the
Spirit of God does take away from her the title of City, and leaves her to be
termed a wandering Woman, as aforesaid: The Court that is without the Temple
(says the Angel) leave out, and measure it not, for it is given to the
Gentiles; and the Holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two months,
Rev. 11. 2. The Holy City shall they tread under foot; that is, all the
City-Constitutions, her Forts and Strength, her Laws and Privileges for a long
time shall be laid aside and slighted, shall become a hissing, a taunt, and a
byword among the Nations. And truly thus it was in the Letter, in the
destruction of Jerusalem by the King of Babylon and his wicked Instruments, by
whose hands the City was broken up, the Walls pulled down, the Gates burned,
the Houses ri^^ed, the Virgins ravished, and the Children laid dead in the top
of every street, 2 Chronicles. 36. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Jer. 52. Lam. Chap. 1, 2, 3,
4. Now was Zion become a plowed Field, and Jerusalem turned to heaps; a place
of Briers and Thorns, and of wastness and desolation, Mic. 3. 12. Isa. 7. 23,
24.

Secondly, The phrase also that is joined with this of City, does much concern
the point; she is here called, The new and holy City, which words are explained
by these, As a Bride adorned and prepared for her Husband: the meaning is, That
she is now got into her Form, Fashion, Order and Privileges again; she is now
ready, adorned, prepared, and put into her Primitive state: Mark, though she
was in her state of affliction called a Woman, yet she was not then either
called a City, or a Woman ADORNED; but rather a Woman robbed and spoiled, rent
and torn among the briers and thorns of the Wilderness, Isa. 5. 6. and 42. 22.
and 32. 13, 14. Wherefore this City is nothing else but the Church returned out
of Captivity from under the reign of Antichrist: As is yet further manifest,
because,

Thirdly, We find no City to answer that which was built after the Jews return
from Captivity, but this: for this, and only this is the City that you find
in this Prophecy, that is nominated as the Antitype of that Second of the
Jews: wherefore John has no relation of her while toward the doom of
Antichrist, and no description of her in particular until Antichrist's utterly
overthrown: as all may see that wisely read the 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th
Chapters of this Prophecy.

-- And showed me that great City. The holy Ghost is pleased at this time Why
the Church at this day is called by the name of a City, rather than a Woman,
Temple, House, or the like.
to give the Church the name of a City, rather than any other name; rather than
the name of Spouse, Woman, Temple, and the like: (though he gives us her under
the name of a Woman also, to help us to understand what he means) but I say,
the name of a City is now the name in special, under which the Church must go,
and that for special Reasons:

First, To show us how great and numerous a People will then be in the Church;
the Church may be a Woman, a Temple, a Spouse, when she is but few, but an
handful, but two or three; but to be a City, and that in her glory, it bespeaks
great store of Members, Inhabitants, and Citizens; especially when she goes
under the name of a GREAT City, as here she does: He showed me that GREAT City.

Secondly, She goes rather under the name of a City, than Temple or Spouse; to
show us also how plentifully the Nations and Kingdoms of men shall at that day
traffic with her, and in her, for her goodly Merchandise of Grace and Life: to
show us, I say, what wonderful custom the Church of God at this day shall have
among all sorts of People, for her Heavenly Treasures. It is said of Tyrus
Ezekiel. 27 Rev. 18. 2, 3.
and Babylon, That their Merchandise went into all the World, and men from all
quarters under Heaven came to trade and to deal with them for their Wares: why
thus it will be in the latter day with the Church of God, the Nations shall
come from far; from Tarshish, Pull, Lud, Tubal, Javan, and the Isles afar off;
They shall come, says God, out of all Nations upon Horses and Mules, and upon
swift Beasts, to my holy Mountain Jerusalem: And it shall come to pass, that
from one new Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh
come to worship before me, says the Lord, Isa. 66. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Alas,
the Church at that day when she is a Woman only, or a Temple either, may be
without that Beauty, Treasure, Amiableness, and affecting Glory that she will
be endowed with when she is a prosperous City: His marvelous kindness is seen
in a strong City, Psalm. 31. 21. In Cities, you know, are the Treasures, Beauty,
and Glory of Kingdoms, and it is thither men go, that are desirous to solace
themselves therewith: Out of Zion, the perfection of Psa. 50. 2.
Beauty, God has shined.

Thirdly, It is called a City rather than a Woman, or Temple, to show us how
strong and securely it will keep its Inhabitants at that day; In that day shall
this Song be sung, We have a strong City; Salvation will God appoint for Walls
and Bulwarks: And verily if the Cities of the Deuteronomy. 9. 1, 2. Number. 13. 28.
Gentiles, and the strength of their Bars and Gates, and Walls, did so shake
the Hearts, yea, the very Faith of the Children of God themselves, how secur^
and safe will the Inhabitants of this Cit^ be, even the Inhabitants of that
City which GOD Himself will build? etc.

But lastly and more especially, The Church is called here a City, chiefly to
show us that now she shall be undermost no longer: Babylon reigned, and so
shall Jerusalem at this day; And thou, O Tower of the Flock, the strong hold of
the Daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first Dominion, the
Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, Mic. 4. 8. Now shall she, when
she is built and complete, have a complete Conquest and Victory over all her
Enemies; she shall reign over them; the Law shall go forth of her that rules
them, and the Governors of all the World at that day shall be Jerusalem-Men:
And the Captivity of this Host of the Children of Israel shall possess that of
the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem which is in
Sepharad, shall possess the Cities of the South: And Saviors shall come out of
Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords, Ob.
20, 21. For the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem: And ^e shall judge among many People, and rebuke strong Nations afar
off, and they shall beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up a Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, Mic. 4. 1, 2, 3. There brake he the Ships of Tarshish
with an East wind: As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the Lord
of Hosts, in the City of our God; God will establish it for ever, Psalm. 48. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. For observe it, Christ has not only obtained the Kingdom
of Heaven for those that are his, when this World is ended, but has also, as a
Reward for his Sufferings, the whole World given into his hand; wherefore as
all the Kings and Princes and Powers of this World have had their time to
reign, and have Glory in this World in the Face of all; so Christ will have his
time at this day to show who is the only Potentate and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy
6. 15. At which day, he will not only set up his Kingdom in the midst of their
Kingdoms, as he does now, but will set it up even upon the top of their
Kingdoms; at which day there will not be a Nation in the World, but must bend
to Jerusalem, or perish: For the Isa. 60. 12
Kingdom and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven,
shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7. 27.
And his Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River, to the ends of
the Earth, Zech. 9. 10. O Holiness! how shall it shine in Kings and Nations,
when God does this!

He showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
from God. In these words we are to enquire into three things:

First, What he here should mean by Heaven.

Secondly, What it is for this City to descend out of it.

Thirdly, And why she is said to descend out of it from God.

First, For the word Heaven, in Scripture it is variously to be understood, but
generally either materially or metaphorically: Now not materially here, but
metaphorically; and so is generally, if not always, taken in this Book.

Now that it is not to be taken for the material Heavens where Christ in Person
is: Consider,

That the descending of this City, ^ not the coming of glorified Saints with
their Lord; because that even after the descending, yea, and building of this
City, there shall be Sinners converted to God; but at the coming of the Lord
Jesus from Heaven with his Saints, the door shall be shut; that is, the door of
Grace, against all Unbelievers, Luke 13. 25. Matthew. 25. 10.

Therefore Heaven here is to be taken metaphorically, for the Church; which, as
I said before, is frequently so taken in this Prophecy, as also in many others
of the holy Scriptures, Rev. 11. 15. and 12. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 13. and 13. 6.
and 19. 1, 14. Jer. 51. 48. Matthew. 25. 1. etc. And observe it, though the
Church of Christ under the tyranny of Antichrist, loses the title of a
standing City, yet in the worst of times she loses not the title of Heaven;
She is Heaven when the great Red Dragon is in her, and Heaven when the third
part of her Stars are cast unto the Earth; she is Heaven also when the Beast
does open his Throat against her, to blaspheme her God, his Tabernacle, and
those that dwell in her.

Secondly, Now then to show you what are to understand by this, that she is
said to DESCEND out of Heaven; for indeed to speak properly, Jerusalem is
always in the Scriptures set in the highest ground, and men are said to
descend, when they Ezr. 3. 1. Neh. 12. 1 Mat. 20. 17, 18. Luke 19. 28. and 10.
30.
go down from her, but to ascend, or go up, when they are going thitherwards:
but yet though this be true, there must also be something significant in this
word descending; wherefore when he says, he saw this City to DESCEND out of
Heaven, he would have us understand,

1. That though the Church under Antichrist be never so low, yet out of her
Loins shall they come that yet shall be a Hebr. 7. 6, 13, 14.
reigning City: Generation is a descending from the Loins of our Friends; he
therefore speaks of the generation of the Church: Wherefore the meaning is,
That out of the Church that is now in Captivity, there shall come a complete
City, so exact in all things, according to the Laws and Liberties, Privileges
and Riches of a City, that she shall lie level with the great Charter of
Heaven. Thus it was in the Type, the City after the Captivity was builded, even
by those that once were in Captivity, especially by their Seed and Offspring;
and thus it shall be in our New - Testament New Jerusalem; They that shall be
of thee, says Isa. 45.
the Prophet, (that is, of the Church in affliction) they shall build the old
waste places; thou shall raise up the Foundations of many Generations; and thou
shall be called, The Repairer of Breaches, and the Restorer of Paths to dwell
in; and again, They that sometimes had Ashes for Gladness, and the Spirit of
Heaviness instead of the Garment of Praise, They shall build the old Wastes,
they shall raise up the former Desolations, and they shall repair the waste
Cities, the Desolations of many Generations; for your shame you shall have
double, and for confusion they shall rejoice in their Portion, etc. Isa. 58.
11, 12. and 61. 3, 4, 7. Thus therefore by descending, we may understand that
the Churches Generation shall be this Holy City, and shall build up themselves
the Tower of the Flock.

2. When he says, This holy City descended out of Heaven, he would have us
understand also what a Blessing and Happiness this City at her rebuilding will
be to the whole World: Never was kind and seasonable showers more profitable to
the tender new-mown-Grass, than will this City at this day be, to the
Inhabitants of the World; they will come as a Blessing from Heaven upon them:
As the Prophet says, The Remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many
People, as a dew from the Lord; as the showers upon the Grass, that tarrieth
not for man, nor waits for the Sons of men; Mic. 5. 7. O the Grace, the Light
and Glory, that will strike with spangling Beams from this City, as from a Sun,
into the furthest parts of the World! Thus says the Lord, As the new Wine is
found in the Cluster, and one says, Destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it:
so will I do for my Servants sake, that I may not destroy them all: I will
bring forth a Seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an Inheritor of my holy
Mountain; and my Elect shall inherit it, and my Servants shall dwell there: And
Sharon (where the sweet Roses grew, Song. 2. 1.) shall be a fold for Flocks,
and the Valley of Achor a place for the Herds to lie down in, for my People
that have sought me, Isa. 65. 8, 9, 10. In that day Israel shall be the third
with Egypt and Assyria, even a Blessing in the midst of the Land, Isa. 19. 24.
And it shall come to pass, that as you were a curse among the Heathen, O House
of Judah, and House of Israel; so will I save you, and you shall be a Blessing:
fear not, but let your Hands be strong, Zec. 8. 13. As the dew of Hermon that
descended upon the Mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the
Blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3.

And now for the third particular, namely, What it is to descend out of Heaven
FROM GOD.

1. To descend out of Heaven (that is, out of the Church in Captivity) from
God, is this; The Church is the place in which God does beget all those that
are the Children of him; wherefore in that they are said to descend out of
Heaven FROM GOD, it is as as if he had said, The Children of the Church are
Heaven-born, begotten of God, and brought forth in the Church of Christ: For
Jerusalem which is above, is the Mother of us all: The Lord shall count when he
writes up the People, that this man was born there; Gal. 4. 26. Psalm. 87. 5, 6.

2. When he says he saw this Jerusalem come out of Heaven from God, he means,
That those of the Church in Captivity that shall build this City, they shall be
a People peculiarly fitted and qualified for this Work, of God. It was not all
the Children of Israel that had their hand i^ building Jerusalem after the
Captivity of old; their Nobles put not their hands to the Work of the Lord;
also there were many Neh. 3. 5.
of Judah that were sworn to Tobiah the ^rch Opposet of the building of the
City, because of some Kindred and Relation that then was between them and him,
Neh. 6. 17, 18, 19. and as it was then, so we do expect it will be now; some
will be even at the beginning of this Work, in Babylon; at that time also some
will be cowardly and fearful, yea, and even men hired to ^inder the Work,
Nehem. 6. 10, 11, 12. Wherefore I say, those of the Church that ^t that day
builded the City, they were men of a particular and peculiar Spirit, which also
will so be at the building of New Jerusalem: They whose Light breaks forth as
the Morning, they that are mighty for a Spirit of Prayer, they that take away
the Yoke, and speaking Vanity, and that draw out their Soul to Isa. 58. 8. to
14.
the Hungry; they that the Lord shall guide continually, that shall have fat
Bones, and that shall be as a watered Garden, whose Waters fail not, etc. of
THEM shall they be that build the old wastes, and that raise up the Foundations
of many Generations, etc. It was thus in all Ages, in every Work of God, SOME
of his People, SOME of his Saints in special in all Ages, have been used to
promote, and advance, and perfect the Work of their Generations.

3. This City descends or comes out of Heaven from God, that is, by his special
working and bringing to pass; 'twas God that gave them the Pattern, even when
they were in Babylon; 'twas God that put it into their Hearts while there, to
pray for deliverance; 'twas God that put it into the Hearts of the Kings of the
Medes and Persians to give them Liberty to return and build; and it was God
that quailed the Hearts of those that by opposing did endeavor to hinder the
bringing the Work to perfection; yea, it was God that did indeed bring the Work
to perfection: wherefore she may well be said to descend out of Heaven from
GOD; as he also says himself by the Prophet, [ I] will cause the Captivity of
Judah, and the Captivity of Israel to return* and [ I] will build them as at
the first, Ezekiel* 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Neh. 2. 8. and 3. 18. Ezr. 7. 27* Neh. 4. 15.
and 6. 15, 16. Jer. 33. 7. and 32. 44. Ezekiel. 36. 33, 34, 35, 36. and 37. 11,
12, 13, 14. Amos 9. 11. Lastly, When he says he saw her decend from God out of
Heaven, he may refer to her Glory, which at her declining departed from h^^,
and ascended to God; as the Sap returns into the Root at the Fall of the Le^^:
which Glory does again at her return descend, or come into the Church, and
Branches of the same, as the Sap does arise at the Spring of the Year; for
indeed the Churches Beauty is from Heaven, and it either goes up thither from
her, or else comes from thence to her, according to the natures of both Fall
and Spring, Cant. 2.

Thus you see what this HEAVEN is, and what it is for this City to DESCEND out
of it; also what it is for this City to descend out of it FROM GOD.

Verse. 11. Having the Glory of God:
These last words do put the whole matter out of doubt, and do most clearly
show unto us, that the descending of this City is the perfect return of the
Church out of Captivity: The Church, when she began at first to go into
Captivity, her Glory began to depart from her; and now she is returning again,
she receives therewith her former Glory, having the Glory of God. Thus it was
in the Type, when Jerusalem went into Captivity under the King of Babylon
(which was a figure of the Captivity of our New-Testament-Church under
Antichrist) it is said that then the glory of God departed from them, and went
by degrees, first out of the Temple to the Threshold of the House, and from
thence with the Cherubims of Glory, for that time quite away from the City,
Ezekiel. 10. 4, 18. and 11. 22, 23, etc.

Again, As the Glory of God departed from this City at her going into
Captivity; so when* she returned again, she had also then returned to her the
Glory of God; whereupon this very Prophet that saw the Glory of God go from her
at her going into Captivity, did see it, the very same; and that according as
it departed, so return at her deliverance* He brought me to the Gate, says he,
(that is, when by a Vision he saw all the Frame and Patterns of the City and
Temple, in the state in which it was to be after the Captivity) he brought me
to the Gate that looks toward the East, and behold the Glory of the God of
Israel came from the way the East (the very same way that it went, when it
departed from the City, Ezekiel. 11. 23.) his Voice was like the Voice of many
Waters, and the Earth shined with his Glory; It was according to the appearance
of the Vision which I saw, even according to the Vision that I saw when I came
to destroy the City, and the Vision was like the Vision that I saw by the River
Chebar; and I fell on my face, and the Glory of the Lord came into the House by
the way of the Gate, whose prospect is toward the East: so the Spirit took me
up, and brought* me into the inner Court, and behold, the Glory of the Lord
filled the House, Ezekiel. 43. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Thus you see it was in the Destruction and Restoration of the Jews Jerusalem,
by which God does plainly show us how things will be in our Gospel Church; she
was to decline and lose her glory, she was to be trampled (as she was a City)
Rev. 11.
for a long time under the feet of the unconverted and wicked World: Again, She
was after this to be builded, and to be put into her former Glory; at which
time she was to have her Glory, her former Glory, even the Glory of God
returned to her again; He showed me, says John, that great City the holy
Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God, having (...) Glory of God: As he
says by the Prophet, I am Returned to Jerusalem with Mercies, and my House
shall be built in it: and again, I am Returned to Zion, and will dwell in the
midst of Jerusalem, Zech. 1. 16. and 8. 3.

Having the Glory of God: There is the Grace of God, and the Glory of that
Grace; there is the Power of God, and the Glory of that Power; and there is the
Majesty of God, and the Glory of that Majesty, Ephesians. 1. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Isa.
2. 19.

It Is true, God does not leave his People in some sense, even in the worst of
times, and in their most forlorn condition; Joh. 14. 18.
as he shows by his being with them in their sad state in Egypt and Babylon,
Dan. 3. 25.
and other of their states of calamity: as he says, Though I cast them far off
among the Heathen, and although I have scattered them among the Countries; yet
will I be to them a little Sanctuary in the Countries where they shall come,
Ezekiel. 11 16. God is with his Church even i^ her greatest adversity, both to
limit, bound, measure and appoint out to her Isa. 27. 7, 8, 9.
her quantity and quality, her beginning Rev. 2. 10
and duration of distress and temptation: but yet I say the Glory of God, in
the notion of Ezekiel and John (when they speak of the Restoration of this
City) that is not always upon his People, though always they are beloved, and
counted for his peculiar Treasure. She may then have his Grace, but not at the
same time the glory of his Grace; his Power, but not the glory of his Power;
she may also have his Majesty, when not the glory thereof: God may be with his
Church, even then when the Glory is departed from Israel.

The difference that is between her having his Grace, Power and Majesty, and
the Glory of each, is manifest in these following particulars: Grace, Power,
and Majesty, when they are in the Church in their own proper Acts, only as we
are considered Saints before God, so they are invisible, and that not only
altogether to the World, but often to the very Children of God themselves; but
^ow when the glory of these do rest upon ^he Church, according to Ezekiel and
John, why then it will be visible and ap*parant to all Beholders; When the Lord
shall build up Zion, he shall APPEAR in his glory, Psalm. 102. 16. as he says
also in another place, The Lord shall ARISE upon thee, and his glory shall be
SEEN upon thee, Isa. 60. 1, 2.

Now then to speak a word or two in particular, to the Glory of God that at
this day will be found to settle upon this City.

First therefore at her returning, she shall not only have his Grace upon her,
but the very Glory of his Grace shall be seen upon her; the glory of Pardoning
Grace shall now shine in her own Soul; and Grace in the glory of it shall
appear in all her doings: now shall both our inward and outward man be most
famously adorned and beautified with Salvation; the golden Pipes that are on
the Head of the golden Zech. 4. 2
Candlestick shall at this day convey with all freeness the golden Oil
thereout, into our golden Hearts and Lamps: Our Win^ shall be mixed with Gall no
longer, we shall now drink the pure blood of the Grape the glory of pardoning
and forgivin^ Mercy shall so show it self at this day in this City, and shall
so visibly abide the^ in the Eyes of all Spectators, that all shall be inflamed
with it: For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I
will not rest, until the Righteousness thereon go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation t^ereof as a Lamp that burns: and the Gentiles shall see thy
Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory; and thou shall be called by a new Name,
which the mouth of the Lord shall name, Isa. 62. 1, 2. and again, The Lord
shall make bare his holy Name in the eyes of all the Nations, and all the ends
of the Earth shall see the Salvation of God, Isa. 52. 9, 10. Psalm. 98. 2. At
that day the Prophet tells us that there shall be HOLINESS upon the very Horses
Bridles; and that the Pots in the Lords House shall be like the Bowls before
the Altar; and every Pot in Jerusalem shall be Holiness unto the Lord, Zech.
14. 20, 21. The meaning of all these places is, That in the day that the Lord
does turn his Church and People into the frame and fashion of a City, and when
he shall build them up to answer the first state of the Church, there will such
Grace and plenty of Mercy be extended unto her, begetting such Faith and
Holiness and Grace in her Soul, and all her Actions, that she shall convince
all that are about her, that she is the City, the beloved City, the City that
the Lord has chosen; for after that he had said before, He would return to
Zion, and dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, Zech. 8. 3
he says moreover, That Jerusalem shall be called, A City of Truth, and the
Mountain of the Lord of Hosts, the holy Mountain: And all the People of the
Earth shall see that thou art called by the Name of the Lord, and they shall be
afraid of thee, Deuteronomy. 28. 10.

Secondly, As the Glory of the Grace of God will at his day be wonderful
manifest in and over his City; so also at that day will be seen the Glory of
his Power: O my People, says God, that dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the
Assyrian; he shall smite thee with a Rod, and shall lift up his Staff against
thee after the manner of Egypt (that is, shall persecute and afflict thee, as
Pharaoh served thy Friends of old) but be not afraid: for yet a little while
and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction: and the
Lord of Host shall stir up a scourge for him, according to the slaughter of
Midian at the Rock Oreb: and as his Rod was upon the Judge. 7.
Sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt: the sum is, God will at
the day of his rebuilding the New Jerusalem so visibly make bare his Arm, and
be so exalted before all by his Power toward his People, that no People shall
dare to oppose (or stand, if they do make the least attempt to hinder) the
stability of this City, Isa. 10. 24, 25, 26, 27. I will surely (gather or)
assemble, O Jacob, all of thee, says God: I will surely gather the Remnant of
Israel -- as the Sheep of Bozrah, as the flocks in the midst of the fold; they
shall make a noise by reason of the multitude Mich. 2. 12, 13.
of men: The breaker up is come up before them, they have broken up (the
Antichristian siege that has been laid against them) they are gone through the
gate, they are gone out of it, and their King shall pass before them, and the
Lord in the head of them: Like as a Lion and a young Lion roaring on the prey,
when a multitude of Shepherds are called forth against him, he will not be
afraid of their Voice, nor abase Isa. 42. 13 14.
himself for the noise of them; so shall the Lord come down to fight for Mount
Zion Isa. 31. 4, 5.
and for the Hill thereof: The Lord shall go forth like a mighty man, and shall
stir Zech. 12. 8.
up Jealousy like a man of War; he shall Zeph. 3. 8
cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his Joel 3. 16
Enemies; but not by Might, nor yet by Power, that is, the Power and Arm of
Zech. 4. 6
Flesh, but by the power of the Word and Spirit of God, which will prevail, and
must prevail, to quash and over-turn all opposition.

Thirdly, When God has thus appeared in the Glory of his Grace, and the Glory
of his Power, to deliver his Chosen; then shall the implacable Enemies of God
shrink, and creep into holes like the Locusts and Frogs of the Hedges, at the
appearance of the Glory of the Majesty of God: now the high ones, lofty ones,
haughty ones, and the proud, shall see so evidently the hand of the Lord
toward his Servants, and his indignation toward his Enemies, that they shall
go into the Rocks and Holes of the Earth, and into the tops of the ragged
Rocks, for the fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he
shall arise to shake terribly the Earth, Isa. 2.

Where the presence of the Lord does so appear upon a People, that those that
are Spectators perceive and understand Josh. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
it, it must needs work on those Spectators one of these two things; either
first a trembling and astonishment, and quailing of Heart, as it does among the
implacable Josh. 9. 22, 23, 24, 25.
Enemies; or else a buckling and bending of Heart, and submission to his People
and Ways; as says the Prophet, The Sons of them that afflicted thee shall come
bending to thee, all they that despised thee shall fall down at the soles of
thy feet; they shall call thee, The City of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One
of Israel: as Moses said to the Children of Israel, The Lord shall put the fear
of you, and the dread of you upon all the Land that you shall tread upon, as he
said unto you. Isa. 60. 14. Deuteronomy. 11. 25.

At this day the footsteps of the Lord will be so apparent and visible in all
his actions and dispensations in and toward his People, this holy City, that
all shall see, as I have said, how gracious, loving, kind and good the Lord is
now toward his own Children: Such glory, I say, will be over them, and upon
them, that they all will shine before the World; and such tender Bowels in GOD
toward them, that no sooner can an Adversary peep, or lift up his Head against
his Servants, but his hand will be in the Neck of them: so that in short time
he will have brought his Church into that safety, and her Neighbors into that
fear and submission, that they shall not again so much as dare to hold up a
hand against her, no not for a thousand Years. Thus says the Rev. 20. 3.
Lord, Behold, I will bring again the Captivity of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy
upon his dwelling Places; and the City shall be builded upon her own heap, and
the Palace shall remain after the manner thereof: and out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving, and the Voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply them,
and they shall not be few; and I will also glorify them, and they shall not be
small: Their Children also shall be as aforetime, and their Congregation shall
be established before me; and I will punish all that oppress them, Jer. 30. 18,
19, 20.

Having the Glory of God: And her Light was like unto a Stone most precious,
even like a Jasper Stone, clear as Crystal. Having thus told us of her Glory,
even of the Glory of God, how it at this day will rest upon this City; he now
comes to touch a second thing, to wit, her Light, and that in which she
descends, and by which, as with the Light of the Sun, she sees before her, and
behind her, and on every side: This therefore is another Branch of her Beauty;
She in her descending has the Glory of God, and also the Light of a Stone most
precious.

Ezekiel tells us, That in the Vision that he saw when he came to destroy the
City, (which Vision was the very same that he saw again at the restoring of it)
he says, I say, that in this Vision among many other wonders, he saw a Fire
enfolding Ezekiel. 1. 4
it self, and Brightness about it; and that the Fire also was bright, and that
out Ver. 13, 14
of it went forth Lightning; that the likeness of the Firmament upon the living
Creatures, was the color of the terrible Verse. 22.
Crystal; that the Throne also, upon which was placed the likeness of a Man,
was like, or as the appearance of a Saphir-Stone: Verse. 26.
all which words, with the nature of their Light and Color, the holy Ghost
does in the Vision of John comprize, and places within the Color of the
Jasper, and the Crystal-stone. And indeed, though the Vision of John and
Ezekiel, touching the end of the matter be but one and the same, yet they do
very much vary and differ in terms and manner of Language: Ezekiel tells us,
That the man that he saw come to measure the City and Temple, had in his hand a
Line of Ezekiel. 40. 3.
Flax, which Line John calls a Golden Reed: Ezekiel tells us that the River
came out of, or from under the Ezekiel. 47. 1.
Threshold of the House; but John says it came out of the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb: Ezekiel tells us that on either side of this River grew All Trees
Ver. 12.
for food; John calls these ALL Trees, but ONE Tree, and tells us that it stood
on both sides of this River: The like might also be showed you in many other
particulars, as here you see they differ as touching the terms of the Light and
Brightness that appears upon this City at her rebuilding, which the holy Ghost
represents to John under the Light and Glory of the Jasper and Crystal Stone:
for indeed, the end of Ezekiel's Vision was to show us, That as when the Glory
of God departed from the City, it signified that he would take away from them
the Light of his Word, and their clearness of Worship; suffering them to mourn
for the loss of the one, and to grope for the want of the other: so at his
return again, he would give them both their former Light of Truth, and also the
clearness of Spirit to understand it; which also John does show us shall last
for ever.

-- And her Light was like unto a Stone most precious -- This Stone it is to
represent unto us the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose light and clearness this City
comes out of Babylon: for, as he says, she has the Glory of God, that is, his
visible hand of Grace, Power, and Majesty, to bring her forth; so she comes in
the light of this precious Stone: which terms, I say, both the Prophet Isaiah,
and the Apostle Peter, do apply to the Lord Jesus, and none else; the one
calling him, A precious Cornerstone, the other calling him, The chief
Cornerstone, elect and precious, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Now then, when he
says this City has the light of this Stone to descend in, he means, That she
comes in the shining Wisdom, Knowledge, Understanding, and Influences of
Christ, out of her afflicted and captivated State: and observe it, she is
rather said to descend in the Light of this Stone, then in the Light of God
(though both be true) because it is the Man Christ, the Stone which the
Builders rejected, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge,
of whose fullness we do all receive, and Grace for Grace: for it has pleased
the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell, Col. 2. 3. John 1. 16. Col. 1.
19. see also Act. 2. 33. and Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13.

This shows us then these two things: first, That the time of the return of
the Saints to build the ruinous City, is near, yea, very near, when the Light
of the Lord Jesus begins to shine unto perfect day in her: God will not bring
forth his People out of Babylon, especially those that are to be the chief in
the building of this City, without their own Judgments: The light of the Church
shall be according to the purity of the Word.
They shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion: as he says
also in another place, The light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun,
and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that
the Lord binds up the Breach of his People, and heals the Isa. 52. 8. and
30. 26
stroke of their Wound. Now the Eyes of them that see, shall not be dim; and
the Ears of them that hear, shall hearken: The Heart also of the rash shall
understand Knowledge, and the Isa. 32. 3, 4.
Tongue of the Stammerers shall be ready to Isa. 33. 5, 6.
speak plainly: The Lord shall be now exalted, and be very high, for he will
fill Zion with Judgment and Righteousness, and Wisdom and Knowledge shall be
the stability of thy times: When Israel went out of Egypt, they wanted much of
this; they went out blindfolded as it were, they went they knew not whither;
wherefore they went not in the glory of that which this City descends in; as
Moses said, The Lord has not given you an Heart to perceive, nor Eyes to see,
nor Ears to hear, unto this day, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. But these shall see every step
they take; they shall be like the Beasts that had Eyes both before and behind;
they shall see how far they are come out of Antichrist, and shall see also how
far yet they have to go, to the complete rebuilding and finishing of this City.

Secondly, This shows us how sweet The Way out of Babylon a pleasant Way
and pleasant the way of this Church will be at this day before them: Light,
Knowledge and Judgment in GOD's matters, does not only give men to see and
behold all the things with which they are concerned, but the things themselves
being good, they do also by this means convey very great sweetness and
pleasantness into the Hearts of those that have the knowledge of them: Every
step, I say, that now they take, it shall be as it were in Honey and Butter:
The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and
everlasting See Verse 2.
Joy shall be upon their Heads; they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow
and Sighing shall flee away, Isa. 35. 10. as he says, Again, I will build
thee, and thou shall be built; O Virgin of Israel, thou shall again be adorned
with Tabrets, and shall go forth in the Dances of them that make merry. -- For
thus says the Lord, Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of
the Nations; publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord save thy People, the
Remnant of Israel: Behold, I will bring them from the North Country, and gather
them from the coasts of the Earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the
woman with Child, and her that travelleth with Child together; a very great
company shall return thither, Jer. 31. 4, 7, 8.

By these words, the Blind and the Lame, the Woman with Child, and her that
travelleth, he would have us understand thus much:

First, That the way of God shall by the illuminating Grace of Christ be made
so pleasant, so sweet, and so beautiful in the Souls of all at that day, that
even the blindest shall not stumble there^n, neither shall the Lame refuse it
for ^ear of hurt; yea, the Blind, the Lame, ^he Woman with Child, and her that
travelleth, shall (though they be of all in most evil case to travel, and go
the Journey, yet) at this day by reason of the glorious light and sweetness
that now will possess them, even forget their impediments, and dance, as after
musical Ta^rets.

Secondly, This City upon the time of her rebuilding, shall have her blind men
see, her halt and lame made strong, she also that is with Child, and her that
travelleth, shall jointly see the City-work that at this day will be on foot,
and put into form and order, yet before the end: Behold, at that time I will
undo all that afflict thee, says the Lord to this People, and I will save her
that halteth, and gather her that was driven out, and I will get them praise
and fame in every Land where they have been put to shame; at that time I will
bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a Name
and a Praise, among all People of the Earth, when I turn back your Captivity
before your EYES, says the Lord God, Zeph. 3. 19, 20.

And her Light was like unto a Stone most precious. In that he says, Her Light
is like unto A STONE MOST PRECIOUS, he shows us how welcome, and with what
eagerness of spirit this Light will at this day be embraced by the Lords
People: Truly the Light is good, says Solomon, and a pleasant thing it is for
the Eyes Eccles. 7. 11.
to behold the Sun; and if so, then how beautiful, desirable, and precious will
Welcome will be that Light that does show us the Way out of Babylon.
that Light be, that is not only heavenly, and from Christ, but that will be
universal among all Saints, to show them the same thing, and to direct them to
and in the same Work: The want of this, has to this day been one great reason
of that crossness of Judgment and Persuasion that has been found among the
Saints, and that has caused that lingering and disputing about the glorious
state of the Church in the latter days: Some being for its excellency to
consist chiefly in outward glory; and others swerving on the other side,
conclude she shall not have any of this; some conceiving that this City will
not be built until the Lord comes from Heaven in Person; others again
concluding that when he comes, then there shall be no longer tarrying here, but
that all shall forthwith, even all the Godly, be taken up into Heaven; with
diverse other opinions in these matters: And thus many run to Dan. 12. 4.
and fro, but yet, God be thanked, Knowledge does increase, though the Vision
will be sealed, Isa. 32. 15 Isa. 29. 24.
even to the time of the end. But now, I say, at the time of the end, the
Spirit shall be poured, down upon us from on high; now also they that erred in
Spirit shall come to understanding; the City shall descend in the Light of a
Stone most precious: the Sun will be risen upon the Earth, when Lot goes from
Sodom into Zoar, Genesis 19. 23.

Now there shall be an oneness of Judgment and Understanding in the Hearts of
all Saints; they shall be now Ezekiel 37. 19, 20, 21
no more two, but one in the Lords hand: Alas, the Saints are yet but as an
Army routed, and are apt sometimes through fear, and sometimes through
forgetfulness, to mistake the word of their Captain General, the Son of God,
and are also too too prone to shoot and kill eve^ their very right hand man;
but at the day all such doing shall be laid aside, for the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Isa. 11. 9. 13.
Sea; which Knowledge shall then strike through the Heart and Liver of all
swerving and unsound Opinions in Christ's matters; for then shall every one of
the Christians call upon the Name of the Lord, and that with one pure Lip, or
Language, to serve him with one consent. It Is Zeph. 3. 8.
Darkness, and not Light, that keeps Gods People from knowing one another
both in their Faith and Language; and it is Darkness that makes them stand at so
great a distance both in Judgment and Affections, as in these and other days
they have done: But then, says God, I will plant in the Wilderness (that is,
in the Church that is now bewildered the Cedar, the Shittah Tree, the Myrtl^
Tree, and the Oil Tree; I will set in the Desert the Fir Tree, the Pine, and
the Box-Tree together; that they may see and know consider and understand
together, that the Hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy One of Israel
has created it: and again, The glory of Lebanon shall com^ unto thee, the
Fir Tree and the Pine Tree, and the Box-Tree together, to beautify the House
of my Glory, and to make the place of my Feet glorious, Isa. 41. 19, 20. and
60. 13.

Never was fair weather after foul, nor warm weather after cold, nor a sweet
and beautiful Spring after a heavy and niping and terrible Winter, so
comfortable, sweet, desirable and welcome to the poor Birds and Beasts of the
field, as this day will be to the Church of God: Darkness! it was the Plague of
Egypt; It is an empty, forlorn, desolate, solitary, and discomforting state;
wherefore Light, even the illuminating Grace of God, especially in the measure
that it shall be communicated unto us at this day, it must needs be precious:
In Light there is warmth and pleasure; it is by the Light of the Sun that the
whole Universe appears unto us distinctly, and it is by the heat thereof that
every thing grows and flourishes; all which will now be gloriously and
spiritually answered in this Holy and New Jerusalem: O how 2 Thessalonians. 2.
clearly will all the Spiders, and Dragons, Rev. 18.
and Owls, and fowl Spirits of Antichrist 1, 2, 3, 4.
at that day be discovered by the Light hereof! Now also will all the prett^
Robins, and little Birds in the Lords Field, most sweetly send forth their
pleasant Notes, and all the Flowers and Herbs of his Garden spring: Then will
it be said to the Church by her Husband and Savior, Arise, my Love, my fair
One, and come away; for l^, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the
Flowers appear in the Earth, and the time of the singing of Birds is come, and
the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; the Fig Tree puts forth her
green Figs, and the Vine with her tender Grapes give a good smell, Cant. 2. 10,
11, 12, 13. You know how pleasant this is, even to be fulfilled in the letter
of it, not only to Birds and Beasts, but men; especially it is pleasant to
such men that have for several years been held in the Chains of affliction: it
must needs therefore be most pleasant and desirable to the afflicted Church of
Christ, who has lain now in the Dungeon of Antichrist for above a thousand
years: But Lord, how will this Lady, when she gets her liberty, and when she is
returned to her own City, how will she then take pleasure in the warm and
spangling Beams of thy shining Grace! and solace her self with Thee in the
Garden, among the Nuts and the Pomgranates, among the Lilies and Flowers, and
all the chief Spices, Cant. 7. 11, 12, 13.

Even like a Jasper Stone, clear as Crystal. These words are the Metaphor by
which the Holy Ghost is pleased to illustrate the whole business. Indeed
Similitudes, if fitly spoke and applied, do much set off, and out, any point,
that either in the Doctrines of Faith or Manners, is handled in the Churches.
Wherefore, because he would illustrate, as well as affirm, the Glory of this
Jerusalem to the life; therefore he concludes his general Description of this
City with these Comparisons: I saw, says he, the holy City, the Lambs Wife: I
saw her in her Spangles, and in all her Adorning, but verily she was most
excellent; She was shining as the Jasper, and as pure and clear as Crystal. The
Jasper it seems is a very beautiful and costly Stone, in as much, as that above
all the precious Stones, is made use of by the Holy Ghost to show us the Glory
and shining Virtues of the Lord Jesus in this New Jerusalem: and yet, behold!
the Jasper is too short and slender to do the business; there must another
Stone be added, Even like a Jasper Stone, clear as Crystal. Yea, says the Lord
Jesus, Her Cheeks are like rows of Jewels, and so are the Joints of her Things:
even like the Jewels that are the work of the hands of a cunning Workman, Cant.
1. 9, 10. and 7. 1.

The Crystal is a Stone so clear and spotless, that even her greatest
Adversaries in the midst of all their rage, are not able, justly, to charge her
with the least mote or spot imaginable: wherefore when he says, that this City
in her descending is even like the Jasper for light, and like the Crystal for
clearness; he would have us further learn, that at the day of the descending of
this Jerusalem, she shall be every way so accomplished with innocence,
sincerity, and clearness in all her Actions, that none shall have from her, or
her ways, any just occasion given unto them to slight, contemn, or oppose her.
For

First, as she descends, she meddleth not with any man's matters but her own;
She comes all along by the Kings highway: that is, alone by the Rules that her
Lord has prescribed for her in his Testament. The Governors of this World
need not at all to fear a disturbance from her, or a diminishing of ought they
have: She will not meddle with their Fields, nor Vineyards, neither will she
drink of the water of their Wells: only let her go by the Kings highway, and
she will not turn to the right Number. 20. 18, 19.
hand or to the left, until she has passed all their borders. It is a false
report then Number. 21. 22.
that the Governors of the Nations have received against the City, this New
Jerusalem, if they believe, that according to the Tale that is told them, she
is and has been of old a Rebellious City, and destructive to Kings, and a
Diminisher of their Revenues. I say, these things are lying words, and forged
even in the heart of Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and Ezra 4. 7
the rest of their Companions: For verily this City, in her descending, is
clear from such things, even as clear as Crystal. She is not for meddling with
any thing that is theirs, from a Thread, even to a Shooe-latchet. Her Glory is
spiritual and heavenly, and she is satisfied with what is her own. It Is true,
the Kings and Nations of this world shall (one day) bring their Glory and
Honor to this City; but yet not by outward force or compulsion: none shall
constrain them but the love of Christ, and the Sea more of this hereafter. Isa.
60. 3.
beauty of this City. The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising. The light and beauty of this City, that only shall
engage their hearts, and overcome them. Indeed if any shall out of mistrust, or
enmity against this City and her prosperity, bend themselves to disappoint the
designs of the Eternal God concerning her Building and Glory, then they must
take what follows: Her God in the midst of her is Mighty, He will rest in his
love, and rejoice over her with singing, and will UNDO all that afflict her.
Zeph. 3. 17.
Wherefore, Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye shall be broken to
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far Countries: Gird your selves, and ye shall
be broken to pieces; gird your selves, and ye shall be broken to pieces. Take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not
stand: for God is with us, Isaiah 8. 9, 10.

What work did he make with Og the King of Bashan, and with Sihon King of the
Amorites, for refusing to let his People go peaceably by them, when they were
Number. 21, 22, 23, 24 etc.
going to their own Inheritance? God is harmless, gentle, and pitiful; but woe
be to that people that shall oppose or gainsay him. He is gentle; yet a Lion:
He is loath to hurt; yet He will not be crossed: Fury is not in me, says he;
yet if you set the Briars and Thorns against him, He will go through them, and
Isa. 27. 4.
burn them together. Jerusalem also, this beloved City, it will be beautiful
and profitable to them that love her; but a Cup of Trembling, and a burdensome
Stone to all that burden themselves with her: all that burden themselves with
it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against her, Zech. 12. 2, 3.

Again, She will be clear as Crystal in the Observation of all her turns and
stops, in her journying from Egypt to Canaan, from Babylon to this
Jerusalem-state. She will, I say, observe both time and order, and will go
only as her God does go before her; now one step in this Truth, and then
another in that, according to the dispensation of God, and the Rev. 14. 4
light of the day she lives in: As the Exodus 40. 36, 37, 38
Cloud goes, so will she; and when the Cloud stays, so will she. She comes in
perfect rank and file, terrible as an Army Cant. 6. 9, 10. and 3. 6. and 8. 5.
with Banners. No Balaam can inchant her; She comes out of the Wilderness like
Pillars of Smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Frankensence, with all Spices of the
Merchants, still leaning upon her Beloved. The return of Zion from under the
Tyranny of her Afflictors, and her recovery to her Primitive Purity, is no
headstrong brainsick rashness of her own, but the gracious and merciful hand
and goodness of God unto her, therefrom to give her deliverance: For thus says
the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, (that Jer. 29.
10.
is the time of the Reign of Antichrist, and his Tyranny over his Church) I
will visit you, and perform my good word toward Jer. 31. 12
you, in causing you to return to this place. Therefore they shall come and
sing in the Isa. 58. 11
height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for
(Spiritual) Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil, and for the Young of the Flock,
and of the Herd; and their Soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall
sorrow no more at all.

Verse. 12. and had a Wall great and high, and had twelve Gates, and at the
Gates twelve Angels, and Names written thereon, which are the Names of the
twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel.
These words do give us to understand that this holy City is now built, and in
all her parts complete; they give us also to understand the manner of her
strength, etc.

And had a Wall -- Having thus, I say, given us a description Of her Defense.
of this City in general, he now descends to her Strength and Frame in
particular; her Frame and Strength, I say, as she is a City compact together:
as also of her Splendour and Beauty.

And observe it, that of all the particulars that you read of, touching the
fence, fashion, or frame of this City, and of all her glory, the first thing
that he presents to our view, is, her Safety and Security; She had a Wall. A
Wall, you know, is for the Safety, Security, Defense, and Preservation of a
Place, City, or Town; therefore it is much to the purpose that in the first
place after this general description, he should fall upon a discovery of her
Security and Fortification: for what of all this Glory and Goodness, if there
be no way to defend and preserve it in its high and glorious state? If a man
had in his possession even Mountains of Pearl, and Golden Mines; yet if he had
not wherewith to secure and preserve them to himself, from those that with all
their might endeavor to get them from him, he might not only quickly lose his
Treasure, and become a Beggar, but also through the very fear of losing them,
even lose the comfort of them while yet in his possession. To speak nothing of
the Angels that fell, and of the glory that they then did lose, I may instance
to you the state of Adam in his Excellency; Adam you know, was once so rich
and wealthy, that he had the Garden of Eden, the Paradise of pleasure, yea, and
also the whole World to boo^, for his inheritance; but mark, in all his Glory
he was without a Wall; wherefore presently, even at the very first assault of
the Adversary he was not only worsted as touching his Person and standing, but
even stripped of all his Treasure, his Paradise taken from him, and he in a
manner left so poor, that forthwith he was glad of an Apron of Genesis 3.
Fig Leaves to cover his nakedness, and to hide his shame from the face of the
Sun: Wherefore, I say, John speaks to the purpose in saying she had a Wall; a
Wall for Defense and Safety, for Security and Preservation: Now then, she shall
lie no longer like blasted Bones in Ezekiel. 37. 1, 2.
an open field, or valley; that was her portion in the days of her affliction.

And had a Wall -- It is said of old Jerusalem, that she had Jer. 39. ^ and 52.
7.
a Wall and a Wall, two Walls for her Defense and Safety: which two, in my
Judgment, did hold forth these two things; The one, their eternal preservation
and security from the wrath of God, through the benefits of Christ; and the
other, that special protection and safeguard that the Church has always had
from and by the special Providence of her God, in the midst of her Enemies:
Wherefore one of these is called by the proper name of Salvation, which
Salvation Isa. 26. 1. Act. 4. 12.
I take in special to signify our fortification and safety from the wrath of
God, and the Curse and Power of the Law and Sin: The other is called, A Wall of
fire round about her; and alludeth to the Vision that the Prophet's servant
Zech. 2. 5 2 King. 6. 17.
was made to see for his comfort, when he was put in fear, by reason of the
great company of the Enemies that were bending their force against the life of
his Master.

But now in those days, though there The Reason of two Walls.
was for the defense of the City those two Walls, yet they stood a little
distance each from other, and had a ditch between them; which was to signify,
that though then they had the Wall of Salvation about them, with reference to
their eternal state, yet the Wall of Gods Providence and special Protection was
not yet so nearly joined thereto, but that they might for their foolishness
have that Isa. 22. 10 11, 12.
broken down, and they suffered to fall into the ditch that was between them
both; and so he says by the Prophet, I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard, (that is, to this City, for the wickedness thereof) I will take away
the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and will break down the Wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down, Isa. 5. 5, 6, 7. Which Hedge and Wall
could not be that of Eternal Salvation, for that stood sure, though they should
be Amos. 9. 9
scattered among the Nations, as Wheat is sifted in a Sieve; it must therefore
be the Wall of her special Preservation in her outward Peace and Happiness,
which Wall was often in those days broken down, and they made havoc of, of all
that dwelt about them.

But now touching the safety of New Two Walls made one.
Jerusalem, the City of which I here discourse; she is seen in the Vision by
John to have but one only Wall; to signify, That at this day the Wall of her
Eternal Salvation, and of Gods special Providence, to protect and defend her,
in her present, visible and Gospel-Glory, shall be so effectually joined
together, that now they shall be no more two, that is, at a distance, with a
ditch between, but one sound and inclosing-Wall; to show us, That now the state
of this Jerusalem, even touching her outward Glory, Peace, and Tranquillity,
will be so stable, invincible and lasting, that unless that part of the Wall
which is Eternal Salvation, can be brokendown, the Glory of this City shall
never be veiled more: Wherefore the Prophet, when he The reason why they both
are made one.
speaks with reference to the happy state and condition of this City, he says,
Violence shall be heard no more within thy Land, nor wasting and destruction
within thy Borders; but thou shall call thy Walls, Salvation, and thy Gates,
Praise: as he says also in another place, Thine Eye shall see Jerusalem a
quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the
Stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the Cords thereof be
broken, Isa. 60. 18. and 33. 20. The Walls are now conjoined, both joined into
one; the Father has delivered up the great Red Dragon into the hand of Christ,
who has shut him up, and sealed him down, even down for a thousand years:
Wherefore Rev. 20. 1* 2, 3.
from the Lord shall there be upon every dwelling Place of Mount Zion, and upon
all her Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire
by Night; for upon all her Glory shall be a Defense: And in that day shall this
Song be sung, We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and
Bulwarks, Isa. 4. 5. and 26. 1, 2. The same in effect has our Prophet John,
saying, I saw the Holy City, the New Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from
God, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; and I heard a great Voice out
of Heaven, saying, The Tabernaele of God is with men, and he shall dwell with
them; and God himself shall be with them, and be their God; and God shall wipe
away all tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things
are passed away, Rev. 21. 2, 3, 4.

And had a Wall great and high -- These words, Great and High, are added The
Wall is great and high* Deuteronomy. 1. 28.
for illustration, to set out the matter to the height; and indeed the glory of
a Wall lies in this, that it is great and high; the Walls of the Canaanites
were terrible upon this account, and did even sink the Hearts of those that
beheld them: wherefore this City shall be most certainly in safety, she has a
Wall about her, a great Wall; a Wall about her, an high Wall: It is great for
compass, it incloseth every Saint; it is great for thickness, it is compacted
of all the Grace and Goodness of God, both ^^ritual and temporal: and for
height, if you count from the utmost side to the utmost, then it is higher then
Heaven, who Heb. 7. 26* Job 11. 8* The height of the Wall.
can storm it? and for depth, it is lower then Hell, who can undermine it?

Great Mercies, high Mercies, great Preservation, and a high Arm to defend,
shall continually at this day incamp this City: God himself will be a continual
Lifeguard to this City; I will incamp, says he, about mine House, because of
the Army, because of him that passes by, an^ because of him that returns;
and no Oppressor shall pass through them any more, for now have I seen with mine
Eyes, Zech. 9. 8.

-- And had twelve Gates -- Having thus showed us her Wall, he The Gates of the
City. Jer. 17. 19, 20.
now comes to her Gates; it had Gates, it had twelve Gates: By Gates in this
place, we are to understand the way of Entrance; Gates, you know, are for
coming in, and for going out; and do in this place signify two things:

First, An Entrance into communion What the Gates sig nifie.
with the God and Savior of this City.

Secondly, Entrance into communion with the Inhabitants and Privileges of this
City; in both which the Gates do signify Christ: for as no man can come to the
knowledge and enjoyment of the God, and glorious Savior, but by and through the
Lord Christ; so no man can come into true and spiritual communion with these
Inhabitants, but by him also: I AM THE WAY, says he, the Truth, and the Life;
and no man comes to the Father but BY ME: and again, I am the DOOR, BY ME if
any man ENTER, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture,
Joh. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 14. 6.

-- And had twelve Gates -- In that he says, Twelve Gates, he alludeth Twelve
Gates. Neh. 3. 13* 28, 29, 31. and 12. 37* 39. Why Twelve Gates.
to the City Jerusalem that was of old, which had just so many; and are on
purpose put into the number of Twelve, ^o answer to the whole number of the
Elect of God, which are comprehended within the number of the Twelve Tribes,
whether they are natural Jews or Gentiles; for as all the Godly Jews are the
Seed of Abraham after the Flesh, though ^ot Godly because they are the Children
of the Flesh of Abraham; so all the Godly Gentiles are the Children of Abraham
after the Spirit, though not by that means made the Children of the Flesh of
Abraham: they both meet then in the Spirit and Faith of the Gospel, as Exodus
12. 48.
God says to the Jews, When the Stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will
keep Gal. 3. 7.
the Passover (that is, become godly, and Romans 4. 16
receive the Faith of Christ) let all his Males be circumcised, and then let
them come near, and keep it, etc. For they that are of Faith, are the Children
of faithful Abraham, who is called, The very Father of us all. Thus you see all
the godly come under the Title of the Children of Abraham, and of the Jews; and
so under the denomination also of being Persons The twelve Gates do answer the
twelve Tribes.
belonging to the Tribes, the twelve Tribes, who answer to those twelve Gates*
Wherefore the Psalmist minding this speaks indifinitely of all the Godly
under the name of The Tribes of Israel saying, Our Feet shall stand within the
Gates, O Jerusalem: Jerusalem is builded a City that is compact together,
whith^ the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the Testimony of Israel,
to give tha^^ to the Name of the Lord; Psalm. 122. 2, 3, ^

But again, Though I am certain that all the Gentiles that are at any time
converted, are reckoned within the compass of some of the Tribes of Israel, to
which the Gates of this City may truly be said to answer: Yet the Gates are
here in a special manner called by the name of twelve, to answer to the happy
Return and Restoration of those poor distressed Creatures the twelve Tribes of
the Jews that are scattered abroad, and that are, and for a long time have been
to our astonishment and their shame, as Vagabonds and Straglers among the
Nations, there to continue Hos. 9. 17
many days, without a King, without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and
without an Ephod; that is, without the true God, the true Savior, and the true
Word and Ordinances; after which, says the same Prophet, They shall even in
the latter days, (that is, when this City is builded) return and seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall then fear the Lord and his Goodness,
Hos. 3. 4, 5. This the Apostle also affirms, when he tells the believing
Gentiles, That blindness in part ^s happened to Israel, until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in; which Israel in this place cannot by any means be
taken for the Gentiles that are converted, for th^^ Israel must be rejected
until the bulk of the elect Gentiles be converted; besides, he calls this
Israel by the name of Israel, even while unconverted; but the converted
Gentiles, still Gentiles, even when converted: he calls this Israel the Natural
Branches; but the Gentiles Will Branches; and tells us further, Tha^ when they
are converted, they shall be grafted into their own Olive Tree; but when the
Gentiles are converted, they must be cut off of their own Stock and Tree: read
Romans 11. throughout. Wherefore, I say, the Gates are called twelve, to answer
these poor Creatures, who at this day shall be awakened, and enlightened, and
converted to the Faith of Jesus. These Gates in another place are called, A
Way, and these Jews, The Kings of the East; and it is there said also, That at
present this Way does want preparing* which is as much as to say, This City
wants setting up, and the Gates want setting in their proper places: Wherefore
says John, The sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates,
that is, destroyed the strength and force of the Roman-Antichrist, (for the
River Euphrates was the fence of literal Babylon, the Type of our spiritual
one) which force and fence, when it is destroyed, or dried up, then the way of
the Kings of the East will be prepared, or made ready for their Journey to this
Jerusalem, Rev. 16. 12. Of this the Prophets Isa. 57. 14
are full, crying, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the
stumbling block out of the way of my People: and again, Go through, go through
the Gates, prepare ye the way of my People; cast ye up, cast ye up the
highway, gather out the stones, lift up a Standard for the People: Behold, the
Lord has proclaimed unto the end of the World, Say to the Daughter of Zion,
Thy Salvation comes; behold, his Reward is with him, and his Work before him:
and they shall call them, The holy People, the Redeemed of the Lord: and thou
shall be called, Sought out; A City not forsaken, Isa. 62. 10, 11, 12. All
which does most especially relate to the Conversion of the Jews in the latter
day, who in great abundance shall, when all things are made ready, come
flocking in to the Son of God, and find favor, as in the days of old.

-- And at the Gates twelve Angels -- By Angels, in this place we are to
understand The Angels, and what they are.
the Messengers and Ministers of the Lord Jesus, by whom the Mystery of Eternal
Life and Felicity is held forth and discovered before the Sons of Men; and thus
this word Angel is frequently taken in this Prophec^^, Rev. 1. 20. and 2. 1, 8,
12, 18. and 3. 1, 7. and 14. 6.

-- And at the Gates twelve Angels -- In these words then, there are two things
to be considered:

First, Why they should be called twelve. And

Secondly, Why they are said to stand at the twelve Gates of this New and Holy
City.

For the first, They are called twelve, Why the Angels are said to be Twelve.
to signify two things: 1. The Truth of their Doctrine: and 2. The sufficiency
of their Doctrine and Ministry for the converting of the twelve Tribes to the
Faith of Christ, and Privileges of this City.

First, For the Truth of their Doctrine: For by twelve here, he would have us
to understand that he has his Eye upon the twelve Apostles, or upon the
Doctrine of the twelve, the Apostolical Doctrine: as if he should say, This
City, the New Jerusalem, shall be every way accomplish(...) with Beauty and
Glory; she shall (...) a Wall for her security, and twelve ^ates to answer the
twelve Tribes; yea, and also at these Gates the twelve Apostles, in their own
pure, primitive, and unspotted Doctrine. The Romish Beasts have corrupted this
Ezekiel. 34. 17, 18.
Doctrine by treading it down with their Feet, and have muddied this Water with
their own dirt and filthiness; but at this day, this shall be recovered from
under the Feet of these Beasts, and cleansed also from their di^t, an(...)
again in the same Glory, S(...) and Purity, as in the Primitive ^^mes. It is
said, that when Israel was passed out of Egypt, beyond the Sea, they presently
came to Elim, where were twelve Wells of Water, Exodus 15. 27.
etc. and that they ^ncamped by the Waters: which twelve Wells did figure forth
the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles, out of which the Church at her return from
Captivity, shall draw and drink, as out of the Wells of Salvation. Now shall
the Isa. 12. 3.
Wells of our Father Abraham, which the Philistines have for a great while
stopped; now, I say, shall they again be opened by our Isaac, his Son; and
shall be also called after their own Names, Genesis 26. 18. This is generally held
forth by the Prophets, That yet again the Church shall be fed upon the
Mountains of Israel, and that they shall lie down in a good fold, and a fat
pasture; yea, I will feed my Flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says
the Lord God, Ezekiel. 34. 14, 15.

Secondly, As by these twelve, we are to understand the Truth and Purity of the
Doctrine of the Twelve; so again by this word twelve, we are to understand the
sufficiency of that Doctrine and Ministry to bring in the twelve Tribes to the
Privileges of this City: Mark, for the twelve Tribes there are twelve Gates,
for every Tribe a Gate; and at the twelve Gates, twelve Angels, at every Gate
an Angel: O Judah, says God, I have set Hos. 6. 11
an Harvest for thee, when he shall turn again the Captivity of his People; and
so for Psalm. 80. 2.
the rest of the Tribes: Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, he will
stir up his strength to save them: I will hiss for them, says God, and gather
them, for I have reedeemed them; and they shall increase as they have
increased: and I will sow them among the Nations, and they shall remember me in
far Countries, and they shall live with their Children, and shall return; and I
will bring them again also out of the Land of Egypt, and gather them out of
Assyria, and I will bring them into the Land of Gilead and Lebanon, and place
shall not be found for them, Zech. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

But to come to the second Question, Why the twelve Angels stand at the twelve
Gates.
that is, Why these twelve Angels are said to stand at the Gates? which may be
for diverse Reasons.

First, To show us that the Doctrine of the Twelve, is the Doctrine that
lets in at these Gates, and that also that shuts out: Whose sins ye
remit, they are remitted, Mat. 18. 18.
says Christ; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained: And hence it is
that Joh. 20. 23.
the true Ministers in their right administration, are called Porters; because
as Mark 13. 34.
Porters stand at the Gate, and there open to, or shut upon those that make an
attempt to enter in; so the Ministers of Christ by the Doctrine of the Twelve,
2 Chronicles. 23. 19.
do both open to, and shut the Gates against the Persons that will be
attempting to enter in at the Gates of this City.

Secondly, But again, They are said to stand at the Gates for the encouraging
and persuading of the tempted and doubting Jews, who at the beginning of their
return will be much afflicted under the sight and sense of their own
wretchedness: Alas! were it not for some to stand at the Gates of this City for
instruction, and the encouragement of those that will, at that day in earnest
be looking after life, they might labor as in other things for very very
Vanity; and might also be so grievously beat out of Heart and Spirit, that they
might die in despair: But now to prevent this, for those that are in the way to
Zion* with watery Eyes, and wetted Cheeks, here stands the Angels, continually
sounding with their Golden-Gospel-Trumpets, Enter ye into his Gates with
^hanksgiving, Psalm. 100. 4, 5.
and into his Courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his Name; for
the Lord is good, and his Mercy (...) everlasting, and his Truth indureth for
ever, even to all Generations: as he says again, And it shall come to pass in
that day, that the great Isa. 27. 13
Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the
Land of Assyria, and the outcasts of the Land of Egypt, and shall worship the
Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem.

-- And at the Gates twelve Angels, and Names written thereon, which are the
Names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel. Thus it was in the Vision
of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 48. 31.
when he was taking a View of the Pattern of this City; And the Gates of the
City, says the Angel to him, shall be after the Names of the Tribes of Israel;
which saying John does here expound, saying, The Names of the twelve Tribes of
the Children of Israel, were writ or set upon them.

This being thus, it clears to you what I said but now, to wit, That the
Gates are called twelve, to answer the twelve Tribes, for their Names are
written thereon: This must therefore without all doubt be a very great
encouragement to this despised People; I say great encouragement, that
notwithstanding all their Rebellion, Blasphemy, and contempt of the glorious
Gospel, their Names should yet be found recorded and ingraved upon the very
Gates of New Jerusalem. Thus then shall the Jews be comforted in the latter
days; and truly they will have but need hereof; for doubtless at their return,
when they are thoroughly sensible of the Murder they have committed, not only
upon the Bodies of the Prophets and Apostles, but of the Son of God himself: I
say this must needs, the other with the remembrance of the rest of their villainous
actions, exceedingly afflict and distress their bleeding Souls: for the
Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Judah together, going
and weeping; they shall go and seek the Lord their God, and shall ask the way
to Zion, with their Faces thitherward, Jer. 50. 4, 5. Mark, going and weeping;
there will not be a step that these poor People will take in the day of their
returning, but will be watered with the Tears of Repentance and Contrition,
under the consideration of the wickedness that in the days of their Rebellion,
they have committed against the Lord of Glory: as he says also by another
Prophet, I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as a Man mourns for his
only Son; and they shall be in bitterness for him, as him that is in
bitterness for his firstborn: at that day there shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, and the
Land shall mourn, Zech. 12. 10, 11, 12.

Wherefore, I say, they both have and also will have need of twelve Gates, and
on them the Names of their twelve Tribes, with an Angel at each, to encourage
them to enter this holy and goodly City; and to tell them that yet he counts
them his Friends, in whose Zech. 13. 6.
House he received the wounds in his Hands.

But again, As by the Names of the twelve Tribes written on the Gates, we may
see what encouragement the Jews will have, at their Return, to enter in at
them: so we may also understand that by the Names of the twelve Tribes here
written, God would have us to perceive how all must be qualified, that from
among the Gentiles at this day do enter in at these Gates; namely, Those, and
those only, that be cut out of their own wild Olive Tree, and transplanted
among the Children of Israel, into their good Olive Tree: Such as are Jews
inwardly, the Israel of God according to the New Creature, they shall enter,
(for the holy Gentiles also by virtue of their conversion, are styled the
Children of Gal. 3. 7.
Abraham, Jews, the Chosen Generation, Romans 2. 28.
the Peculiar People, the Holy 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
Nation; and so are spiritually, though not naturally by carnal generation, of
the twelve Tribes, whose Names are written upon the Gates of this City) And it
shall come to pass, says the Prophet, that in what Tribe the Stranger (that
is, the Gentile) sojourneth, there shall ye give him his Inheritance, says the
Lord God, Ezekiel. 47. 22, 23. Thus the Jews and Gentiles shall meet together in
the Spirit of the Gospel, and so both become a righteous Nation; to both which*
the Gates of this City shall stand continually open; at which also, they may
with boldness demand, by the Faith of the Lord JESUS, their entrance, both for
Communion with the God, Grace, and Privileges of this City; according to that
which is written, Open ye the Gates, that the righteous Nation which keeps
the Truth may enter in, Isa. 26. 2.

Thus much of the Number of the Gates, and now to proceed to the Order of them.

Verse. 13. On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on South three
Gates, and on the West three Gates.
I shall not speak any thing to the manner of his repeating of the Quarters
toward which the Gates do look; why he should begin at the East, then to the
North, afterward crossing to the South, and last to the West; though I do
verily think that the holy Ghost has something to show us, wherefore he does
thus set them forth: and possibly he may set them thus, and the West last, not
only because the West part of the World is that which always closes the day,
but to signify that the West, when Jerusalem is rebuilded, will be the last
part of the World that will be converted, or the Gate that will be last,
because longest occupied with the travels of the Passengers and wayfaring-Men
in their Journey to this Jerusalem. But I pass that.

From the order of their standing, I shall enquire into two things:

First, Why the Gates should look in this manner every way, both East, West,
North, and South?

Secondly, Why there should be three, just three, on every side of this City;
On the East three, on the North three, on the South three, and on the West
three?

For the First, The Gates by looking Why the Gates look every Way.
every way, into all Quarters, may signify to us thus much, That God has a
People in every corner of the World: and also, That Grace is to be carried out
at these Gates by the Angels in their Ministry, into every place, to gather
them home to him: as it is said of the living Creatures, Whither the Head
looked, they Ezekiel. 10. 11.
followed it, and turned not as they went; so whithersoever the Gates look,
thither the Ministers go, and carry the Word, to gather together the Elect: He
sent them Mat. 28. 19.
two and two before his Face, into every City Joh. 11. 12.
and Place whither he himself would come.

Again, The Gates by their thus looking Luke 10. 1
every way, do signify to us, That from what Quarter or Part of the World
soever men come for Life, for those men there are the Gates of Life, even right
before their doors: Come they from the East, why thither look the Gates; and so
if they come from North, or West, or South: No Man needs at all to go about, to
come at Life, and Peace, and Rest: Let him come directly from Sin to Grace,
from Satan to Jesus Christ, and from this World to New Jerusalem. The twelve
Brazen Oxen that Solomon made to bear 1 Kin. 7. 23, 24, 25
the molten Sea, they stood just as these Gates stand, and signify, as I said
before, that the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles should be carried into all the
World, to convert (as in the Primitive Times, so now at the building of New
Jerusalem) and to bring in Gods Sheep to the Fold of his Church: Now I say, as
the Word is carried every way, so the Gates, the open Gates, look also into all
corners after them, to signify that loving Reception that shall be given to
every Soul that from any corner of the whole World shall unfainedly close in
with Grace, through the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus therefore Men shall come from
the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South, and sit down
in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13. 29. Psalm. 107. 1, 2, 3.

On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three Gates,
and on the West three Gates. Having thus showed you in a word why they stand
thus looking into every Corner or Quarter of the World; I now come to show you
why there must be just three looking in this manner every way.

First then, There may be three looking Why there is three Gates looking every
Way.
every way, to signify that it is both by the consent of the Three Persons in
the Trinity, that the Gospel should thus every way go forth to call men: and
also to show you, that both the Father, Son and Spirit are willing to receive
and embrace the Sinner from whatsoever part or corner of the Earth he comes
hither for Life and Safety: Come they from whence they will, the Father is
willing to give them the Son, and so is the Son to give them Himself, and so is
the Spirit to give them its help against whatever may labor to hinder them
while they are here, Joh. 3. 16. Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 17.

Secondly, In that three of the Gates look every way, it may be also to show
us, that there is none can enter into this City, but by the three Offices of
the Lord Jesus; Christ by his Priestly Office must wash away their Sins; and by
his Prophetical Office he must illuminate, teach, guide and refresh them; and
by his Kingly Office rule over them, and govern them with his Word, Heb. 7. 25.
Joh. 13. 8. Act. 3. 22, 23, 24. Isa. 40. 10, 11. and 9. 6, 7. Psalm. 76. 1, 2,
3. Psalm. 110. 3.

Thirdly, Or by three Gates, may be signified the three states of the Saints in
this Life; an entrance into Childhood, 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14.
an entrance into a Manly state, and an entrance into the state of a Father in
the Church.

Or lastly, The three Gates may signify the threefold state we pass through
from Nature to Glory: The state of Grace in this Life, the state of Felicity in
Paradise, and our state in Glory after the Resurrection: Or thus, The state of
Grace that possesses Body and Soul in this Life, the state of Glory that
posseseth the Soul at Death, and the state of Glory that both Body and Soul
shall be possessed with at the coming of the Lord and Savior: This was figured
forth by the order of the Stairs in the Temple at Jerusalem, which was first,
second, and third, by which Men ascended from the lowest to the uppermost Room
in the House of God; as he tells us, They went up with winding Stairs from the
first into the second story, and from thence by them into the third, 1 King. 6.
8.

Thus much for the Wall and Gates of New Jerusalem.

Verse. 14. And the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the
Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.
In these words we have two things The foundations of the Wall.
considerable:

1. That the City-Wall has twelve Foundations.

2. That in these twelve, are the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

First, It has twelve Foundations: This argues invincible strength and
support. That Wall that has but one Foundation, how strongly does it stand, if
it be but safely laid upon a Rock! even so strong^y, Mat. 7. 24, 25.
that neither Wind nor Weather in their greatest vehemence, are able to shake
or stir it, to make it fall: but I say, how much more when a City has
Foundations, twelve Foundations, and those also laid by God himself; as it is
said concerning the Worthies of old, They looked for a City that had
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11. 13, 14.

And the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb. The Wall, you know, I told you, is the Wall of
Salvation, or the Safety of the Church by Jesus Christ; to which is adjoined,
as the effect of that, the special Providence and Protection of God: Now this
Wall, says the Holy Ghost, has twelve Foundations, to wit, to bear it up for
the continuation of the safety and security of those that are the Inhabitants
of this City; a Foundation is that which bears up all, and that upon which
the stress of all must lie and abide: Now to speak properly, the Foundation of
our Happiness is but one, and that one none but the Lord Jesus; for other
Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.
11. So then, when he says the Wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and
that in them also are written the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; he
does not mean that this Wall had twelve Christ's for its support, but, That the
Doctrine of the It is the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles that holds up the
Wall of New Jerusalem.
twelve Apostles is that Doctrine upon which both Christ, and Grace, and all
Happiness stands firm and sure for ever: and to signify also, that neither
Christ nor any of his Benefits can be profitable unto thee, unless thou receive
him alone upon the terms that they do hold him forth and offer him to Sinners
in their Word and Doctrine: If we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you any
other Gospel, says Paul, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed: As I said before, so I say now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9.

And in them the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. And in them their
Names:] This makes it manifest that by the Foundations of this Wall, we are to
understand the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles of the Lord Christ, for their
Names are to it, or found ingraved in the Foundations. Thus it was with the
Doctrine which was the Foundation of the Jewish Church: the first Pattern being
delivered by the man Moses; his Name was always so entailed to that Doctrine,
that at last it became common, and that by Divine Allowance, to call that
Doctrine by the name of Moses himself: There is one that accuses you, says
Christ, even Moses in whom you trust: and again, For Moses of old has in every
City them that preach him. John 5. 45. Act. 15. 21. The same liberty of speech
does the Holy Ghost here use in speaking of the Foundations of this Wall, which
is the Doctrine of the Twelve. And in that he calls the Doctrine by the Name
of Foundations, and leaves it only with telling us the Names of the twelve
Apostles are engraven in it; he expects that men should be wise that read him,
and that they should be skilful in the Word of Righteousness, if they come up
clearly to the understanding of him.

And in them the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Thus you see that
the twelve Apostles, The Doctrine of the XII, the purest of all other.
above all the Servants of Christ, are here owned to be the foundations of this
Wall; and good reason, for they above all other are most clear and full in the
Doctrine of Grace, and all Doctrines pertaining to Life and Holiness: In other
Ages, says Paul, it was not made known to the Sons of men, as it is now
revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 5. Moses
was not fit for this, for his was a more dark and veiled Administration; While
Moses is read, the Vail is over the 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15.
Heart, says Paul: Neither was any of the Prophets fit for this, for they were
all inferior to Moses, and were as it Number. 12. 6, 7.
were his Scholars: Nay, John the Baptist is here shut out; for the least in
the Kingdom Mat. 11. 11.
of Heaven is greater then he.

The Apostles above all other were the men that were with the Lord Jesus all
the time, from the Baptism of John, even until the time he was taken up into
Heaven; they saw him, heard him, and discoursed with him, and were Beholders
Luke 24. 39, 40.
of all the wondrous Works that he did; they did eat and drink with him after
his Passion, and saw after he was risen, the print of the Nails and the Spear
with which he was peirced, when he died for our Sins: And because they had
seen, The XII went beyond all others in their Experience.
felt, and at such a rate experienced all things from the very first, both
touching his Doctrine, Miracles, and Life; therefore he said unto them in
chief, Ye shall be Witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem and all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the utmost parts of the Earth, Act. 1. 21. and 13. 31. and
10. 39. and 2. 31. 1 John 1. 2, 3. Act. 1. 8.

Further, The Apostles were in that mavelous manner endued with the holy
Ghost, that they out-stript all the Prophets that ever went before them;
neither can I believe that in the best of times there should be any beyond
them; yet if it should so fall out, that a Dispensation should come, in which
they should have, as to the pouring forth of the Spirit, their Equals; yet it
could not follow, that therefore the Gospel should be offered in other terms
than they at first have offered it; especially besides what has been said of
them, if you consider to them 'twas said, Whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound
in Heaven, Matthew. 18. 18. they, as to their Doctrine, were infallible, 'twas
impossible they should err; he that despised their Doctrine, despised 1 Thessalonians.
3. 8.
God himself: Besides, they have given in commandment that all should write
Gal. 1. 8. The foundation may not be altered.
after their Copy, and that we should judge both Men and Angels that did, or
would do otherwise.

Timothy must have his Rule from Paul, and so must holy Titus: All which, if we
consider it, the holy Ghost speaks to the purpose, in saying, That in the
twelve Foundations are found the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb: they
are called the chief, and such as have laid the Foundation, and others build
thereon: and that as no men have laid the Foundation but they, so none can lay
even that Foundation otherwise then they before have laid it, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Ephesians. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 3. 6, 10. Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 3. 11.

-- And in them the Names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. These words then,
teach us two things worthy of our Christian Consideraration.

First, That God has given to every man a certain and visible mark to aim at
for his Salvation, or to build his Soul upon, namely, The Doctrine of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb: for in that he says their Names are in the
Foundations, it is better for us (all things considered) then if he had said,
In them was the Name of God himself; that is, it is more easy to see (this
way) through the mist of our Carnality what the Mystery of his Will should be,
which is, that we receive Christ according to their Doctrine, Words, Writings,
Epistles, Letters, etc. their Names, I say, being there, The Names of the XII,
as the Broad Seal of Heaven.
God counts it as the Broad Seal of Heaven, which gives Authority to all that
Doctrine whereunto by themselves they are prefixed and subscribed; not where
they are writ by others, but by themselves I say, as the Token of every
Epistle, and of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17.
their Doctrine for Truth; the which Gal. 6. 11.
Paul insinuates, when he says, that his 1 Cor. 9. 1
hand is the Token of every Epistle: as he Gal. 5. 2.
says again, Am not I an Apostle? And 2 Cor. 11. 5.
again, Behold, I Paul have written unto Gal. 6. 11.
you; I Paul, I an Apostle, I a wise Master Builder, I who am in my Doctrine
one of the Foundations of the Wall of Salvation, I have written unto you. And,
as I said before, there is a reason it should be thus; for as he who was the
Foundation of the Jewish Church, even Moses, received the Pattern of all his
Order from the Mouth of the Angel in Mount Sinai, so the twelve received their
Doctrine of Faith and Manners, the Doctrine of the New Testament, from the
Mouth of the Son of God himself, as from the Mouth of the Angel of the
everlasting Covenant, on the Mountain of Zion, Act. 7. 38. and 1. 3. Matthew. 28.
19.

Secondly, In that he says, The Names of the Twelve are in the Foundations,
this shows us the reason of the continual standing of this Jerusalem; it is
builded upon the Doctrine of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, and stands
there: for observe, so long as he sees this holy City, he sees her standing
upon these Foundations; but he saw the City till she was taken up, therefore
she continued as being settled for ever upon them. Indeed the Primitive City,
or first Churches, was built upon these Foundations, Ephesians. 2.
and had also so long as they there continued, sufficient supportation and
upholding by that means; but then, as I have showed you, the Wall of her
Salvation, and the Wall of Gods special Protection stood at a distance each
from other, and were not so conjoined as now they will be: wherefore they then,
to answer the Type, did fall into the Ditch that was between, and through their
Foolishness provoked God to remove the Wall of his outward Protection and
Safeguard from them; whereupon the wild Beast, Antichrist, got into his
Vineyard, making havoc of all their Dainties: But mark, this City is not so,
the Walls are now conjoined, and for ever fastened upon the Foundations,
therefore it abides for ever, and ascends higher and higher; yet not from the
Foundations but by them into Heaven: Behold, says God, I have graven Isa. 49.
16
thee upon the Palms of my Hands, thy Walls are continually before me.

And in them the Names of the twelve A. postles of the Lamb. This word twelve,
must be warily understood, or else the weak will be ready to stumble and take
offense; wherefore to prevent this, consider,

First, The Twelve must be them How you are to understand the word Twelve.
Twelve that were with the Lord Jesus from the Baptism of John, until the day
in which our Lord was taken up, Act. 1. 22.

Secondly, These Twelve are not neither to be considered simply, as twelve
Christians, or twelve Disciples; but as their Witness of the Lord Jesus (they
being with him from first to last) was a Twelve-fold Witness of him in all his
things; a twelve-fold seeing with their Eyes, a twelve-fold hearing with their
Ears, a twelve-fold handling also with their Hands, and feeling of the Son of
God: As one of them said, That which was from the beginning, which we have seen
with our Eyes, and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life; that which we
have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye might have fellowship with
us, etc. 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3. Now this being thus, it follows that the Doctrine
of the other Apostles, as of Paul and Barnabas, was still but the Doctrine of
the Twelve; their Doctrine, I say, and no other: Wherefore as Ephraim and
Manasseh were dissolved into the twelve Tribes, so these two, with all other
the Apostles of Christ, are dissolved into the Number of the Twelve, because
their Doctrine is only the Doctrine of the twelve; for they center in their
Doctrine; their length and breadth, and depth and height being the Doctrine of
the Twelve. So then the names of the Twelve being found in the Foundations of
this Wall, it argues that that Doctrine is only true, that is the Doctrine of
the twelve Eyewitnesses of the Lord Jesus: And again, That at the day of
Antichrists fall, this Doctrine shall be in its former purity, and bear the
sway, and for ever hold up the Wall of safety, for the Inhabitants of New
Jerusalem: And indeed this* Doctrine, That the Doctrine of the Twelve is that
upon which Eternal Safety is built and stands, is so true, that it must not be
varied from, upon pain of Eternal Damnation: Here centred Luke the Evangelist,
here centred Jude, here centred the Author to the Hebrews, yea, here centred
Paul himself, with all the Old and New Testament* The Doctrine of the Twelve
must be the Opener, Expounder and Limiter of all Doctrines; there also must all
men center and ground, and stay. A man may talk of, yea, enjoy much of the
Spirit of God; but yet the Twelve will have the start of him; for they both had
the Spirit as he, and more then he: besides, they together with this, did feel,
see, handle and receive Conviction, even by their very carnal Senses, which
others did not; besides, their Names also are found in the Foundations of this
saving Wall, as being there engraved by GOD himself; which puts all out of
doubt, and gives us infallible ground that their Doctrine is only true, and
all men's false that do not keep within the bounds and limits of that, Luke 1.
2. Jude 3. 17. Heb. 2. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and 9. 1.
Gal. 1. 1, 2. Ephesians. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 9.

To conclude: Here is yet two things worthy of noting:

The first is, That by the Names of the twelve Apostles being in the
Foundations of this Wall, and the Names of the twelve Tribes being upon the
Gates of this City, it gives us to consider, that at the time of the building
of this City, the Jews and Gentiles shall be united together, Romans 11.
and become one Body: which very Jam. 1. 1.
Consideration must needs be to the Jews 1 Pet. 1. 1.
a great encouragement to have in mind Act. 13. 16, 26.
at their Conversion: for it plainly signifies Romans 1. 16
that our New-Testament-Preachers Romans 2. 10
shall carry in their Mouths, Salvation to the Jews; by which means they shall
be again reconciled, and made one with the Lord Jesus.

The second Consideration is, That at No Preacher now allowed, but he that can
preach the Doctrine of the XII.
the day of New Jerusalem, there shall be no Doctrine accepted, nor no
Preachers regarded, but the Doctrine, and the Preachers of the Doctrine of the
Twelve: for in that he says, That in them are found the Names of the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb, he does implicitly exclude all other, of whatever Tribe
they pretend themselves: It shall not be then as now, a Popish Doctrine, a
Quakers Doctrine, a Prelatical Doctrine, and the Presbyter, Independent, and
Anabaptist, thus distinguished, and thus confounding and destroying: but the
Doctrine shall be one, and that one the Doctrine where you find the Names of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb: If any man teach otherwise, and consents not
to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
that is according to Godliness, he is proud, and knows nothing, 1 Timothy 6. 3,
4.

Thus you see the Doctrine of the Twelve is that which lets Souls into this
City; and that the same Doctrine is the Doctrine that keeps up the Wall of
their Salvation about them, when they are entered in within the Gates.

Verse. 15. And he that talked with me had a Golden Reed to measure the City,
and the Gates thereof, and the Wall thereof.
Now having passed the relation of the A Golden Reed.
Wall, Gates, and Foundations, he comes to the Measuring-Line, to see how all
things lie and agree with that.

Under the Law, I find that all things pertaining to the Worship of God were to
be by Number, Rule and Measure, even to the very Tacks and Loops of the
Curtains of the Tabernacle: Now the Rule or Line by which all things were then
squared, it was the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances which was given to Moses by
the Lord in the Mount Sinai; for thither he went to receive his Orders: and
according to the Pattern there showed him, so he committed all things, by
writing, to them that were to be employed in the workmanship of the holy things
pertaining to the rise and completing of the Tabernacle, and all its
Instruments. Exodus 10. 11. and 24. 1. and 25. 40. Deuteronomy. 30. 10. and 31. 24, 25,
26.

Now when this Rule was thus received, then whosoever observed not to do it, he
was to fall under the Penalty that by the same Law also was prescribed against
the Offenders and Transgressors, Number. 15. 30, 31.

I find also that when the Temple was builded in the days of Solomon, all
things were then done according to the writing that David made, when the hand
of God was upon him, when he made him understand all the work of this Pattern,
2 Chronicles. 3. 1, 2, 3. and Chap. 4. 1 Chronicles. 19. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 28. 19.

Thus again, When Josiah went about to bring to pass the Reformation of the
Church of the Jews, and their Instruments of Worship, after their revolting; he
goes to the Law of God, and by that, understanding what was out of order, and
how to put all things into order, he so did reduce them to their former manner.
The same way also went Ezra, and Nehemiah, at the rebuilding of the Temple and
City after the Captivity, 2 Kings 22. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Ezra 7. 14. Ezra.
8. 3, 4. From all which I conclude, This Golden Reed is the Word of God.
That the Reed, the Golden Reed that here you read of, it is nothing else but
the pure and unspotted Word of God; by which, both the City, Gates and Wall of
this Jerusalem is regulated: Which Word by the holy Prophet, is also compared
to Gold, and is said to be above much fine Gold, Psalm. 12. 6. and 19. 9, 10.

I find in the Vision of the Prophet Ezekiel, that the Angel that there is said
to measure the City, which was a Type of our Jerusalem, he appeared with a line
Ezekiel. 40. 3.
of Flax in his hand, to measure the pattern withal; which very phrase does
show us that his was but the Type, and an Old-Testament-business: but John has
his in a New-Testament-stile, and that in the most excellent manner of
Language, to signify that his City, or the City that he has the Vision of, is
to be the end of all Types and Shadows, and the very perfection of them all:
Wherefore he tells us also, that the Line or Why the measuring-Line of New
Jerusalem in special, is called a Golden Reed.
Reed by which this City is builded, and squared, it is not now a Line of Flax,
but a Reed of Gold, a Golden Reed; to signify not a Word of the Law and Letter
that had to do with Shadows, but the New Testament, and ministration of the
Spirit, which has to do with Substance, and the heavenly things themselves,
Heb. 9. 23.

A Golden Reed to measure the City, etc. I told you at the first, that this
City The City measured
was the Church of God that should be in the latter days; but yet not the
Church disorderly, and confusedly scattered here and there, without all visible
order and discipline, but the Church brought into exact Form and Order, lying
every way level and square with the Rule, and Golden Reed of the New*Testament
of Christ; wherefore he calls it a City, a City under Rule. Thus it was in
the Type; for when Solomon's Temple was to be builded, and the City in
aftertimes, it was not enough that they had Stones and Timber, but every one
of them must be such Stones, and such Timber, and must also come under the Rule
and Square of the Workman; and so being fitted by Hewers, Sawes, Axes and
Squares, they were fitly put into the building, 1 Kings 5. 17, 18. and 7. 9,
10, 11, 12. 1 Chronicles. 22. 2. By this then we may see, with what a holy, exact
Line, Rule and Order this Church and City at this day, will be compact and
builded; the Members must be all such as shall be made fit for the City of God,
by the hewing words of Hos. 6. 5.
the Prophets; they must join in Christian-Communion also according to the
Golden Reed of the New Testament, and ministration of the Spirit. Indeed all
the time of the reign of Antichrist, the Church, as she was a holy Temple in
the Lord, so she was measured with reference to the truth of her Grace, and
invisible condition: but as she is to be a City, so she then is to be trodden
down, Rev. 11. 1.
and to lie without all Form and Order: but when Antichrist is dead, she shall
again come into mind, be considered, reared, builded by measure, and inhabited:
and observe it, as the Rule of the Carpenter is of use in the building, from
the first appearance of the laying of a Stone in order, even till it be in
every point and part complete; so the Golden Reed, with which the Angel is here
said to measure the City, etc. is to be of use from the first Foundation, even
to the laying of the last Stone thereof: As was also fore-shewed by the man
that is said to measure the pattern of this, in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 40. to chapter
48.

And he measured the City. That is, he measured the Church in her Constitution
and Fellowship. Now, when God is said to measure, he is said to measure
sometimes in Judgment, and sometimes in Mercy; sometimes to throw down, and
sometimes to build up and establish: Sometimes, I say, he is said to measure in
Judgment, with intention to throw down and destroy: Thus he measured the City
before she went into Captivity, and the ten Tribes before they were carried
away beyond Babylon, Isa. 28. 17, 18.
because they lay cross to his Word, Amos 7: 7, 8, 9.
and had perverted that which was right, etc. but when he is said to measure
the City in this place, it is that she might be builded and set up: wherefore,
as I said, the Line or Golden Reed that is now stretched forth to measure this
City, it is to the end, that all things may be in right Form and Order, fitly
joined, and knit together, by that which every joint supplyeth, according to
the effectual working of the measure of every part, making increase of the
Body, to the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19.

Again, By measuring the City, he would have us to understand, that all her
Limits and Bounds were now apparent, that all things, even the Church and all
the World, was made to see their own Compass: for as God in the days when
Temple-Worship (only) was on foot, would not lose a Form or Ordinance of all
the Forms and Ordinances of his Temple; so when City-work comes up, he will not
lose an Inch of the Limits, and Bounds, and Compass of his City, she shall be
full as large, and of as great a compass every way, as is determined of her: as
he says by the Prophet, All the Land, says he, shall be turned This is that
which a little before is called the new Heaven and a new Earth.
into a Plain; that is, there shall be a smooth Face upon the whole Earth, all
Snugs, and Hubs, and Hills, and Holes shall now be took away, even from Gebato
Rimmon, South of Jerusalem: and it (the City) shall be lifted up, and inhabited
in her place, from Benjamins Gate, unto the place of the first Gate, unto the
Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Hananiel, unto the Kings Wine-Presses. The
four places here mentioned in this verse, they do seem to be the four Corners
of the City of old; at which places the City bounds were set; and in which very
Circle the Prophet tells us, but with Gospel Language, she shall be settled
again, Zech. 14. 10.

And he measured the City, and the Gates thereof. This was figured forth by the
Vision The Gates measured
in Ezekiel, for in it he saw the Angel go from Gate to Gate, and saw him take
the exact and distinct measure of every one thereof; nay, not only of them in a
general way, but of the Thresholds, the Porch, the Posts, and the Faces of
their Enterances; he measured also every little Chamber that was above upon the
Gates, with all the Spaces that were between, Ezekiel. 40 chapter.

Now by Gates, I told you, we are to understand the Son of God, as he is the
Way to the Father, and to the Privileges of this City: Wherefore when he
says, He measured the Gates, it is as if he had said, he measured the
Entrance, Strength and goodly Countenance of Him, with the Mansions of Glory
that are to be enjoyed by every one that enters in hereby; for the Porch,
Posts, Face, Entrance and Chambers of the Gate in Ezekiel, they signify the
Entrance, Strength, Shining Countenance, and resting places that every one
shall find in the Lord Jesus that enters in by him: and to measure all these,
it is in substance but this, To set them forth, and out, in their full force,
glory, largeness, beauty and profitableness, in the view of all: for I told you
at the first, the Golden Reed is the Word of God: Now the City and the Gates
thereof, are said to be measured by this Golden Reed; which I say, can be
nothing else, but an opening of all the Excellencies of Christ, as ^e is the
Gate of the Sheep, even by the ^ull Sway, Power, Majesty, and Clearness of the
Word. The Lord help us! Christ, as he is the Door to God, and to all
Gospel-Priviledges, is now strangely handled, and so has been of a long time
among the Sons of men; some of them making him the very Inlet to all the vile
and abominable crew in the world, counting all that are pliant to their ungodly
humors, the Saints of the most high, and Christ the Door and Gate through whom
they have right to enter, and to whom belongs the Delicates of the precious
things of God, even those which he has most choicely laid up, and reserveth
for none but those that unfeignedly turn from iniquity, and walk with him in
the newness of the Spirit. Others again do shut up the Gates against the Godly,
laboring with might and main to hinder those that labor to enter, that fain
would do it Mat. 23. 14.
unfeignedly. Others again do labor 2 Chronicles. 29. 7.
all that in them lies to deface the Gates, to take away their Beauty: like him
that 2 Kings 18. 16
took the Gold from off the Doors and Gates of the Temple, rendering Christ a
low and carnal business, etc. but at the measuring-day, at the day when the
Golden Reed shall be the alone Rule: then you shall see this City and her Gates
discovered in their own Glory, Holiness and Beauty: for though in our
Affliction under Antichrist, our Temple and Instruments of Worship, with the
City, Wall, Gates, and the like, have been much defaced, (even our Doctrine of
Faith and Worship) and have been much trod and trampled under the foot of the
uncircumcised: Yet all shall be recovered and brought into Order again, by the
Golden Reed of the Word of God: which thing was figured forth to us by that
good man Ezra the Scribe, who at the restoring of Jerusalem took review of all
the things pertaining to the City, both touching its Breaches and Deformity,
and also how to set all things in Order, and that by the Law of God which was
in his Hand, even according to the Writing thereof, Ezra 7. 14. and 8. 34. Neh.
8, 9. And whosoever does but read the History of Ezra and Nehemiah throughout,
they shall find that by the Word of God they brought all things to pass; all
the Ordinances of the House and City of God, into their right and holy Order:
And indeed the measuring of the City and of the Gates thereof, which is Christ
the Way, it can be nothing else but a bringing of them by the right
understanding and opening of the Word, into their proper Places and
Excellencies, both for Comers in, and Goers out, according to the Commandment,
Ezekiel. 40. 4. and 43. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. for, to speak properly, Christ in his
Love, Grace, Merits and Largeness of Heart, to let Souls into Communion with
God and all Happipiness, is in all these things unsearchable, and passing
knowledge, being filled with these things beyond thought, and without measure,
Ephesians. 3. 8. Col. 3. 9. Ephesians. 3. 18. and 19. Joh. 3. 34.

And he measured the City, the Gates thereof, and the Wall thereof. In that he
says, he measured the Wall The Wall measured
also, it is to show us that all things now are according to the Rule of the
Word: The Inhabitants are according to the Word, the Entrance is according to
the Word, yea, and so is the safety of it also, even a Fence to fence them from
their Enemies; even a fence on every side, that they may be at ease and rest,
and be no more a tossing to and fro: O thou afflicted, and ^ossed with Tempest,
says he, and not comforted, (I will do many good things for thee) in
righteousness shall thou be established: thou shall be far from Oppression, for
thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it shall not come nigh unto thee,
Isa. 54. 11, 14.

Touching the Wall, what it is, I have spoken already; therefore here I speak
only to the measure of it, which measure is only the fulfilling all those
Promises and Engagements of God, that are made to New Jerusalem, for her Safety
and continual Defense; and that not only in her own Eyes, but in the Eyes of
all her Beholders: Then shall that Saying be with gladness in the Mouths of all
the Inhabitants of this Jerusalem, We were bondmen, and yet our God has not
forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended Mercy unto us in the sight of the
Kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the House of our God, to
repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a Wall in Judah and in
Jerusalem, Ezra 9. 9. Which Wall, I say, shall be so conspicuous to all the
Adversaries of this holy and beloved City, that the greatest of them shall not
once dare to peep or mutter against her any more: God is known in her Palaces
for a Refuge: for lo, the Kings were assembled, they passed by, they saw it,
and so they marwelled; they were troubled, and hasted away; fear took hold upon
them, and pain, as of a Woman in travel: As it is said of the building of the
Wall after the Captivity; when the Enemies and all the Heathen saw it was
finished, they were much cast down in their own Eyes. Psalm. 48. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. Neh. 6. 15, 16.

The regulating of this City by this Golden Reed, and the measuring the Gates
and Wall by this Word, when finished, will then cause all that have skill in
singing the Lords Songs, and of lifting up the Praises of God in this City, to
gather themselves together to sing, and to praise, and to say, Bless ye the
Name of the Lord, for his Mercies endure for ever: for then will they purify
the People (this City) with the Gates and Wall thereof, Neh. 12, 28, 29, 30.

Wherefore in the mean time, between this and the building of this City, let
Jerusalem come into your mind, and walk about her, go ^e round about her
(enquire by the Word what God has said of her State, Strength, Safety, Ease,
Peace, and blessed Tranquillity in the latter days) tell the Towers thereof,
mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye may tell it to the
Generations following, Psalm. 48. 12, 13.

Verse. 16. And the City lies four square, and the length is as large as the
breadth: and he measured the City with the Reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the
length, and the breadth, and height of it are equal.
And the City lies four square] These words do open unto you the matter yet
more, to wit, That now both the City, Gates and Wall, were exactly in their
Visibility according to the Word, lying even every way with that Golden Reed:
for by four square, you are to understand Perfection, or an answering the
figures that of old did figure to us the compleatness and perfection of the
New-Testament-Order.

For if you search the Scriptures, you will find that especially the great and
principal Instruments of Gods Worship in and under the Law, their Perfection
was what here you read to be the Perfection of this City, even a four square.
As for instance: The Breast Plate of Judgment, on which were engraved the Names
of the Children of Israel, its exact point of Perfection was, to be a right
four square. The ten Bases also, that were to be for Bearers to the Lavers in
the Temple, they were to be four square: The Altar of Burnt-Offerings likewise,
with the Altar of Incense, their perfect Pattern was, that they should be four
square: The inward Court and outward Court, with the Posts of the Temple, and
Tables on which they were to slay the Sacrifices, they were all four square.
Yea, the City in the Type, in the Vision of Ezekiel, was seen to be of the same
frame and fashion every way, having just twelve Gates, and of each of the four
sides three Gates. Exodus 28. 15, 16. and 39. 8, 9. 1 King. 7. 27, 28, 29, 30,
31. Exodus 27. 1. and 38. 1. Ezekiel. 43. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Exodus 37. 1.
Ezekiel. 40. and 41. 21. and 40. 40, 41, 42. and 48. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Wherefore
when he says, The City lies four square, it is as if he had said, She lies
even with the Pattern, or Golden-Reed of the Word; even, I say, both in her
Members, Doctrine, Worship, and Manners: For the things afore-hinted unto you
do hold forth all these Particulars.

-- And the length is as large as the breadth. -- This explaineth the matter
yet more fully and distinctly; for as to the things that I made mention of
before, though they were to be made apiece, and that their Perfection lay
exactly in that form; yet these Squares did not lie in Exodus 27. 1. and 38. 1
their height and depth, but in their length 1 King. 7.
and breadth, just as you read here of the Ezekiel 40. 42.
Square of this City. As to instance: The Altars, though they were five Cubits
long, and five Cubits broad, yet but three high; so the Bases, they were a
Cubit and an half broad, and a Cubit and an half long, yet but half a Cubit
high; the Tables also on which they slew the Sacrifices, they were a Cubit and
a half long, and a Cubit and a half broad, yet but one Cubit high. Which
things being thus, you see the reason of his saying the length is as large as
the breadth.

Now by length and breadth here, we may yet observe another Mystery held forth
unto us; for by the breadth is held forth the perfection of the Rule, or Law to
which all Christians ought to yield their hearty Obedience: His Commandment is
exceeding broad: The breadth of Psalm. 119 96.
which, is signified, I say, by the breadth of those things that before you see
to be By breadth is to be understood the perfection of the Word, and by length
the compleatness of the Saints obedience Luke 1. 6. and 2. 37.
the Instruments of the Worship of God: Now as by breadth, we are to understand
the perfect latitude and compass of the Commandment; so by length, we are to
understand the answerableness of the obedience of the Inhabitants of this City:
for indeed the perfection of Christian Obedience lies in an answerableness to
the Will of God; as it is said of the Father and Mother of John the Baptist;
they walked in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless; and of Anna, that
she continued without ceasing in the service of God in the Temple, day and
night: This is to be as long in our Obedience, as the Law is broad in
commanding: the Law commands right Obedience, and the Christian gives it; the
Law commands continual Obedience, and the Christian gives it; the Law commands
universal Obedience, and the Christian gives it: He gives it all these sorts
of Obedience, 1. By the Person of Christ, for 1 Cor. 1. 30
he is his Righteousness; he gives it all these, 2. With the consent of the
mind: Romans 7. 16
and 3. He gives it all these Obediences in the love of the Spirit, which the
Apostle calls the fulfilling of the Law, that Romans 13. 10.
is, an answering the breadth of its Command, by the length of Obedience:
wherefore when he says, The length is as large as the breadth, he would have
us understand how perfect in Holiness these blessed Souls will be at this day:
and indeed, this is it that is by God expected to be in this City at this day:
As the Angel with his Measuring-Line said to Zechariah, I am going to measure
Jerusalem, Zech. 2. 2
and to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof: To see
whether their Doctrine be pure, and whether their Obedience be answerable.

-- And he measured the City with the Reed, twelve thousand furlongs. -- These
latter words do refer us to a distinct A second measure.
measure from that which went before; the former measure pointing at the
breadth of her Commandment, and the length of her Obedience; but this at the
Glory and Fullness of her Mansions and Portions: For after he had said, The City
lies four square, and that the length is as large as the breadth, (which is
the full and complete effect of that first measure) he comes over again with an
other measuring, saying, And he measured the City twelve thousand furlongs; as
who should say, He measured the City, Gates, and Wall first, and sound them all
exact, and according to the Golden Reed; and after he had so done, he measured
the City with the Reed twelve thousand furlongs.

He measured the City with the Reed A portion measured out for the City.
That is, He measured out to the City, he measured for the City, for its Lot
and Portion, twelve thousand Furlongs: Which very thing you find in the Vision
of the Prophet Ezekiel: for after he had measured the City, the Vessels, with
the Instruments of Worship; I say, when he had done this, he comes again with
an afterward, to measure the City her Portions and Mansions, Ezekiel. 47. 1, etc.

Wherefore, I say, these words do refer to her Portion that she is to enjoy of
her God, as the former refers to her Duty and Obedience.

Now that which makes me conclude that this latter measure is a measure
distinct from the former, and that it relates neither to the exactness of
Rule, nor the compleatness of Obedience, but only to the largeness of the
Portions that God will allot for thy Sons and Daughters, thou City of God, it
is,

First, Because this is the biggest measure: For I find, by considering the
Scripture, that as the Persons and Things pertaining to the Worship of God,
were to go according to the Rule of this Golden Reed; so also the Portions that
pertained to the Persons worshipping, was to go by Rule and Measure also, (as
here he says he measured also the City, or to it, with the Reed, twelve
thousand furlongs.) And hence it is that our Grace is called the measure of
Grace, and that our Romans 12. 3.
Glory is called a weight of Glory.

Now I say, I find that our Portions do Ephesians. 4. 7. 2 Cor. 4. 17
go always under the biggest measure; the Spoons, Cups, Flaggons, Snuffers,
Basins, Candlesticks and Pans, which were the Instruments of Worship, were not
so large as the Chambers in the Temple, and the compass of the holy Land, which
were the Sea Josh. 15. to Chap. 19.
Mansions Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3.
and Portions of the Church.

Secondly, I take the twelve thousand furlongs to signify Portions, rather
than Worship or Worshippers; because, as to the nature of it, it most exactly
agrees with the Portions that are measured out to this City by the Angel before
Ezekiel, which is a measuring forth so much Land for the Portion of the Prince,
so much for the Portion of the Priest, and so much Ezekiel. 45, 46, 47.
for the Portion of the twelve Tribes: Yea, the very phrase, twelve thousand
Luke 24. 13.
furlongs, also implies such a compass of Ground, by which we find the holy
Land Joh. 11. 18
has been measured.

Lastly, I take it to be thus also; because I find not in all this description
of this holy City, that any place does give us that ground to speak to her
measure of Portion, as this: and it would seem strange to me, that the
description of this City given by Ezekiel, should be more complete then this
that is given by our Prophet John: for Ezekiel does most amply set forth her
Portions, even distinctly, for Prince, Priest, and the Tribes in particular.
This therefore is to be understood of the Portions of the City, which John did
see was measured out unto her, immediately after he saw the breadth of her
Rule, and the length of her Obedience: Only consider that Ezekiel measures by
Reeds, not counting by Furlongs; but John, though he measures by Reeds, yet
counts by Furlongs.

But now, though the holy Ghost is thus pleased to speak of the Portions of the
Saints in the New Jerusalem, as if he intended chiefly that their Portion
should consist in outward Happiness, and in the enjoyment of such and such a
Portion, or compass of ground: Yet consider that these are but metaphorical and
borrowed Expressions, spoken to our Capacities, under which is indeed included
the nature of our blessed and spiritual Food and Nourishment: You know it is
usual for the holy Ghost in Scripture to Joh. 20. 15, 16.
call the Saints Sheep, Lambs, Heifers, Cows, Rams, Doves, Swallows, P^licans,
Amos 4. 3
Jer. 31. 18.
and the like; and also to call their Food, their spiritual and heavenly Food,
Song 2. 5.
Grass, Provender, Wheat, Wine, Oil, Ezekiel. 34. 14.
Grapes, Apples, Figs, Nuts, and the Zech. 10. 1 Isa 30. 24. Mic. 4. 4.
like also; all which are but shadowish and figurative expressions, even as
this of the measure of the twelve thousand furlongs: and observe it, that which
John says here is twelve thousand furlongs, Ezekiel tells us, it lies on this
Ezekiel. 47. 8, 9, etc.
side and on that side of the bank of the River of the Water of Life: Now I
think there is none so much void of understanding, as to think this Water of
Life is any thing else but the precious Grace of God, in and through the Lord
Jesus: Wherefore the ground or measure for Portions, it is nothing else but our
spiritual and heavenly Food, even spiritual Grace, and Gifts, and Comforts,
that the holy Ones of this City shall most plentifully partake of, and enjoy:
And so indeed the Prophet also says, speaking of the Portions of the holy Land
for this City: The increase thereof, says he, Ezekiel. 48. 18, 19.
shall be for Food unto them that serve the City; and they that serve it shall
serve it out of the twelve Tribes of Israel: Out of the twelve Tribes, that is,
out of the twelve thousand Furlongs, which is the the Portion of the Tribes.
This is according to the Saying of the Prophet David, He makes me to lie down
in green Pastures, he leads me besides the still Waters: and again, For the
Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them
into living Fountains of Water: for their shame, they shall have double; and
for confusion, they shall rejoice in their Portion: Therefore in their Land
they shall possess the double; Everlasting Joy shall be upon them, Psalm. 23. 2.
Rev. 7. 17. Isa. 61. 7.

Thus you see the measure of the City, Gates, and Wall, and the effect of that;
and thus you see also the measure of the Portion for the City, with what it is:
Wherefore it remains that we see what is to be the effect of that also.

And he measured the City with the Reed twelve thousand furlongs, and the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal. Before he told us,
that the length was as large as the breadth; which I then told you, did
signify the nature of her Rule, and the measure of her Obedience: but now he
adds, and says, That both in length and breadth, and in height, she is equal:
Wherefore in that he adds at last a squareness of height, to her squareness of
length and breadth; and also in that he adds it not before he had told us of
the measure of her Portions, he would have us to understand, that as the Rule
in which this City shall walk, shall be complete; and as her Obedience to that
Rule shall be complete; so her enjoyment of God and his Grace at that day shall
be proportionable also: She is square in her Rule, square in her Obedience, and
square in her Enjoyment of God, and his Goodness; the length, and the breadth,
and the height of it are equal. Indeed the Scripture says, That in keeping
Psalm. 19. 11
his Commandments there is great Reward: and again, This man shall be Jam. 1.
25.
blessed in his Deed: This shows unto us then, what glorious days these will
be, to the House and City of God; even days in which Saints shall see the Mind
of God clearly, have Hearts to do it completely, and have continually the
answerable Enjoyment of God, and spiritual Happiness: Now will his Paths Psalm.
65. 11.
drop Fatness, with a witness! and now will he meet him that rejoices and
works Isa. 64. 5.
Righteousness, those that remember him in his Ways: And the length, and the
breadth, and the height of it, are equal. Wherefore the Prophet in the Vision
of the measures of the Portions, does observe that there was a squareness in
them, as well as in their Ordinances and Obedience: and hence it is that he
tells us that every little Chamber was one Reed broad, and one Reed long: and
again, the Oblation, that is, the Portion for the Tribes, shall be five and
twenty thousand: By five and twenty thousand ye shall offer the holy Oblation,
FOUR SQUARE, with the Portion of the City, Ezekiel. 40. 7. and 48. 20.

Again, In that he says, The length, and the breadth, and the height of it,
are equal; he shows us how fit this City at this day will be, even for the
Kingdom of Heaven and Glory: for observe, That as the Rule, Obedience, and
Comforts of God, do make this City a square City, both in height, and length,
and breadth; so the Holiest of all, which was a Heb. 9. 24.
Type of Heaven, was of the same fashion also; It was twenty Cubits high, and
twenty Cubits long, and twenty Cubits broad; the length, and the breadth, and
the height of it were equal, 1 King. 6. 20. 2 Chronicles. 3. 8. Ezekiel. 41. 4.

Wherefore as now the Will of God will be done (according to the Petition) on
Earth as it is in Heaven; so will this Mat. 6. 10
City be at this day fit to enter into the Holiest Place; even as fit as one
four square is to shut into another: Here is a four square City for a four
square Heaven; And the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal:
Wherefore it is upon this account that this City at her appearing is said to be
adorned and prepared, as a Bride is for her Husband; which we all know is the
most perfect and compleatest Attire that is possible to be got: And therefore
it is again, that at the coming of the Lord, those that go in with him to the
Marriage, are said to be ready beforehand, Rev. 21. 2. Matthew. 25. 10.

Verse. 17. And he measured the Wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four
Cubits.
This measure of the Wall that here A third measure.
he makes mention of, is also distinct from the former measure, where he is
said to measure the City, Gates, and Wall; and it refers to such a Wall, or to
such a part of the Wall in such a place: for I find that though the Wall of
this City in general is that which shall incompass the New Jerusalem round; yet
this Wall is in some place, and for some reason, of another manner and measure
than the Wall is in general, as it compasses round the City; which part of the
Wall is called the broad Wall, the Wall upon which even half of the People
might walk complete at once, Neh. 3. 8. and 12. 38.

But to trace out the business in the Type, and so to come to its answer in the
Antitype: I find that a little distance from Jerusalem there was a place
called Tophet, which place was counted 2 Kin. 23. 10.
profane, unholy, or defiled; I find also that this unclean unholy place, was
a figure Isa. 30. 33.
of Hell it self: Now mark, I find by the Scripture, that against this Tophet,
this unholy and profane place, was the broad Wall of the City for the defense
of A broad Wall against Tophet, to keep the Sanctuary.
the Sanctuary, erected, and reared up: He measured, says the Prophet, by the
four sides, and it had a Wall rouud about, five hundred Reeds long, and five
hundred Reeds broad, TO MAKE A SEPARATION BETVVEEN THE SANCTUARY AND THE
PROFANE PLACE, Ezekiel. 42. 20. Which Wall could not be that Wall which
compassed the City, because it was but five hundred Reeds long: for take the
measure of this Wall in its largest measure, and it is (if you count a Reed for
that which we count a Pole) but twelve Furlongs, which compass will scarce go
round many Market Towns; especially, if together with this, you consider the
breadth of the Wall, whose breadth is as large as its length; wherefore now
there is not room enough for a City so big as a Cotage to stand in the midst
thereof: I speak this, to show you that the Wall in this place is not the Wall
that goes round about the City, but the Wall that is placed just between the
Sanctuary and Tophet, or Hell it self: Now though Ezekiel and John do differ
touching their count about the thickness of this Wall, it is not so much to
signify the Walls are not one and the same, as to show us that the one, to
wit, Ezekiel's Wall, was to incompass a worldly Sanctuary, but John's to
incompass a spiritual and heavenly; wherefore Ezekiel's must be of so many
Reeds long to go round about the material Sanctuary, as a Type; but John comes
more to the spirit of the matter, and shows us what the Sanctuary, Wall, and
the like, should mean: for by Sanctuary we are to understand (even in the Old
Testament) a place of Safety and Ezekiel. 11. 16.
Security, which was a Type of Christ: Heb. 6. 18
Now in that Tophet did stand against the Sanctuary in the letter, it signifies
that Hell it self is bent against all those that take shelter in Christ; but to
no purpose, for in the very face of Tophet, even between it and our place of
sanctuary, is fixed an invincible and impregnable mighty Wall, to keep in
safety those that have fled to Christ for shelter. Now, I say, in that John
tells us this Why this Wall is said to be 144 Cubits.
Wall is an hundred forty four Cubits, (and waves the manner of the measure of
Ezekiel) it is to show us that this Wall is for the safety of the hundred forty
four thousand that have taken sanctuary in Christ; that is, all the holy and
truly gracious Souls that are with him on the Mount Rev 14. 1, 2, 3.
Zion, having his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads; both Numbers, I say,
Rev. 7.
being twelve times twelve, implying a sufficient safety for all that are
sincerely and truly gracious.

And now to bring down the matter to our New Jerusalem-state: for though it be
true in all Ages, that there is between those that have taken sanctuary in
Christ, and the bottomless pit, an invincible and mighty Wall of Grace and
heavenly Power, and of the Merits of Christ, to save to the utmost all and
every one that Heb. 7. 25 26.
are thus fled to him for safety; yet there is some thing in it more then this,
for those that come into the days and state of the New Jerusalem: For, I say,
this Wall being it that makes a separation between the Sanctuary and the
profane place in general, and yet being spoken of as a thing extraordinary,
and accompanying the state of this new City only; it implies that at this day
the Saints The profit of the broad Wall.
shall have that shelter by this Wall from all the force of Hell, and the
damned Spirits that now from Tophet afflict them, that they never had before;
and therefore you find at the beginning of the thousand Years, which (as I
conceive) is the time of the building of this City, a mighty Angel is said to
come down from Satan bound as Deceiver Persecutor, and a Temptor to blasphe my
and unbelief.
Heaven, to lay hold of the Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil and
Satan, and to bind him a thousand Years; which done, he casts him into the
bottomless pit, and there shuts him up, to the end he should deceive the
Nations no more, the effect of which, will be not only a delivering of the
Saints from outward persecution, but also Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3.
from being any more assailed with either wicked and erroneous Doctrine, or
fierce and fiery darts from the Prince of Darkness, which now many of them are
so much anoyed and afflicted with: now the Church will be free from those
hellish suggestions to blaspheme, to despair, and the like, that her Members do
yet most dreadfully and sadly meet with: for observe, this old Tempter is said
to be tied up, or to be cast into the bottomless Pit, first, as he is a Dragon,
under which name he goes in this Book, in his persecuting the Church, Rev. 12.
Secondly, he is said to be shut up, as he goes under the name of a Serpent,
under which name he went when he fomented his devilish and damning seducing
Doctrine to our first Parents; the which the Spirit expressly seems to relate
unto, and therefore calls him that OLD Serpent; that OLD Serpent that deceived
us at the first, Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, he is said to be shut up also,
as he goes under the name of the Devil and Satan, under which Name he goes
commonly in the New Testament, when he provokes and stirs up our lusts, and
when he labors to drive us into all manner of unbelief, distrust, despair, and
so consequently into murmurings and blasphemy against God, Mat. 4. 1, 5, 8.
Luke 4. 2, 3, 5, 6. Act. 5. 1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 2, 7, 11. Wherefore,
I say, that at the day that this Wall is set up in all its glory, and when it
performs every part and piece of its office to the full, then shall Satan be
bruised under our Feet indeed, and Romans 16. 20.
then shall Jerusalem be called, The joyous City, and her People, A Joy; for
her Rev. 21. 4
former Sorrows shall be past and forgot.

If thou still objectest, But I have yet Object.
an evil heart, and therefore if I be not rid of that at that day (should I
live till then) why though there should be no Devil to afflict me, I shall feel
and meet with sorrow and trouble enough.

I answer thee: First, I dare not say Answ.
that at this day thou shall be in every sense without thy evil heart, in the
midst of all this glory, tempted Soul: Yet I say thus much to thee;

First, Where there is no Devil to The benefit of having Satan thus bound and
tied up.
tempt, though the Saints will yet be imperfect, and come short of a glorified
state; yet they by his absence will be delivered from many dreadful vexing and
burning hellish Darts, that will otherwise confound and afflict the Soul like
Arrows, whose heads are poisoned: Christians have a great deal of ease, when
God does (even at this day) withold the Devil for a season, (though yet they
have their own lusts) over they have when the Devil and their own Lusts are
suffered to meet and work together: yea, the Lord Jesus himself, who had no
sin, yet in the Temptation was fearfully handled and afflicted with the Devil;
though all the while, I say, he kept him at staves end, and did not suffer him
in the least to anoy his Person; and therefore it is said that when he was in
the Wilderness Mark 1. 12, 13.
in the conflict, the Angels came to minister to him: at the time of his Agony
Col. 2. 14, 15.
also, in which Agony doubtless Satan Luke 23. 44.
had a very great hand to afflict him, you see his complaint, how that he was
sore Mark 14. 33, 34.
amazed, and exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, being so laden with
heaviness and sorrow, that he was scarce able to stand or wag under the burden
of it. Satan even from himself, besides the workings of our own Lusts, does do
us wonderful injury, and hits our Souls with many a fiery Dart, that we think
comes either from our selves, or from Heaven, and God himself; but now by this
Wall, this broad Wall, this sorrow will be cut off.

Secondly, Again, when Satan is thus tied up, we shall, together with this
Mercy, Corruptions shall now also be greatly weakened
receive such a plentiful pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, that though there
will remain in us still the remainders of our Corruptions; yet by the plentiful
indwellings of the holy Ghost, and the Joy and Peace and heavenly sweetness
thereof, these things shall lie like lean, withered, blasted things: the reason
of that power and that strength that our Lusts have to this day in our hearts,
it is because we are so lean and thin and weak in the things of God: strong
Grace makes Corruptions weak, and strikes them through, laying them at the point
of death, always gasping for life: thus it was with Moses, he had such Grace in
his Soul, and such Communion with God, that though he had yet a Body of Sin
within him, it was a rare thing for him to see his wretchedness; that is, to
see it pirt, lively, and powerful in him: indeed God says, That upon the Land
of his Numb. 11 14, 15.
People shall come up Briars and Thorns; yea, upon all the Houses of Joy in the
joyous City, because the Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the City
shall be left, the Forts and Towers shall be for Dens for ever, a Joy of wild
Asses, a Pasture of Flocks; until the Spirit be poured on us Isa. 32. 13 14, 15.
from on high, and the Wilderness be a fruitful Field, etc. And then the Lord
shall defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at
that day shall Zec. 12. 8.
be as David, and the House of David shall be as God, even as the Angel of the
Lord before him: The Inhabitants shall not say, Isa. 33. 24
I am sick; the People that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their Iniquity.

And he measured the Wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four Cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel. According to the
measure of a Man] The Man Christ Jesus: For the measure of this City, or the
Golden Reed with which this City is thus measured, it is His Joh. 12. 48.
, his Word and Law of the New Testament: Joh. 5. 27
All Judgment is committed into the hand of the Son; and God has given him
authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

-- According to the measure of a Man, that is, of the Angel. This Angel is one
of the Seven that Rev. 21. 9
had the seven last Plagues to execute upon the Man of Sin, and yet he says,
the measure is according to the measure of a man; the meaning is, That the
City, the New Jerusalem, is to be builded according to the Word of Christ; but
yet by his Word as it is in the hand of his Angels, that is, his Messengers
and Servants; of which Servants, the chief will be those that are his
Instruments ^o pour forth the seven Vials full of (...)ven last Plagues upon
the Antich(...)n Harlot: For they, with their Plagues, will both destroy what
stands in impiacable opposition, and will subject the rest, and bring them
into a correspondency with the Word and Will of God (as I have showed) Whence
note, That they of his Servants that God shall use to pour forth his last and
most dreadful Plagues upon the Whore, they are they that God will use to show
us the Pattern of this holy City: Or thus, They that can tell how to plague the
Whore, they can tell how to measure this City: The righteous men, they shall
judge them (that is the Antichristian Harlot, with her wicked and adulterous
Daughters) after the manner of Adulteresses, and after the manner of Women that
shed blood; because they are adultrous, and blood is in their hands, Ezekiel. 23.
45.

Thus much touching the frame of this City, its Wall, Gates, and Foundations,
with the measure of each: And now it remains that I speak of the Glory of them.

Verse. 18. And the building of the Wall of it was of Jasper; and the City was
pure Gold, like unto clear Glass.
IN these words you have a discovery of The Glory of the Wall.
the Glory both of the Wall and City it self; and that, as you see, under the
notion of two choice Metaphors: the Wall is Jasper, the chief of Stones; and
the City is Gold, the chief of Metals: And the building of the Wall of it was
of Jasper, and the City was pure Gold.

This Jasper is that Stone in the light of which this City is said to descend,
as in the light of a Stone most precious: Now as there he says she descended
in the light of this Stone, so here he says this Stone is the Wall thereof;
And the building of the Wall of it was of Jasper.

This therefore confirms unto you what I said of the Wall before, to wit,
That it was the Salvation of God through Christ: Wherefore learn this by the
way, That this City shall not be at this day in her own keeping, but in the
keeping of Jesus Christ; He with his Benefits does compass her round, and by
him alone she lies down in safety: Wherefore it is from this Consideration
that God does say by the Mouth of the Prophet, I will give them within my House
and within my Walls, a place and a name better then that of Sons and of
Daughters; I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off, Isa.
56. 5.

And the [building] of the Wall, etc. By this word building, we are to
understand both the Materials of the Wall, the manner of their placing, and the
Instruments that God will use for the setting up thereof: Now to speak
properly, this Wall being the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 1. 30 Heb. 11. 10 Heb.
3. 4.
Himself in his precious Merits, Benefits and Offices, the Builder hereof must
needs be God Himself; for he it is that has made this Christ for us a
Safeguard and Defense, by making of him our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, by which he does incompass us round on every
side, and that at every moment, to deliver us from the Power and Destruction
both of Sin, Death, the Devil, and Hell.

But again, The building here spoken of, is a building of this Wall after the
destruction of Antichrist, and so long after Christ was sent, and made these
things in his own Person, to his beloved and blessed The building of the Wall.
Church: Wherefore the building of this Wall that is here spoken of, it must be
understood of the recovering again the purity of those Doctrines in which the
Lord Jesus with all his Benefits is found and made ours, for our everlasting
Defense and Safety: For we find that the King of Babylon, who was a Type of our
Antichrist, when he came up against Jerusalem, the Type of our Primitive
Church, he brake down their City, destroyed their Walls, rifled their Houses,
and killed their Children; whose steps, I say, our Antichrist follows to a
hair, in treading down the Primitive Church, corrupting her Doctrines (which
are her Safeguard Psalm. 74: 4, 5, 6, 7.
and Wall) also robbing and spoiling the Houses of God, and killing his
Children with a thousand Calamities; turning all the heavenly Frame and Order
of Church Government into an heap of Rubbish, and a confused Dunghill.

Wherefore the building again of this Wall is to be understood of the
recovering and settling and fastening the Doctrines of Christ, as before, in
which Doctrines he in all his Benefits is wrapped, and held fast forever: I
say, a recovering of them, and setting him up again in his primitive and pure
Glory, of being our Priest, Prophet and King, in his Church, and a giving unto
these Offices their own proper length, breadth, height, and depth; letting them
rule in all their Force, Glory, and Majesty, and Zec. 14. 9* Rev. 11. 15.
Authority, for then will be golden Days, and not till then; then, I say, when
the Zech. 9. 7, 8.
several Offices of the Lord Jesus do rule in their own nature and largeness of
Authority both in the Church and in the World.

Alas! This Wall is yet unbuilt, the Offices of the Lord Jesus do not yet
shine in that purity, nor so stand in their proper places, as they shall do at
the coming in of New Jerusalem: the Wall lies yet but as an heap of Rubbish;
the Offices of the Lord Christ are to this day by many Preachers confounded,
and removed Ezekiel. 28. 2, 3.
to and fro, even like loose and roulingstones; these Offices also are by
others 2 These. 2. 4.
attributed to Antichrist, and his Children of Iniquity; but at this day the
Nations shall know themseves to be but men, and the Doctrines of Christ shall
be set again in their own places: Now shall every going into this City, and
every going out thereof, stand where The Names and Attributes of the Father and
Son, the Towers of this Wall.
it ought; and now shall every Tower and Fortress on this Wall be placed as in
the days of old; which Towers and Fortresses are the glorious Names and
Attributes of the Father and Christ: for the Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, the Righteous flee into it, and are safe: and again, Thou have been a
shelter to me, and a strong Tower from the Enemy: Wherefore now, I say, shall
the Name of God, as Lord of all, and Father of his Church, with the Names of
the Son, as Head, Savior, and King of kings, be as the Bulwarks Song 1. 10 1
Pet. 2. ^ 1, 2.
to this City, to which shall be added all the Promises, Consolations,
Encouragements, etc. in the blessed Book of God, out of which this City
continually shall suck the Milk and Nourishment of the unsearchable Grace of
God to them; to all which shall be added many new pieces of Timber in the Wall
(for so Neh. 2. 8.
it was in the Type at the rebuilding of the City) by which new pieces, I
gather, that the special Providence of God, and his Protection, shall be at
this day so fastened in this Wall for the complete delivering of this City both
from Hell and Earth, that she shall stand in full force, safety, and peace,
even till the Heavens and the Earth shall be no more. Now when this Wall is
thus set up, even every Truth and Office of Christ, in is own true natural
force, about this City; and when God in his special and most indeared
affections shall engage himself even everlastingly to keep this City safe from
all storms and tempests, and trouble and sorrow; then shall these Citizens, as
a sign of their Conquest both of Hell and the World, even set up their Banners
on the several Towers of this Wall, and the Standards that belong to the Tribes
The Saints shall set up their Banners on these Towers. Psalm. 20. 5.
thereof; then, I say, We shall rejoice in thy Salvation, O Lord, and in thy
Name will we set up our Banners: And then shall the Inhabitants of the World
both wondering and tremblingly say, Who is this that looks forth as the
Morning, fair as the Sun, clear as the Moon, and terrible as an Song. 6. 10
Army with Banners? O the Names of God, of Christ, of his Offices, and the
power of his Grace and Promises! How will they shine! In what Glory will they
appear! They will be even as a Wall of fire round about Jerusalem; and will not
be, as now, in the mind and thought of the People, as the White of an Egg in
the Mouth, without taste; but shall be and appear in their own Brightness,
Sweetness, and Grace: For how great is his Goodness, and how great is his
Beauty! Corn shall make the young Men cheerful, and new Wine the Maids: In that
day shall thou say, O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me,
thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me: Behold God is my Salvation:
I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord JEHOVAH is my Strength, and my
Song, he also is become my Salvation. Isa. 12. 1, 2.

For the Workmen, I am sure God is the principal, as I said before; but yet he
will do it by instruments, through the guidance of his Spirit. The building of
the Wall of old, was of God; but so, as that he did it by the hand of Nehemiah,
and his Companions. I do observe in the completing of the City Jerusalem of
old, that there was first Altar-work, then Temple-work, and after that the
building the Wall, and completing the City. Altar-work, Altarwork, Templework,
and Citywork.
I say, was the first which was reared, and on which there was offered
according to the Law, and holy custom, the Sacrifices and Offerings both
morning and evening, as every day required; but the foundation of the Temple
was not yet laid, Ezra 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. These Altarmen were those also that
afterward built the Temple; but yet by them was first of all repaired the
Altar, to signify that the first work that will be on foot at the beginning of
the return of the Christians What Altar-work is.
from out of Antichristian Babylon, it will be to find out Altar-work, that
is, the Priestly Office of Christ, and to offer (...) Him, the Prayers and
Supplications of the Church continually. Wherefore these Altar-men, or these
men in their Altar-work, did figure-out for us our famous and holy Worthies,
that before us have risen up in their place, and shook off those Relics of
Antichrist that entrenched upon the Priestly Office of our Lord and Savior,
even worthy Wickliff, Hus, Luther, Melancton, Calvin, and the blessed Martyrs
in Q. Mary's days, etc. with the rest of their companions: these in their day
were stout and valiant Champions for God, according to their light, and did
upon the Altar of God, which is Christ our Lord, offer up many strong cries,
with groans and tears, as every day required, for the complete recovering of
the Church of God; the benefit of whose Offering we have felt and enjoyed to
this day; but by this the Foundation of the Temple was not yet laid. Ezra 3. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.


Now after these, arise another People, not another with respect to
Christianity, but with respect to further light. These men, though they keep
the continual Offerings upon the Altar, as the other did, What is Templework.
yet they are men also that are for Temple-work, wherefore these begin to
search out the Foundations of the Temple of God, that they may rear up the
House, as well as build up the Altar: These be they that are for having the
Church a select Act. 19. 9 Romans 1. 7 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 12 13.
company of visible Believers, walking in the Faith and Holiness of the Gospel;
which Believers are for separating from the unconverted and open profane, and
for building up one another an holy Temple in Act. 2. 40 Ephesians. 2.* 21, 22. 1
Cor. 5 11, 12, 13
the Lord, through the Spirit. I say, a Temple, or House, or Church, separate
and distinct from that confused heap of rubbish and carnal Gospelers, that
every where like Locusts and Maggots craul up and down the Nations. These were
figured forth by Zerubbabel, Joshua and all the people of the Land that are for
working and laboring in this service of Temple-work. Hag. 1. 12. Hag. 2. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5.

Again, As there is thus Altar-work, and Temple-work to be done by the Saints
when they are coming out of spiritual Sodom and Egypt: So at the end of these,
there will be City-work on foot also. Which City-work will chiefly consist in
setting up the Wall and Gates for defense, and of building themselves Houses or
Mansions of rest and refreshment, Isa. 65. 19 20, 21.
after all their hard usage under the tyranny of the Man of sin, that Son of
Perdition; which City-work will be then completed, when the Church of Christ
has obtained a complete conquest and victory over the world, and has got her
enemies, and them that hate her, to lie at her feet, and to lick the dust of
the soals Isa. 60. 14
thereof. For, as I have told you already, Temple-work, yea, when that is
complete in the work, yet there may be great havoc made of the Church of
Christ; at which time also, City-work may be trampled under the feet of the
wicked Rev. 11. 1, 2, 3.
and uncircumcised Gentiles; but when the City is builded, then Zion is become
a strong hold, and about all her glory shall Isa. 4. 5.
be a defense. Then she either draws and allureth her adversaries to entreat
her kindly, and to count it their honor to be under her protection (as did the
Gibeonites) or else she breaks and b^uises, Josh. 9.
and subjects them to her by her Power and Authority. The daughter of Tire
shall be there with a gift, and the rich among the People shall entreat thy
favor, Psalm. 45. 12. In the last days, says the Prophet, it shall come to
pass, that the Lords House shall be established upon the tops of the Mountains,
and shall be exalted above the Hills; and People shall flow unto it, and many
Nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up unto the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and and he will teach us of his
ways, and we will walk in his paths. For the Law shall go forth of Zion, and
the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And ye shall judge among the People, and
rebuke strong Nations afar off; and they shall beat their Swords into
ploughshares, and their Spears into pruning hooks; (that force and power that
they used formerly to destroy the Church of God, now they shall use it to do
her service, even to break up the clods of the hearts of sinners, and to prune
and dress the House of God and Vinyard of Jesus Christ) Nation shall not lift
up a Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more; (for the Word
of the Kingdom of Peace shall bear sway) And thou, O Tower of the Flock, the
strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first
Dominion; the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of Jerusalem, Mich. 4. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. This is Citywork, and as to the Glory, Peace, and Deliverance
of the Church, it is the chiefest of all other, because it is not only most
excellent for concourse and multitude, but, I say, for preservation and safety;
and that not only to keep the Worshippers, if they keep their order, but to
keep the Order and Worshippers both in order and continual safety, that they
may be for ever in the purest order. But now, though at the completing of Neh.
4. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and 6. v. 1 to 13.
this Wall, and the building its Towers, when they are finished, there will be
great peace; yet all the time that these things are doing, before they be done,
let the workmen look for opposition, taunts, underminers, and a thousand
tricks for the hindrance of it; For the Street of the City shall be built, and
the Dan. 9. ^5.
Wall, even in troublous times.

And the building of the Wall of it, was of Jasper. Of Jasper only; For as by
building is showed unto us the manner of the work, so by Jasper is showed unto
us the matter it self, the matter therefore must be ( Jasper) Christ only, his
Word, Offices, and glorious Brightness only; for indeed, whatever the special
Grace, Protection, and Providence of God will at this day be over this City,
yet it shall be every whit of it according to Christ; that is, both of him, for
him, and by him, as the Fruits and Effects of his Suffering, Bloodshed, and
Merits: Therefore, says Isa. 53. 12
God, I will divide him a Portion with the Great, and he shall divide the Spoil
with the Strong, because he has poured out his Soul unto death, and was
numbered among the Transgressors. O Holiness! How will it shine both in Kings
and Nations, when God does this!

And the City was pure Gold. Having thus given us a discovery of The Glory of
the City.
the glory of the Wall, he now comes to show us the glory of the City that is
within the Wall: The City (faith he) is Gold, it is pure Gold: This was figured
out by Exodus 25. 31. to 36
the Golden Candlesticks belonging to the Tabernacle and Temple among the Jews,
which Candlesticks did then present unto us the worth and use of the Church of
CHRIST; The seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, says the Rev. 1. 2^
Lord Christ himself. Now the City here spoken of, is the Church in her highe^*
and greatest glory: Its state was also figured out by the Temple it self, whose
Beams, Posts, Walls, Doors, and the like, were most famously covered over with
Gold, 2 Chronicles. 3. 5, 6, 7. It was also (though but leanly) represented to us by
the golden state of old Jerusalem in the days of Solomon the King, in which
state Gold was so plentiful in the midst thereof, that Silver was nothing
counted of among the Citizens there, in those days, but was as common as the
Stones in the Street of the City, 2 Chronicles. 9. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 27.

And the City was pure Gold. I find by the search of the Scriptures, that there
is diverse sorts of Gold in the World; there is the Gold of the Land of
Havillah, the Gold of Parvaim, the Gold of Ophir, the Gold of Sheba, and the
Gold of Uphaz, Genesis 2. 11. 2 Chronicles. 3. 6. Job 22. 24. Psalm. 72. 15. Jer. 10. 9.
Now seeing he says the City is Gold, yet not distinguishing what Gold, or
which, we may suppose in this place he means Gold of all these sorts: and
indeed it is most agreeable to this Text, thus to judge: for the Church at this
day shall be made up of the twelve Tribes that are scattered abroad, and of the
Gentile Nations both far and near; who as they now lie, are, for ought I can
learn, at as great a distance, and as remote from one another (not only in
knowledge and affections) but touching the places of their abode, as are the
Golden Mines, out of which the Gold that I spoke of before, is dug and
fetched: Thus shall Gold, the Golden Saints of God, at this day be gathered out
of the several Golden Mines of the World, and be brought to King Solomon the
Son of David, our Lord Jesus, to Jerusalem, with which he will build him a
Golden shining City, the Joy of all the World.

And the City was pure Gold. Gold is the choice and chief of all Metals, both
for worth, color, and virtue; wherefore when he says, The City is Gold, you
may conceive how rich and shining, and virtuous this City will be; the Riches
of the whole World will be here, the Beauty of the whole World will be here,
and the Virtue of the whole World will be here; I mean spiritual Riches,
Beauty, and Health; wherefore the rest of the World at this day will be but as
a crushed bunch of Herbs in which is no Virtue; or like a Furnace full of
Dross, out of which the Gold is taken; or like an old crazy and ruinous House,
from which is departed all Health and Happiness; and indeed much like to this,
is that saying of the Prophet, to wit, That at this day the whole circumference
of the World that is without the Walls and Privileges of this City, it shall
be but like an old ruinous House, in which dwells nothing but Cormorants,
Bitterns, Owls, Ravens, Dragons, Satyrs, the Screech-Owl, the great Owl, the
Vulture, Isa. 34. 10 to 17.
and the like most doleful Birds: All their Princes shall be nothing, says the
Prophet, and when they call their Nobles to the Kingdom, none shall be there:
In their very Palaces shall be Thorns, and Nettles, and Brambles; for all
among them that are Princes and Nobles indeed, will have packed up, and be gone
for Jerusalem: So that the World, I say, will be left empty, void, and stripped
both of Treasure, Beauty, and Health, at the day of Jerusalems building again:
But O how melancholy a forlorn beautiless World will this be at this day! It
will be only the Rev. 22. 15.
place of Dogs, Sorcere^s, Whoremongers and Murderers, and whosoever loves and
makes a lie; it will now be the very Emblem of Hell, as the Church at this day
will be the Emblem of Heaven: wherefore as the Church (as I showed you before)
will be most fit for her putting on of Immortality and Incorruption; so the
World will at this day be most fit to be swallowed up of the Lake and
bottomless Gulf. All things that are good, and worth any thing, shall at this
day be Zech. 14. 14.
found only in the City of God: The Rev. 18.
Gold will be in Jerusalem.

Again, In that this City is here called by the name of Gold, it is to show us
how great pains, and travel, and charge the Lord Christ has been at, to get so
great a Treasure together: Gold is 2 Chronicles. 9 12.
fetched from a far Country, and that with great pains, charge, and
difficulty: Luke 22. 44.
The Gold wherewith King Solomon made his drinking Vessels, it cost a three
years Mat. 12. 40.
Journey to obtain it: so the Saints also, those Golden Vessels wherewith is
made this Golden City, they cost Christ a three days travel in the heart of the
Earth, even sweatingly under the wrath of God, to obtain them, and thus to
build this City with them.

Further; In that he says this City is Gold, he would have us to consider what
the state of the Church was, before she came into this happy condition, to wit,
an afflicted tempted and tried condition. Gold, as it comes from the Mine, it
comes commixed with its Dust and Ore; wherefore the Goldsmith has a burning
Furnace, wherein he having put it, does with the fire purge and take away the
Dross and Dust from among the Metal it self; into which Furnace he puts it
once, twice, thrice, and again, to the end it may at length be thoroughly
cleansed and purified from its Dross: Now all this befalls the People of God;
they are thrown into the burning fiery Furnace of Affliction and Temptation,
and there they are tried, purged, and purified; as the Lord also says by the
Prophet, I will try them as Gold is tried, and will refine them as Silver is
refined; yea, I will melt them and try them; for how shall I do for the
Daughter of my People? Isa. 31. 9. Jer. 9. 7. Zech. 13. 9.

Lastly, When he says this City is Gold, he also thereby insinuates how
invincible and unconquerable a Spirit the People of God are possessed with:
Gold is a Metal so invincible and unconquerable, that no fire can consume it;
it may burn it indeed, and melt it; the Dross indeed does consume, and give way
to the power of the fire, but the Gold remains, and holds its ground; yea, it
gets ground even of the Furnace and Fire it self; for the more it is burned and
melted, the more it recovers its color, and the more it shakes off its Dross
and Dishonor: Just thus it is with the People of God, and has been so even
from the beginning; The more they oppressed them, the more they grew, Exodus 1.
12. the truth of which will be proved with a witness when God comes to set up
this City Jerusalem: his Church has been now for many hundred years in the
King of Babylon's Furnace; all which time she has most gloriously endured and
withstood the heat; and at last, when the fire has done its worst against her,
Behold, there comes out a City of Gold: A Type of which, was the state of the
three Children, who though they were cast into the Fire, bound, and in
disgrace; yet came out in the Liberty and Grace of the Son of God, Dan. 3. 23,
24, 25, 26. Wherefore let her be bold to say, even before she comes out of the
Fire, When I am tried, I shall come forth as Gold, Job 23. 10.

And the City was [pure] Gold. These words, PURE Gold, clear up what I said
already: Pure Gold, or Gold upon which the fire has done its work. The Church
in the fire of Persecution is Esth. 2. 12
like Esther in the perfuming Chamber, but making fit for the presence of the
King; which fire, when it has done its work, then she comes into his presence
in clothing all of Gold: The Kings Daughter is all glorious within, her
clothing is of wrought Gold: and again, At thy right hand did stand the Queen
in Gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45. 9, 13. Wherefore he means by pure Gold, Gold out of
the Fire, Gold on which the fire of Persecution and Temptation has done its
full and complete work.

And the City was pure Gold, like unto clear Glass. By Glass, in this place, we
are to understand the Word of God, as both James and Paul do testify, Jam. 1.
23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 3. 18. and 1 Cor. 13. 12. By clear glass then, we are to
understand the Word in its own nature and purity, without the corruptions and
traditions of men. Wherefore when he says, this Golden City was like unto
clear Glass: it is as if he had said, she is even with the Word and Law of her
Goldsmith, in all her matters. The Word is a Golden Reed, this City a Golden
City; and that, a Golden City, taken out of the furnace of affliction, and
therefore like to the Golden Reed. And the City was pure Gold, like unto clear
Glass.

Verse. 19, 20. And the Foundations of the Wall were garnished with all manner
of precious stones. The first Foundation was a Jasper, the second a Saphir, the
third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth a Sardonix, the sixth a
Sardius, the seventh a Chrysolite, the eighth Beryl, the ninth Topaz, the tenth
Chrysoprasus, the eleventh a Jacinct, the twelfth an Amethyst.
Thus having showed us the Glory of the Wall, and of the City, he now comes to
show us the glory of the Foundations. The glory of the Foundations.
The Foundations you know, I told you before, they are the twelve Apostles in
their Doctrine, or the (primitive) Doctrine of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

Now the great business in this place will be to show you the garnishing of
these Foundations, and also the mystery and order of the lying of the
Foundations, for their glory lies in both.

As for the garnishing of these Foundations, it is, and will be at the day of
The Glory of the Foundations twofold.
New Jerusalem, twofold; and the first is with beautiful Gifts and Grace: Thus
was the Apostles of old adorned, and thus shall their Doctrine again be
garnished. I know that the Doctrine of the twelve has been always accompanied
with goodly Gifts and Grace, from the first Churches quite down, that is,
according to the measure of light they appeared in, and according to the
dispensations of God in the times of Antichrist. But yet the glory that this
Doctrine had in these latter days, I mean since the Apostasy, it was nothing
in comparison of the glory and splendour that will be in them in the day when
this City is builded and complete; Wherefore you find, that though all-along in
Antichrist's reign, the Gospel of Grace has shone, and given light to the
Saints and People of God in all their travels and afflictions; yet the shining
of it at that day was much The Gospel darkened by the smoke of Antichrist.
opposed and eclipsed by the smoke of the bottomless-pit: as he says, There
arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and
the Air was darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit, Rev. 9. 2. In which
days, I say, abundance of the light, heat, and operation of the Gospel, was
diminished and taken off, so that but little of the power or glory of it, has
been either felt, or seen from that time to this very day. This is that God
spoke of by the Prophet Amos, saying, I will cause the Sun to go down at noon,
and will darken the Earth in the clear day; and I will turn your feasts into
mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth
upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the
mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day. (All which he
explaineth in the next words, for) Behold the days come, says the Lord, that
I will send a Famine in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, or of thirst for
Water, but of hearing the Words of the Lord; and they shall wander from Sea to
Sea, and from the Amos 9. 10, 11, 12.
North even to the East; they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the
Lord, and shall not find it. In those days Eli's sons 1 Samuel 2. 12, 13, 14, 15.
were become Varlots. Indeed there was here and there a little child, like
Samuel in his minority, that now and then would speak most goodly things. But
the Word of the Lord was precious in those and 3. 1.
days, there was no open Vision. This is that which David in the Spirit of
Prophecy Psalm. 82. 5.
complains of, saying, They know not, neither will they understand; they walk
on in darkness: all the Foundations of the Earth are out of course. Thus in the
days of the eclipsing of the glory of these Foundations: But now, behold, they
recover their light, and put on, as of old, their former glory, and are again
garnished as in the former days. Now will all the Doctrines of the Gospel
spangle and sparkle; out of every Text will the Ministers of God make to issue
exceedingly most precious and heavenly Fire; for these Stones are indeed the
Stones of Fire, Ezekiel. 28. 14, 16.
and in them is contained that which would set the whole World on a flame with
love and delight in the things of God and another World, had but men the Spirit
of Wisdom, and the Authority of God in their Ministry, as the Apostles and the
primitive Christians had. Well, this Doctrine of the Twelve shall be again
adorned with Gifts and Grace as in the days of old: by which it shall also be
made to shine, and to cast forth its Golden Rays before the Nations, to their
Salvation. Behold, says God, I Isa 54. ^ 11.
will lay thy Stones with fair Colors, that is, thy Apostolical Doctrines
shall again be garnished, as at the first; Truth shall appear in its old and
mature colors, and (as such) shall be embraced, and lived and delighted in,
both by Jews and Gentiles, as I have showed.

But secondly, The Twelve Foundations that here you read of, they are the If
you compare the stones you will find them (some of them) to differ in name, but
know it is usual for one stone to go under 2 names; and besides, the Greek does
give many things other names than does the Hebrew text.
same with those twelve Stones that long before were set in the Brestplate of
Judgment, in which were engraven the Names of the twelve Tribes of the children
of Israel, the names of which Tribes did comprehend the whole body of the house
of their fathers, Exodus 28. 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 29. Exodus 39. 14. Now then,
seeing these Twelve are the same with those on the Breastplate of Judgment;
and seeing also, that those on the Breastplate did comprehend the whole of the
twelve Tribes: I conclude that for these Foundations to be garnished with all
manner of precious Stones, it is as much as to say, they shall be garnished
with abundance of Converts; Multitudes, and that of all sorts both of Jews and
Gentiles, Moors, Tartars, Turks, and those in the utmost parts of the World,
shall now be entangled with the Light and Truth, with the Glory and Goodness of
the Doctrine Converts the garnishing of the foundations.
of the Twelve. And I the rather take it thus, 1. Because, as the Foundations
themselves are said to be precious Stones: so also the Saints in general, they
go under the same names too. As Jeremiah Lam. 4. 1, 2, 3.
says, The precious Stones of the Sanctuary, are the precious Sons of Zion: As
Peter also says, in alluding to the precious 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Stones of the Temple: The Saints, are lively, or living precious stones, built
up a spiritual house, etc. and the foundations 1 Chronicles. 29. 2.
of the Wall were garnished with all manner of precious stones; That is, the
Doctrine of the Twelve was garnished with all manner of precious souls; that
is, converted by it, by which they become a glory and a garnishing to it.

2dly. I take it to be the conversion of the Precious Ones of God; because,
that, thus to understand it, is most like the phrase of the Apostle Paul
himself, saying, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20.
What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? Ye are our Glory and Joy.
Mark; in the text he says, The Foundations were garnished with all manner of
precious Stones, and here those precious Stones, Paul accounts to be those that
are converted by the Word: for, what is our hope, or joy, or crown? are not
even ye that have been converted by us? Ye are our Joy, ye are our Crown, ye
are our Glory; It is with you that we shall be crowned, adorned, and garnished
in the presence of our Lord Jesus. Mark, John says, They are garnished, Paul
says, they are crowned. John says, they are garnished with precious stones and
Paul says, they are crowned with the conversion of sinners. Thus therefore as
God will lay these Stones with fair colors, Isa. 54. 11.
so also he will lay these Foundations with Saphirs: that is, as he will
beautify the Doctrine of the Twelve with its former Glory, Sweetness and
Authority: so he will crown and garnish it with the conversion of many sinners.
The Elect are the Jewels of God, and this is the day of Malac. 3. 14, 15, 16,
17.
his binding them up, even then when the Antichrist falls, and the Gospel
breaks out in its primitive glory.

And the Foundations of the Wall were garnished with all manner of precious
stones. In these words, there is yet two things considerable:

First, That all who go to the adorning of these Foundations, they must be
precious Stones, not a common stone shall here be owned: And indeed what should
Pebbles do among the Pearls and the Job 28. 3
Diamonds of New-Jerusalem; or the stones of blackness and emptiness, among the
Saints of Light! I tell you, that those which God does reckon the
adorningstones, they are all, and every one, precious stones; they must be all
lively, glistring, 1 Pet. 21 5.
and curious stones, though stones of diverse 1 Chronicles. 29. 2.
colors. Antichrist counts any thing sufficient enough to garnish her Apostles
with, even the empty stones of confusion, the Isa. 34. 11.
sinners that have no more grace in their souls than there is sap in a post
that has been this twenty years without either sap or water: But God will not
count such for the beauty of his Word, nor for the garnishing and beautifying
of the Doctrine of the Twelve: they are garnished with PRECIOUS STONES.

Secondly, As he says the Foundations are garnished with precious stones only;
so he says it is with ALL MANNER of Precious Stones: by which he would have us
understand that all Saints have not the same degree either of precious grace,
or gifts and virtue in them; there are some that excel, and differ from the
rest, even as one Star differs from 1 Cor. 14. 12.
another in glory. Some Saints, as they have both more grace, and also gifts
than Prove. 31. 29.
others; so too they are more laborious and painful in the work of God than
their 1 Cor. 15 10. 41.
fellows, and therefore he says, ALL MANNER of Precious Stones.

Verse. 20. The first Foundation was a Jasper, the second a Saphir, the third a
Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the
seventh Chrysolite, etc.
Thus having showed you the garnishing and beautifying of the twelve
Foundations, he now comes to discover the Foundations themselves, with
reference to their order of placing and lying.

Touching which order, he says the first and bottom Foundation is a Jasper.

I have hitherto said that this Jasper in The Jasper does represent the Lord
Christ up on several accounts.
both the two aforementioned places, both as to the Light of this City, and
also of the Wall, it was Jesus Christ; Christ illuminating, and Christ
defending: But here the Jasper is said to be one of the twelve Foundations,
even one of those Foundations in which are writ the Names of the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb, which one would think did put this Jasper now into
another state, even to be a representation of one of the twelve Apostles, and
not of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself: To which I shall yet say,
That the Jasper here in the order of the Foundations, is to be understood of
Christ, as well as in the other two places in this Discourse; I say it is yet
to be understood of representing the Lord Jesus, though it also does bear the
name of one of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb: And in this very thing there is
an enfolding Mystery wrapped up, and enclosed.

For first, In that the Name of an Apostle The first account.
is writ in this Stone, and yet that this Jasper should represent Christ, it
shows unto us the agreement that is between the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
Christ himself, to wit, That they are one and the very same; and hence it is
that the Apostle says, We preach Christ crucified: 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.
Christ in all his Benefits is the very Marrow, Life and Sum of all their
Teaching; Other Foundation can no man 1 Cor. 3. 11.
lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Wherefore the Doctrine of the
Apostles being Christ it self, no marvel though the Name of an Apostle be writ
upon this Jasper; and again, no marvel though this Jasper go yet under that
Name that represents him.

Secondly, In that it is said the Names The 2d. account.
of the Twelve are in these twelve Foundations, and yet that the first of them
should be the Jasper, Christ; It argues also that whosoever receives the
Doctrine of the Twelve, they must needs with that receive the Lord Christ
himself: Receive the Doctrine of the Gospel, as it is held forth by the Twelve
in the Word, and thou can not miss of the Lord Jesus Christ himself; he will
be found in the bottom of their Doctrine: Ye are builded upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief Cornerstone,
Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.

Thirdly, In that he says in these The third account.
twelve Stones are the Names of the twelve Apostles, and yet that the first
should be the Jasper, Christ; It argues also that wherever the Doctrine of
the Twelve is preached, there is therewith the presence of Christ: the presence
of his Spirit to teach and enlighten the ignorant and blind Hearts of the
Unconverted; the presence also of his Power, to overcome them, and to make them
fall under the Glory and Truth of his heavenly Word: Lo, says he, I am with
you always, even to the end of the World: And they went forth and preached
every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs
following, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 20.

Fourthly, In that he says the Names The 4th account.
of the Twelve are in the Foundations, and yet that Christ should be one of the
twelve himself; It shows to us the Union that is between Christ and his holy
People: Mark, In the twelve Foundations are placed all, even all manner of
precious Stones: again, In the Twelve is placed the Jasper, Christ; by which we
may see the nearness that is between Christ and his whole Body: I in them, and
thou in me, says Christ, that they may be made perfect in one, John 17. 23. 1
Cor. 12. 12. Christ and his Saints make but one Temple, one Man; being but one
Flesh, one Nature, etc.

Fifthly, In that this Jasper is said to The fifth account.
be one of the Foundations, and that too the first and undermost; He shows
farther, that Christ is the Foundation of them before God, that are the
Foundation of him before men: The Twelve do bear up Christ before the World, as
the twelve brazen Oxen did hold up the 1 Kin. 7. 25.
Molten Sea in the Temple; and Christ does bear up the Twelve before his
Father, as the high Priests did carry the twelve Stones on their Breast Plate of
Judgment, when they went to make an Atonement for the Sins of the People Exodus
28. 29.
into the Holiest.

Sixthly, It shows us further, That The sixth account.
though the Apostles shall be adorned with the Conversion of those that they
shall win to the Lord Christ; yet they will never be able to stand under that
Glory and Honor, unless they are supported and upheld by Christ, as their
Foundation. Sirs, As Christ is the Strength of his People in their Work for him
in this World, so he must be their Strength by which they must stand under the
Reward they shall have for their labor, when this World is ended: And hence it
is, that the Prophet says, They shall hang upon him all the Glory of his
Fathers House, the Offspring and the Issue; all Vessels of small quantity,
from the Vessels of Cups, even to the Vessels of Flagons; and again, He shall
build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the Glory, Isa. 22. 24. Zech.
6. 13. He shall bear the Glory of our Salvation from Sin, Preservation in the
midst of all Temptations, and of our going to Glory; also he shall bear the
Glory of our labor in the Gospel, of our Gifts and Abilities, of making our
Labor and Work effectual to the saving of Sinners, that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18.

Seventhly, In that the Foundations The 7th account.
are twelve, and Christ the undermost of them; It signifies that all that are
converted by the Twelve, as they shall be for the garnishing of the Twelve, so
also both the Twelve, with all that they are garnished with, shall be for
garnishing of Christ; we shall stick like Pearls in the Crowns of the twelve
Apostles, and they again with all their Glory shall stick in the Crown of
Christ. And hence it is that you find the four and twenty Elders, which four
and twenty do (as I conceive) hold forth the Twelve both in the first and
second Jerusalem; I say, hence it is that you find them take their Crowns from
off their Heads, and cast them down before the Throne of God, Rev. 4. 9, 10, 11.
and of the Lamb, crying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto
Him Rev. 5. 11 12, 13, 14.
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever.

Lastly, One thing more of this goodly The 8th account.
Jasper, and then to the rest; which thing is this, That Jasper that here you
find to be the first in the twelve Foundations, even that Jasper you find to be
last of all among the Stones in the Exodus 28. 20.
Breast Plate of Judgment: from whence you may note, 1. That Christ as he is to
be the Heb. 12. 12.
Author or first of our Faith, so also he is to be the Finisher or last of our
Faith. 2. That as he is to be the Heb. 2. 10. Isa. 52. 12 and 58. 8. Exodus 14.
19.
Captain and Leader of his People, so he is to be the Rere-ward and Bringer-up
of his People, he is to go before them to lead them the way; and to come behind
them to bring them all up. 3. Again, for as much as he is said to be last before
he is first; that is, last in Exodus, and after that, first in the Revelations;
it may be to show us, that Christ was first to be least, lowest and last, and
then to be Greatest, Highest, and First. He first humbled himself to the death,
even to the shameful death of the Cross; and then was by God his Father
exalted and placed above every name: As he also Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
himself does witness, saying, Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to have entered into his Glory? Luke 24, 26.

The first Foundation was a Jasper, the second a Saphir, the third a
Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerald, the fifth Sardonyx, the sixth Sardius, the
seventh Crysolite, the eighth Beryl, the ninth Topaz, etc. Touching the Jasper,
you see what I Touching the rest of the Foundations.
have said. Now all I have to say to the rest of them, it is in general these
three things.

First, In that the Foundations are all and every one of them Precious Stones,
it signifies that all the Doctrines of the New Jerusalem, will be only the
precious Doctrine of the twelve Apostles; not common stuff, not raked out of
the dunghils and muck-heaps of this world, and from among the toys of
Antichrist, but spiritual, heavenly and glorious. He that has his Word shall
then speak it faithfully, For what is the chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord?
Jer. 23. 32.

Secondly in that they are called after the names of Precious Stones, it
signifies also, that at that day none shall be used or put into the Ministry
but those that have received spiritual and heavenly Gifts from above. It Is not
every babbling fellow, not those that look for their abilities from the
rudiments of the world, that then shall be of any value or account: He must be
a costly Stone, a stone about which the Lord Jesus has bestowed the cost of
his heavenly Abilities, even he whom the Lord Jesus shall appear unto for that
very purpose, to make him a Minister: He shall be a Minister, and none else at
that day. The other shall be ashamed every one of his vision; yea, and shall in
those days be so contemptible, that their Father and their Mother shall
reprove them, and count them liars; Zech. 13. 3, 4, 5.
yea, and shall be ready to run them through, while they are prophesying in
their rough garments to deceive.

Thirdly, In that these precious Stones are not all of one and the same nature,
but every one of them several, and diverse one from another: It argues that
the Gifts of the Apostles, and so of the Ministers of the New Jerusalem, shall
be The differing nature and operations of these stones, do hold forth the
differences of administrations and operations that was and will ever be among
the true and holy Ministers of the Lord Jesus.
differing one from another in Glory and operation; yet mark, as in these
Stones, so in every one of them shall be perfect Glory, according to the nature
of God's working by his Spirit; as the nature of the Jasper is perfect in his
kind, and the nature of the Saphir is perfect in his. These Stones, some of
them are of greater light and cleerness than others; and so some of the
Apostles are chiefest. Some of these Stones, again, they are of a more fiery
and burning color than others, they being bright also, but of a more mild
brightness. Therefore some of the Ministry are called the Sons of Thunder, when
others are styled by the name of the Sons of Consolation. The gifts are
differing being diverse, their administrations are differing, and the
operations of them also are differing, though all these things are from that
one and the self same spirit, working in every one severally as he pleases, 2
Cor. 11. 5. Romans 12. 6. Mark 3. 17. Act. 4. 36. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. All these
things will spangle in the New Jerusalem, and carry their full breadth and sway
as in the days of old.

To conclude this, In that he here says, That the Foundations of the Wall are
these twelve Stones; he does it to show that now also the former ministration
that was in the Apostles days will (...) the same, and in full force again: For
their gifts of Knowledge, Judgment and Authority, they are such as have to this
day lain buried, as it were, with the Apostles themselves; but now they shall
show themselves again, even these Foundation-stones, Stones that are great
Stones, Stones of ten Cubits, and Stones of eight Cubits, 1 Kings 7. 10. Thus
much of the glory of the Foundations.

Ver. 21. And the twelve Gates are twelve Pearls, every several Gate was of one
Pearl; and the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass.
Having thus showed us the glory of this City, Wall, and Foundations, he now
comes to show us the glory of the Gates, and of the Street of the City.

And the twelve Gates are twelve Pearls. -- The Gates, I told you before, they
The glory of the Gates.
signify Christ, both as he is the way to communion with the God of this City,
and with the Inhabitants thereof, that so they may have a share in the
Privileges of the same. I told you also then, that though he tells us exactly
of the measure both of City and Wall, yet he tells us nothing of the measure of
these twelve Gates, and goings in thereat; and the reason is, because, Christ
as he is the way to Grace, He is beyond all measure, both as to fullness and
freeness, Ephesians. 3. 8. And now again he puts us to the same plunge with the
unsearchable riches of the Lord Christ; for who can count the worth of a Pearl
as big as the Gates of a City? as indeed, when Christ himself does speak of the
Parable of the Pearl in the Field, he only tells us that there is such a one,
but never valueth the worth thereof, only he says, a Pearl of great price, and
so leaves it, Mat. 13. 35, 36. Now when he says that the Gates are Pearls, he
thereby insinuates several things. As

First, To show us how rich a Treasure Christ a rich Christ to all that enter
here
Christ Jesus our Lord is, and will be to all those that by him shall enter in
through the Gates into this City; Riches and Honor are with me, says he, even
durable Riches and Righteousness. My fruit (or the fruit of entering in by me)
it is better than Gold, and my revenues th^^ choice Silver. I lead in the way
of Righteousness, in the midst of the Paths of Judgment; That I may cause them
that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures, Pro. 8. 18,
19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 3. 8.

Christ is rich indeed, both in his Blood, Resurrection, Intercession, and all
his Offices, together with his Relations, and all his Benefits; all which he
bestows upon every one that receives him, and makes them unspeakably
wealthy.

Secondly, The Pearl, as it is rich, Christ is beautiful to all that here do
enter.
and so worth much, so again it is beautiful and amiable, even to take the eyes
of all beholders; it has, I say, a very sweet and sparkling Light and Glory in
it, enough to take the eye, and affect the heart of all those that look upon
it: And thus is Christ to all that come to him, and by him to the Father, etc.
My Beloved, Cant. 5. 10. 16.
says she, is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand; his mouth is most
sweet, he is altogether lovely.

The Mother of Harlots had some knowledge of the Beauty and Glory of this
Stone, and knew that it had a very taking and drawing Glory in it; and
therefore she gets it for some time to adorn her self withal, She was decked
with Gold Rev. 18. 4 Ezekiel. 16 17.
and precious Stones, and Pearls, and was therefore called the well-favoured
Harlot, Nah. 3. 4.
by which means she has drawn into her lewdness the Kings and Kingdoms of the
world; who have in such sort been entangled with her Beauty, and with her
Fornication, that they have been adulterated from God and their own Salvation:
For indeed, she used this Pearl but for to get them to drink of her
Fornication, that they might drink, and spue, and fall and never rise more. But
now when he says, the Gates are Pearl, it is as if he had said, This Woman is
stripped of her beauty and delicate ornaments, the Rev. 18. 12, 22, 23
Pearl is taken from her, and is set in his right place, even to be for the
Gates of Jerusalem. Wherefore it is to be expected, that many should be taken
with the way of entrance into this beloved City, in the day that she shall be
set up, and appear in her heavenly Pro. 8. 35 and 3. 35. 1 Cor. 2. 8 Joh. 17.
24.
beauty. The glory of that City must needs be great, whose Wall is Jasper, and
Gates are Pearl.

And the twelve Gates are twelve Pearls. Not Pearls and other Precious stones
Christ only can let in souls to the privileges of his Church.
commixed, but Pearl, only: To signify that Christ only can let in souls into
this City, that they may partake of the goodness and privileges thereof. It Is
not he and Saints together, neither is it all the Saints and Angels in Heaven
without him, He alone has the Key of David; and that opens, and no man
shuts; and that shuts, and no man opens. Rev. 22. 22. and 3. 7.

Secondly, As he says, The several Gates are each of them Pearls: So he says,
that every several Gate was of One Pearl; of one entire Pear. By which he would
have us understand also, that as As none can enter in but by Christ, so none
can enter-in but by WHOLE CHRIST.
none can enter in but by Christ, so none can enter in but by whole Christ.
Christ must be helpful to thee every way, or he will be helpful to thee no way;
thou must enter in by every whit of Christ, or thou shall enter in by never a
whit of him. Wherefore look not to have him thy Savior, if thou take him not
for King and Prophet; nay thou shall not have him in any one, if thou do not
take him in every one of these. Wherefore the Prophet says, He shall build the
Temple of the Lord (that is, by his Prophetical Office) and he shall sit and
rule upon his Throne, and he shall be a Priest upon his Throne, and the counsel
of peace shall be between them both, Zech. 6. 12, 13.

And the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were transparent Glass. In
these words there are four things to be enquired into.

First, What this Street is? Of the Glory of the street


Secondly, Why he says not [ Streets] but [ Street] as of one?

Thirdly, Why this Street is called by the term of pure Gold?

Fourthly, And why it should look like transparent Glass?

For the First, A Street ordinarily is the place of common concourse, and the
place of continual open salutation, and taking acquaintance one of another; and
as touching this Street, we are also to understand it of the open and common
place, or way of Gods Worship in which Saints salute each other, and acquaint
themselves together; also here the World are converted, Saints built up and
edified, etc. Wisdom cries without, she utters Prove. 1. 20, 21.
her voice in the Streets, says Solomon, she cries in the chief places of
concourse, in the opening of the Gates: in the City she utters her words;
that is, in the public What is meant by street.
and righteous Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, which he has ordained in his
Church, for men to travel and trade in, for the good and wholesome merchandise
Pro. 8. 1, 23. and 9. 1, 2, 3. ^
of Heaven, as the men of this world do for the things thereof, in the Streets
and Open places of their Cities and places of privilege.

Thus it was in the figure when the City Jerusalem was builded after the
Captivity (as ours shall be at, and after the overthrow and downfall of
Antichrist) for then it is said that the People, to hear the Law were gathered
together in the Street, Neh. 8.
even in the Water-Street; there they heard the sense given, and there they
were convinced of their wickedness: also there they received the knowledge of
God's goodness to them, and there they received power to eat the fat and drink
the sweet, to eat and drink and be merry, and to cast away sadness and fear,
Nehem. chap. 8. This by way of allegory is called the way for the wayfaring
men, even the way of holiness, over which the unclean shall not in any wise
pass: The way in which they learn to know God and themselves, and the way of
newness of life, in which every one walks that enters in by the Gates of New
Jerusalem. And it is most suitable to the matter that went before, To understand
the Street to be the way of God, the way of Holiness and Newness of life:
because as it is natural for the Stranger, so soon as ever he is entered the
Gates of a City, to have his feet in the Streets of the City; so it is natural
for the sinner, so soon as ever he is entered into the Church by Christ, to
have his feet treading The Gate.
in the way and paths of Holiness. Wherefore it is usual in the holy Scripture
to call the transformatian of the sinner Psalm. 86. 11. and 143. 8.
from Satan to God, a holy way, and also to admonish him that is so transformed
Ezra 11. 20.
to walk in that way, saying, Walk in the Faith, Love, Spirit, and newness of
Life, Ezekiel. 37 24.
and walk in the Truth, Ways, Statutes and Gal. 5. 25.
Judgments of God.

He that enters not by these Gates Romans 4. 12.
into the City, he cannot walk in newness of life; but he that has entered in
by Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. 2 John 4. Romans 6. 4.
them, he cannot but walk in newness of life. The next thing then that a man
passes into, when he is entered in to the New Jerusalem, is to walk in the
STREET thereof, the way of Holiness, even the way in which men learn to fear
God, and to believe in, and love the Lord Jesus, etc.

Secondly, Now this Street or way of Why this street is called not many, but
one.
Holiness, it is on purpose called, not many, but one, to show us the
perfection of Light, Grace, Faith and spiritual Comfort that the Inhabitants of
this City Dan. 9. 25.
shall then enjoy. Daniel also calls it ONE Street, to signify the same
thing: Wherefore from hence I gather that then all Saints shall walk (as before
I have made appear) even in one Street, in one Way, and in one Light. It is
Antichrist that has brought in all those Crossings, Bylaws, and odd Nooks
that to this day many an honest heart does greatly lose it self in; but at this
day they shall be otherwise minded, that is, made all to savor one thing, and
to walk one way, not biting and devouring each other as now. And indeed, there
is all reason it should be thus, for the Street it self is but one: There is
but ONE God, ONE Lord Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 5, 6.
ONE Spirit, ONE Faith, ONE Baptism, Act. 2. 24 and 32. 33.
even as we are also called in ONE hope of our Calling: Now therefore when
Saints Philip. 1. 27.
have the rubbish of Antichristian darkness Romans 15. 6.
and trumpery removed; then they shall have, as they also had of old, but one
Heart, one Soul, one Judgment, one Mind, and shall with one heart and mouth
glorify God. The which also shall be prayed for of all the Saints, even of all
that have received the pure language, before these things come to pass. They
shall call upon the Name of the Lord with ONE Lip, to serve him with ONE
Consent, Zeph. 3. 9. Oh! the heavenly, spiritual harmony that will be in the
City of God in those days, 2 Chro. 5. 13. 1 King. 6. 30. Cant. 3. 10. Why the
Street is called Gold.
when the Trumpeters and Singers shall be as One, to make One Sound, then the
House shall be filled with a Cloud.

Thirdly, When he says, that the Street of the City was pure Gold; he alludes
to the Floor in Solomoms Temple, which was overlaid with Gold; he alludes to
Solomon's Chariot also, whose bottom was paved with Love, and overlaid with
Gold. By the Floor of the Temple we are to understand the way of Holiness; and
by the Chariot of Solomon, the tryumphant Glory of that way. Again, in that he
says this Street is Gold, he would have us to understand the worth and
treasure that is laid up in the ways of God, and of a truly gracious heart.
First, for the worth and treasure that is laid up in the ways of God, They
beget Light, they Psalm. 119. 130. and 119. 9. Prove. 2. Isa. 64. 5.
change the heart, they lead from Death, the Devil and Hell, to Life, God and
the Kingdom of Heaven; in them God walks, and those that walk there also are
sure to meet with him. O this way, It is the way which no Fowl knows, and
which the Vultures eye has not seen; it cannot be gotten for Gold, neither
shall Silver be weighed for it; the Gold and the Crystal cannot equal it, and
the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold. No mention shall be
made of Coral, or of Pearls, for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies, Job. 28.
7, 15, 16, 17, 18, 28. All the ways of God they are pleasantness, and all his
Prove. 3. 17.
paths are Peace, and ought to be preferred before our necessary food.

Again, As the Ways of God are thus rich, and so far above the Gold and Rubies
of the world; so also is that sanctified and gracious heart, without which no
man can walk in this Golden Street. It is not every Clown with his clumping
dirty shoes that is admitted into Kings Privy-Chambers, and private Palaces:
Neither does, or will God at the day of New Jerusalem suffer any to trace about
this Golden Street, but such as have Golden feet, and that beautified with
goodly shoes. For, as for this Street, all that Cant. 7. 1
walk in it, they must be [ golden men] 1 Pet. 1. 7.
with [ golden hearts] and with Graces that are much more precious than Gold
that Rev. 3. 18
perishes.

Further; In that he says, this Street is Gold, pure Gold; he gives us to
understand also, what great delight and pleasure the Lord's People will take in
his Ways and Ordinances in that day: There will not then be that backwardness
to do good, and to receive God, as there is in these more dry and empty days of
the Gospel. As Gold is pleasing to the covetous man and worldling, so shall the
Ways of God be to the Saints and Godly at that day. Now we have strong
Corruptions and weak Grace, but then we shall have strong Grace and weak,
withered Corruptions. You that are spiritual, you know what an high and goodly
lifting up of heart one small gale of the good Spirit of God will make in your
souls, how it will make your lusts to languish, and your souls to love, and
take pleasure in the Lord that saves you. You know, I say, what a flame of
love, and bowels, and compassion, and self-denial, and endeared affection to
God and all Saints, it will beget in the soul. O! it is good to be here, says
the gracious heart: Well, and so thou shall be always, if thou live to see New
Jerusalem settled in her own place. Isa. 65. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

And the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were transparant Glass. Mark,
a Street of Gold like Glass, a Street of Gold, as it were transparant Glass.
What is meant by Glass.
By Glass here, as also in the eighteenth verse, we are to understand the word,
Jam. 1. 23, 24, 25. Wherefore when he says, the Street, the Golden Street was
like unto Glass; he means, that the walking and carriage of the Saints at this
day shall be like unto, or according to the Word, the Life of the Saints
answering the Life of the Word, and Rule of the Lord Christ.

Again, in that he does add to Glass, The first Reason why transparant Glass.
the word Transparent, he would have us to understand thereby these two things.

First, That the walking and ways of Holiness of the Saints shall be more in
the Power and Spirit of the Word than all along in the reign of Antichrist they
have been. For transparent Glass, it is the most clear and excellent Glass, and
goes as far beyond other sorts of Glass, as he that walks in the Spirit and
Power of the Commandment, goes beyond him that only walks in the Letter and
outward Word thereof. Alas, the Churches of Christ at their first assembling,
will be like the coming together of Ezekiels bones, clothed much with flesh
and sinews, but greatly void of spirit and life, Ezekiel. 37. 7, 8. Wherefore the
Spirit, Power, Holiness and Majesty that now will appear in the Church, it will
greatly transcend and go beyond the Spirit, Power and Holiness that has
accompanied her in former days: Then shall the Sun be ashamed, and the Moon
confounded, when the Lord shall reign in Mount Zion, etc. Then shall the Sun be
ashamed, Isa. 24. 23.
that is, then shall that little light and understanding of the Word that has
been in the Church in the days when a third part of the glory of the Gospel was
hid by the smoke of the Pit, be as it were Rev. 8. 12. and 9. 2.
laid aside, and be useless; every Saint shall be under the light of a Sun that
shines sevenfold brighter, even as the light of seven days. We see it is so in
some measure at this day; What Light, and with what clearness do the Saints in
this day see the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, beyond what the holy
and goodly Martyrs and Saints did in the days that were before us, Hus, Bilny,
Ridly, Hooper, Cranmer, with their Brethren, if they were now in the world,
would cry out and say, Our light and knowledge of the Word of the Testament of
Christ, was much inferior to the Light that at this day is broken forth, and
that will yet daily, in despite of Men and Devils, display its Rays and Beams
amongst the sons of men! When the Children of Israel were to depart the Land of
Egypt, the Lord made known himself to them, otherwise than ever he made known
himself Exodus 6. 3.
either to Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob their fathers. The Book also, at the
recovering the Church from under Rev. 5th and 6th chapters.
Antichrist is to be unlocked and unsealed gradually, first one Seal, and
afterward another, and last of all the seventh, before which time the Book
will never quite be opened, according to that of the Angel, Go thy way, Daniel,
for the words Dan. 12 9 Jer. 30. 24. Jer. 23. 20.
are closed up, and sealed until the time of the end; in which time (which is
the time of New Jerusalem) they shall be opened, and men shall consider it
perfectly: Wherefore,

Secondly, It must needs be that the The second reason why Transparent Glass
Church return to her old and primitive love: for what is the cause of the want
of love to Christ, and one another now, but our want of light in the Things,
Mysteries and Privileges of the glorious Gospel of the Son of God? Wherefore
this being come, then Love will reign, and have her perfect work among the
Godly. Love is the very quintescence of all the Graces of the Gospel, and is as
transparent to them; the greatest of 1 Cor. 13. 13.
these is Charity; it is the fulfilling of the 1 Cor. 12. 31.
Law, the Bond of Perfectness, and the most excellent Way: Wherefore the holy
Romans 13. 10.
Ghost does mean by this word TRANSPARENT Glass, that the height of 1 Cor. 16.
14.
Light, and the height of Love will be Col. 3. 14
found in this City; all their things shall be done without confused smoke and
darkness, and also without spiritual pri^^ and desire of vain glory: then shall
they indeed do all their things in Charity, and in the feeling Bowels and
Fellowship of the Gospel: Then shall the Offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant to the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former times, Mal. 3. 4.

Alas! Though now, through Grace, the Saints of God have attained to more Light
and Knowledge in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, than heretofore they had;
yet their Light is far inferior to that which will be, when this City is
builded: Our spiritual Union and Fellowship in the very Bowels of the Grace and
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ also is yet greatly defective. It is said that
no man was able to enter into the Temple of God, until the seven plagues of the
seven Rev. 15. 8
Angels were fulfilled: but when the seven last Plagues are spent, and when all
the Adversaries of the Church, which Ezekiel. 32. 18, etc.
caused terror in the Land of the Living, shall be laid with the uncircumcised
in the Pit, then look for Golden days, and not till then; then shall this
Golden Street be finished; that is, then shall the Light, Faith, Love, and
Holiness of the Gospel be walked in and embraced, in a transparent and
transcending way: He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take Root, Israel
shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the World with Fruit. Isa. 27. 6.

Verse. 22. And I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb, are the Temple of it.
These words do, in my present Light, The time when this City shall have no
Temple.
point at the end of the days of this Jerusalem here in this World; and in so
doing, they signify to us, that when she is builded, she shall stand and
continue in ^his her glorious state aforementioned, ^ven until that Glory be
swallowed up of that which does excel.

That they do point at the end of her ^ay in this world, I do gather from these
particulars:

First, Because they are the last words ^f the description of her Glory, (that
is, ^ese and the words ensuing, which is ^t one and the same continued speech)
^d it is easy to conclude that John in ^is description of this City, does from
^st to last, even from the first appearing of her as she comes out of Babylon,
till she be perfect in Glory, give us the relation of it: first, I say, showing
us her descending, then her building, and afterward the Glory of that building;
at the end of which also he shows to us with what Glory he will crown this
Glory, even by swallowing of her up with a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory.

Secondly, Because in these words he does absolutely cut off all and every
whi(...) of her outward and external Glory; tha^ is, as to outward Ordinances,
and Temple-Worship, which yet was to be most famous for a long time in this new
and goodly City; which he verifies in the eleventh Chapter of this Prophecie^
(which Chapter is a summary collectin^ of the Church in her Fall and Rise under
Antichrist, which Church there in he^ Rise, is this City here in her Glory in
th(...) World) he tells us there, I say, that when the Kingdoms of this World
were become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Chris(...) that THEN THE
TEMPLE OF GOD WAS OPENED IN HEAVEN; tha^ is, Temple-Worship under the Gosp(...)
recovered into its former and Primitiv^ state and Purity, in which it was
before the coming in of the Man of Sin, Rev. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. compared
with Rev. 15. 8. which Temple he here utterly shuts out, saying, I saw no
Temple therein; in the room of which he sets the presence of the Lord Jesus,
and God his Father, making them to stand and be in the room of Temple and
Gospel Worship, in that manner as it is used while we here live in the Flesh:
For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. It Is true, the
Lord God Almighty, Zech. 11. 16.
and the Lamb, are the Temple of this Church in her lowest condition, therefore
much more when she is brought into the condition that she is in at her
rebuilding; but yet, neither in her low estate, nor yet in her highest, is it
proper to say, that so long as she is in this World, God will be a Temple to
her, in opposition to her Temple and Gospel Worship, in outward and
New-Testament-Administrations: Wherefore when he says, He saw no Temple
therein, and that from this reason, Because the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb, are the Temple of it; he must needs aim at a state to which the Church
cannot attain until her Lord comes: For 1 Cor. 13. 10.
then will that which is perfect be come, and that which is in part be done
away.

Now that the [ Temple] in this place What this excluded Temple signifies.
excluded, can signify nothing else but the outward orderly way of Gods
Worship, which the Saints ought with Conscience, in Faith, to be found in till
their Lord comes: Consider,

First, That our New Testament does use the word Temple, three general ways:

1. For the outward Order and Worship Rev. 11. 1 2, 3.
or Discipline of the Gospel.

2. For the Body of Christ, which is his Church, etc.

3. And lastly, For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, which here are said to
be the Temple of this City.

Now then, when he says, He saw NO Temple therein, he cannot exclude the Lord
God Almighty, and the Lamb, for they are here said to be the Temple of it:
Neither can he shut out the Church, which is the Body of Christ, for that is
the City it self; yea, and the Church shall be Gods Temple, and God and Christ
the Temple of the Church for ever and ever: He must therefore by this word [ no
Temple] exclude only the outward Way of Gospel Worship, in which the Saints in
the times of the New Testament, both meet and edify each other; and also meet
their God, and are blessed and refreshed by him.

Again, That this outward Gospel Worship should be laid aside while the Church
is in this World, before her Lord does come to be enjoyed by her, as touching
his Personal Presence; it looks too like Ranting Opinions, and contradiction to
Scripture, for me to believe: 1 Cor. 11. 26. for when He comes, but not till
then, shall these things be laid aside.

Besides, That which yet confirms me more fully in this Opinion, is, Because
herein this New Jerusalem does most exactly answer the City and Temple, which
was builded after the Captivity; which City and Temple being once built, it
stood till Christ our Lord did visit them in his own Personal coming the first
time; as the Prophets also said it should: The Lord whom ye seek, says one,
shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye
delight in, behold, he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts: And again, I will
shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill
this House with glory, says the Lord of Host: Wherefore the glory of this
latter House shall be greater than that of the former, says the Lord of Hosts:
And I will give Peace in this place, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3. 1. Hag.
2. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now observe, That from the time of the building of the second Temple, to the
coming of Christ, the Worship of the Temple-Order was to be by all most
devoutly and continually observed: but when the Lord Jesus was come, and had
established his own more honorable and New-Testament-Dispensation, then all
the former Temple-Worship fell to the ground, and became (with all the
Instruments of Worship that thereunto belonged) null and void; yea, and it was
a derogation to his Gospel to offer to uphold that former way of Worship, after
he had by his own Personal Presence and Spirit, brought in that other
Dispensation. All which, I say, will be answered by our second and
New Testament New Jerusalem: For as the old Jerusalem was builded after the
Jews were come out of literal Babylon, so is our New Jerusalem builded after
our coming out of the Antichristian Oppression of spiritual Babylon: again, As
that City did after she was builded, continue, and retain her Temple-Worship,
until the Personal appearing of Christ the first time; so New Jerusalem shall
retain and hold her outward New-Testament-Worship till He comes in Person the
second time: After all which, as the second Temple was swallowed up of a more
heavenly and spiritual Dispensation, by the Personal Presence of Christ; so
shall also the New Jerusalem Temple-Worship be swallowed up by the glory of the
appearing of the Person of Christ the second time; as Paul says, for he speaks
in the Person of Christ, Till I come, give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to Doctrine, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 13.

Thus then, when this holy City does once again appear upon the stage, and in
her own situation, and when she has bin showed in the Attire of a Queen before
the face of all Nations, and their Kings; and when she has by the Glory of the
Light of her New-Testament-Temple, gathered, as with a Net, the number of Gods
Elect; then she is taken into her Husbands Privy-Chamber, where she and he
alone shall be in that blessed Fellowship and Communion that shall not again be
once eclipsed, or in the least interrupted to Eternity.

Thus have I showed you my present Light into this portion of the holy
Scripture; if any can give me further, I hope I shall not refuse it: but as
yet, methinks this should be the genuine sense of this place, and is the very
track of John himself: For after he had seen the Wall for present Safety, the
Foundations for Continuation, the Gates for Entrance, and the like; then he
comes to tell us of the Glory of all, and of the Street it self at last; which
indeed is the last and end of all the Order of God, and to continue till an end
be put to it by Mortality's being swallowed up of Life: As is yet more fully
showed you in the next Verse of this description.

Verse. 23. And the City had no need of the Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it:
for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof.
And the City had no need of the Sun* That is, after Temple-Worship is over:
this Verse is added therefore for further clearing up and illustrating of that
which he said before: there he tells us this City had no Temple, and here he
tells us she needed neither the light of the Sun or Moon: there he said, The
Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, is the Temple of it; and here he says, They
are the Light thereof: The substance of which, in the language of the Holy
Ghost, is this, The reason why Temple-Worship is now gone and over, it is
because there is now no need in this City of the Light of the Sun and the Moon;
and the reason why she has now no need of them, is, because the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb, are to it instead of both Temple and Light: For the
Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it: For the Glory of God did
lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: Whereby we may note, That though
the Light in which she descended (being the purity of Temple-Worship) was
glorious, yet this City shall, when she is once builded, so advance from Glory
to Glory, that at the last she shall be more happy without the help of that
Light, without which she had been for ever unbuilded, then she was by it in the
midst of the Fullness of it.

And the City had no need of the Sun, etc. The word Sun is in Scripture taken
diverse ways; sometimes for the true and Josh. 10. 12.
natural Sun in the Firmament; sometimes again for Persecution, and the rage
Mat. 13. 10.
of the Enemy, etc. but I take Sun here not to be any of these, but for the
good and pure Word of the Gospel of Christ, unfolded, opened, and explained by
the Servants of Christ; which Sun is the same that before you find to be
darkened by the Antichristian Fog and Mist, which was darkened, I say, even to
a third part Rev. 8. 12 Rev. 9. 2.
of it. This Sun, or Word of the Gospel, Paul says it is shadowed forth even
by that which shines in the Firmament of Heaven, because as that by its light
and shining, gives to those that have Eyes, to see the Glory and Excellency of
this World; so by the shining and light of the Gospel, is given the light of
the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
of Jesus Christ, and a view of the Excellency of the things of the World to
come. Now, I say, though while the Church is in this World, and on this side
the state of Glory, she cannot live and flourish without the shining of this
Sun (but would be lifeless and lightless, and without all heat and comfort (
For it is the entrance of the Law that gives light here, Psalm. 19. 7 8. and
119. 130
and that lightneth the Eyes, making wise the simple) yet at the day of the
coming of her Lord in Person, she shall see far more clearly without the thus
shining of this Sun, than ever she did or could see with and by it. And the
City had no need of the Sun: For when by the light of it, the whole Body of the
Elect have found out the way to this City, and when they have also by this
light accomplished and fulfilled all their Work; yea, when the Lord himself is
come, and does immediately communicate far more glorious light to this City
without it, than ever he did by it; What need is there then of the light of
this Sun? for that is to be of use but for the time present, even until the
whole of the Body of the Lord Jesus is come to the perfect measure, even to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12.
Christ: So then, when the Body of Christ is in every sense completed in this
life by the light of the Sunshine of his holy Gospel, what need of this Sun?
And hence it is that the Word of the Gospel is called, The Word of
Reconciliation, the 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Word of Faith, and the Words of this Life. Romans 10 8 Act. 5. 20
Wherefore, I say, it cease when there is no more to be reconciled, and when
Faith in all is perfected, and when this Life is put an end unto by the coming
in of another: For when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 8, 9, 10.

The Ministers of the Gospel are of use so long as there is either Elect to be
converted, or any converted Soul to be perfected by that measure of Perfection
that God has appointed on this side Glory; but when this Work is done, their
Ministry cease: Wherefore, though like the Widows Sons, they are 2 Kin 4. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
busy to borrow Vessels for the Oil so long as it is running, and emptying it
self out of the great and principal Barrel; yet when it cease, as it will do
when there is no more Vessels to be found, then let them sit down as they, and
receive of the Fruits of their labor; for the Reward of their Work is then
only to be enjoyed by them.

And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it. This
word Moon also, as well as that Josh. 10. 1 Rev. 12. 1. Psalm. 121. 6.
of the Sun, is to be taken diverse ways in the Scriptures of Truth; sometimes
for the natural one, sometimes for the World and Persecutors, etc. but Moon
here, is to be taken for the Church of God, with reference to her Life,
Conversation, Duties, and exemplary Behavior, in which she is conversant on
this side Glory; according to that of the Song, Who Song 6. 10
is this that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Sun, clear as the Moon,
and terrible as an Army with Banners? When he says then, that at this day
there shall be here no need of the shining light of the Moon, he means that
this City at this day in the state she is in when she has the Person of the
Lamb in her, then she shall have no need of the growth of Christianity, for
they shall be all perfect; nor no need of Mortification, for there shall be no
Sin: they shall not need now, as in time past, to exhort and encourage one
another to stick fast to the Promise, 2 Cor. 5. 4
for they shall be swallowed up of Life and open Vision: Here shall be no need
either of Prayer, of Repentance, of Faith, or of good Works, as before: And the
City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it.

Now, I say, the holy Ghost is pleased to bring in here the shining Virtues of
the Church, under the notion of a shining Moon; because as the Church her self
is compared to the Moon, so her Virtues are as naturally compared to a shining
Light; as Christ says, Let your light so shine; and again, Let your loins Mat.
5. 16 Luke 12. 35. Phil. 1. 15
be girded, and your lights burning: for indeed, while we are here that Church
and Congregation of the Lord does most shine, and most send forth the golden
The Life of the Church compared to the Light of the Moon upon a double account.
Rays and pleasant Beams of Christianity; that is, most in the exercise of the
aforementioned Virtues: take away the Moon, and the night is doubtful; or
though the Moon be in the Firmament, if she has lost her light, the night is
not thereby made more comfortable: And thus, I say, it is first, with the
World, where here there is no Church to shine, or where there is a Church that
does not so shine that others may see and be lighted: for while the day of time
does last, even the World it self has need of the shining of the Church; but
at this day, this time will be no longer, because the Day of Eternity will
break, and by that means cause the World that now is, even the World of the
Ungodly, to cease to have a being here any longer. Therefore now no need of the
Moon, or of the light thereof, to shine before that which is not.

Secondly, Again, as the Church is in her light before men, as the Moon is in
her light in the night to the world; so as I said before, this City which is
called, also, Heaven, she, even she, shall have no need of these things; for
she shall be taken up in open Vision, and shall be completely delivered from
all imperfection; she shall not need now the light of her Children to provoke
her, and to stir her up to this or the other act of holiness, all shall be
done, all shall be complete, the Lord himself is come. Indeed while Christ is
absent, as touching his Person, and while the work of God is not yet completely
done in the Church, there will be need both of the light of Sun and Moon, but
when the work is done, and he come, then these things will be out of use. Thus
The (...) Prove. 4. 18.
of the Just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto perfect
day.

For the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. This
is rendered as the reason, why at this day both the light of Sun and Moon are
needless; it is, because the Glory of God did lighten it, and because the Lamb
is the light thereof. Now the Glory of God must be understood in this place,
not of that Glory that does attend the Church in this world, for that Glory
does attend the Church upon the account of her Purity of Worship, of
Temple-Worship, and does either abide on her, or withdraw it self, according to
her exact observing the Rule, or declining from it, as I have showed you in the Sea the Exposition of the 11 verse.
beginning of this discourse. But the Glory that here you read of, it is a
Glory that supplieth this City without those Ordinances, yea, therefore, those
Ordinances (as the Temple and the light of the Sun and Moon) do cease because
of the Glory of this Glory that now is come into this City: The City had no
need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it (mark) for the Glory of God
did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof.

Wherefore, I say, this Glory that now he speaks of, it is the Glory that shall
possess this City at the end of her Glory in this world; wherefore, as says
the holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet, from this day forward, The Sun shall be
no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto
thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting Light, and thy God thy
Glory, Isa. 60. 19.

For the Glory of God did lighten it, etc. Thus it was at the finishing of the
Tabernacle in the Wilderness, and of the Temple at Jerusalem; both which were
figures in their finishing, of the finishing of the state of the Church in this
world: and it is said of them, that in the day when they in all things were
accomplished, according to the fashion that was revealed before concerning
their Order and accomplishment, that then the Glory of God [so] appeared upon
them, that Exodus 4. 33, 34. 1 King. 8. 9, 10, 11.
neither Moses nor Aaron was able to enter in, or to stand therein, because of
the Cloud, and of the Glory of the Lord that at that time filled the House.
Thus you see this City descends in one measure of Glory, and is consumate in
another measure of Glory. The Glory of the Lord was upon the Mount Sinai while
the pattern of the Tabernacle was giving: but it rested on the Tabernacle when
the work thereof was finished; to signify, I say, that the Glory of God will
rest in his Ordinances and in his Church by them, so long as Ordinances are in
use: but when they are needless, then it will rest in the Church without them,
and that more gloriously than ever it therein did rest by them.

For the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Mark;
Though now there shall be no need of Temple, Sun or Moon: yet Christ the Lamb,
or the Man who was offered in sacrifice for our Redemption, shall be of use and
benefit; for, the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. Wherefore, all, that we (who are the saved) shall enjoy of Glory and
Sweetness in another world, though we shall not enjoy it from God through
Christ, by and in the Ordinances, yet we shall enjoy it through Christ the
Lamb, without them; for the Lamb is the light of it. By this word [ Lamb] he
would have us understand, that when we are in Glory, the blood, death and
bloody conquest that the man Christ did get over our infernal enemies, will be
of eternal use to us; because that benefit of Christ shall not only for ever be
the Foundation of our eternal felicity, but the burden of our Song of Glory, in
all our raptures among the Angels. It will be the Rev. 9. 5. and 5. 13. Zec. 3
9.
Blood, the Blood, the redeeming Blood of the Lamb. Blessing, glory, honor and
power be to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the LAMB for ever and ever.
It Is he in Rev. 5. 6.
whom will be found the seven Eyes, the seven Spirits of God, in whose light we
shall see the heights and depths of those Springs and everlasting Fountains and
Depths of Glory for ever; and indeed the conceit of the contrary is foolish. Is
not Christ the Head, and we the Members? and do not the Members receive their
whole light, guidance and wisdom from it? Is not he also the price, the ground
and bottom of our Happiness, both in this world and that which is to come? And
is it possible it should be forgotten, or that, by it, our Joy, Light and 1 Samuel 25 29.
Heaven should not be made the sweeter to all eternity. Our soul is now bound
Col. 3. 3, 4.
up in him, as in a bundle of life; and when we come thither, he is still the
Christ, our life; and it is by our being Joh. 17. 24.
where he is that we shall behold his Glory, and our Glory, because he is
glorified; For the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof. As he said, John 16. 22. Ye now therefore have Joh. 16. 22.
sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your Joy
no man takes from you.

Thus much of this City, her descending, her fashion, her glory, and of her
wading through glory, from glory to glory.

Verse. 24. And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of
it; and the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor to it.
After this long and pleasant Description of this Holy and New Jerusalem, the
Holy Ghost now falls upon a Relation of the People that shall be the
Inhabitants of this City, and of their numerousness and quality.

And the Nations, etc. The Nations of the world, both of the Jews and Gentiles.

Every one knows what the Nations are, wherefore I need not stay upon the
explication of that, for, it does in general Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Tit. 3. 3.
include the multitude of the sinners of the world: Therefore when he says,
the Nations shall walk in the light of this City, it is as if he had said, that
at this day, when she is here in her tranquillity, the sinners and disobedient
among the sons of men, shall by multitudes, and whole Kingdoms, come in and
close with the Church and House of God. These Spiders shall take hold with
their hands, and be in Kings Palaces, Prove. 30. 28.

And the Nations, etc. For this word, the Nations, is a great How the Nations
shall flock to New-Jerusale^.
word, and it comprehends much; mark, it does not say a Nation, or some
Nations, neither does it say, few or small Nations, but indefinitely, the
Nations, Isa. 52. 15 and 60. 22. and 2. 2.
Many Nations, Strong Nations, All Nations, the Nations in general: only he
ties them up with this limit, the Nations of them that are [ saved:] which yet
is not so much spoken to clip off the multitude that we suppose may then be
converted, as to show us their qualifications and happiness: as he says by the
Prophet in another Isa. 60. 21
place, Thy Children shall be all holy, or righteous, and great shall be the
peace of thy Children. And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the
light of it. Surely the holy Ghost would never have spoken at such a rate as
this, if he had not intended to show us that at the day of the setting up of
this Jerusalem, a great harvest of sinners shall be gathered by the Grace of
the Gospel. But the truth is, the Scriptures go with open arms toward the
latter end of the world, even as if they would grasp and compass about, almost
all People then upon the face of the whole Earth, with the Grace and Mercy of
God. The Earth, says God, shall be Isa. 11. 9. Hab. 2. 14
filled with the knowledge of the Glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea. As he says, also, for the comfort of the Church in another place; Behold,
I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy Walls are contiaually before
me. Thy Children shall make haste; thy Destroyers and those that made thee
waste shall go forth of thee. Lift up thine eyes round about, behold all these
gather themselves together to come unto thee: as I live, says the Lord, thou
shall surely cloth thee with them all as with an Ornament, and bind them on
thee as a Bride does. For thy waste and desolate places, and the land of thy
destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the Inhabitants, and
they that swallowed thee up shall be far away. The Children which thou shall
have, after thou have lost the other, shall say again in Isa. 49. 14 15, etc.
thine ears, The place is too strait for me, give place that I may dwell. Then
shall thou say in thy heart, Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my
Children, and am desolate, a captive and removing to and fro? Who has brought
up these? Behold, I was left alone, these! where have they been? Thus the
multitudes of the Nations shall at this day be converted to the Lord, and be
made the Inhabitants of this Jerusalem; as he says again, The Kingdoms of this
world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. And again, The
Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the People of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is
an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, Rev. 11.
15. Dan. 7. 26, 27.

And observe it, these Promises are Isa. 2. 1, 2. and 14. 4, 5, 6, etc. Psalm.
102. 20, 21, 22 Rev. 11. 15. and 16. 17, etc.
to be fulfilled in the last days, at the time of the pouring forth of the last
Vial, which is the time of the sounding of the last of the seven Trumpets; for
then this City shall be builded, and Lucifer fallen from Heaven; then the
Prisoners shall be set at liberty, and the People be gathered together, and the
Kingdoms, to serve the Lord. Rejoice, O ye Nations with his People, for he will
avenge the blood Deuteronomy. 32 43.
of his Servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be
merciful to his Land, and to his People. Alas it is now toward the end of the
world, and therefore now all is going, if the Lord steps not in with the riches
of his Grace. Wherefore now at last before all be turned into fire and ashes,
behold the Lord Isa. 60. 5.
casts the net among the multitude of Fish, and the abundance of the Sea
shall, without fail, be converted to Jerusalem. Though Satan and Antichrist
have had their day in the world, and by their outrage have made fearful havoc
of the souls of sinners from time to time, yet now at length God will strike in
for a share with them, and his Son shall divide the spoil Isa. 53. 12
with the Strong. Wherefore he now sets up this City, puts the Glory of Heaven
upon her, provides a New Heaven and Isa. 66. 22 2 Pet. 3. 13. Isa. 25. 7.
a New Earth for her situation; drives profaneness into the holes and dens of
the Earth: gives Righteousness authority to reign in the world; and takes off
the 1 King. 4. 20.
vail from all faces, that none may hereafter be for ever beguiled by blindness
and ignorance. Now shall they make Neh. 8. 10, 12.
merry with the things of God; now shall all eat the fat and drink the sweet:
For in this Mountain shall the Lord make a feast of fat things to all People, a
feast of Wine on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of Wine on the lees
well refined; Isa. 25. 6.

And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it. They
shall walk in the light of it] That is, in the Light that is in it while it is
in its purity in this world, and in the Glory of it when it is in its
perfection and immortality in another. Whence note by the way, that in the
midst of all this Glory, or while the glorious light of the Gospel shall thus
shine in the world, yet even then there will be some also that will not see and
rejoice in the Glory hereof: But as for those, whoever they are, they are
excluded from a share in the blessed and goodly Privileges of this City: The
Nations of them that are [SAVED] shall walk in the light of it.

And the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor to it. By these
words are great things held forth. He told us before that the Nations of them
that are saved shall walk in the light of it; and here he tells us, that even
How the Kings of the Earth shall flock into New Jerusalem.
their Kings also, the Kings of the Earth do bring their Honor and Glory to
it. The people of the Nations they are but like to single-pence and halfpence,
but their Kings like Gold Angels and Twenty-shilling-pieces. Wherefore when he
says, that the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and Honor unto it; It
argues, that the Gospel and the Grace of God, when it is displayed in its own
nature, and seen in its own complexion, even then they that have most of the
Honor and Glory of the World will yet stoop their Top-gallant unto it: Because
Psalm. 68. 29. Isa. 49. 22, 23. Psalm. 72. 10, 11, 12 Isa. 47. 6, 7. and 60. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. and 62. 2.
of thy Temple which is at Jerusalem, shall Kings bring Presents to thee. The
Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, shall bring Presents to thee: The Kings of
Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts, yea, all Kings shall fall down before him, and
all Nations shall serve him. The Kings shall see and arise, and Princes shall
worship because of the Lord, etc. The Kings shall come to thy light, and
Princes to the brightness of thy rising. The Kings shall see thy righteousness,
and all Kings thy Glory. Isa. 52. 15.
Yea, that which has not been told them shall they see, and that which they
have not heard shall they consider. All the Kings of Psalm. 138. 4, 5.
the Earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear the words of thy mouth;
Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord; for great is the Glory of the
Lord. Thus we see, that though in the first day of the Gospel, the poor, the
halt, the lame and the blind are chief in the embracing of the tenders of
Grace, yet in the latter day thereof, God will take hold of Kings.

And the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and honor to it. To it] That
is, to Jerusalem. Wherefore 2 Chronicles. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
this City must be built before they all of them will fall in love with her.
Indeed, I do conceive, that some of them will lay their hand to help forward
the work of this City, as did Hiram with Ezra. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 6. 1, 2, 3
and 7. 21.
Solomon, and Darius, Cyrus and Artaxerxes with Ezra and Nehemiah, at the
buliding and repairing the City, in the letter, in the days of old; But yet, I
say, the great conquest of the Kings will be by the beauty and glory of this
City, when she is builded. Thou shall arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Zion,
for the time to favor her, yea, the set time is come: for Psalm. 102 13, 14, 15
thy Servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof: So the
Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all Kings thy Glory. And indeed,
before this City is set up, and established in her own place, most of the Kings
and great ones of the Earth will be found employed and taken up in another work,
than to Rev. 17. ^, 12, 13, 14. and 18. 3, 9.
fall in love with Mount Zion, and with the Hill thereof. They will be found in
love with Mistress Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, the Mistress of Witchcrafts,
and Abominations of the Earth. They will, I say, be committing Fornication with
her, and will be as the horns upon the heads of the Beast, to defend the riding
Lady from the Gunshot that the Saints continually will be making at her by the
force of the Word and Spirit of God. They will be shaking the sharp end of
their weapons against the Son of God, continually laboring to keep him out of
his Throne, and from having that rule in the Church, and in the World as
becomes him who is the head of the body, and over all principality and Rev. 17.
14.
power. These shall make war with the Lamb: but I say, it shall so come about,
at the last, by the illuminating Grace of God, and by the faithful and patient
enduring of the Saints, together with the glory that everywhere shall now be
abiding on the Church and Congregation of Jesus, that they shall begin to
receive a man's heart, and shall consider things that have not been told them:
wherefore at last they shall withdraw themselves from the love of this Mistress,
and shall leave her to scrape for her self in the world, and shall come with
repentance and rejoicing to Zion; nay, not only so, but to avenge the Quarrel
of God, and the Vengeance of his Temple; and to recompense her also for the
delusion and enchantments wherewith she has entangled them: They shall hate
her, they shall make her desolate, and naked; they shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire, Rev. 17. 16. Now, Madam, what say thou! the Kings must
come to Jerusalem. Jezebel, thy Chamber-companions will shortly,
notwithstanding thy paintedface, cast thee down headlong out at the windows.
Yea, they shall tread thee in 2 King. 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. Jer. 50. 41, 42.
pieces by the feet of their prancing-Horses, and with the wheels of their
jumping Chariots. They shall shut up all bowels of compassion toward thee, and
shall roar upon thee like the Sea, and upon thy fat ones like the waves
thereof. Yea, when they begin, they will also make an end, and will leave thee
so harborless and comfortless, that now there will be found for thee no
gladness at all, Rev. 18. 12, 14, 22.
no not so much as one Piper to play thee one Fig. The delicates that thy soul
lusted after, thou shall find them no more at all. Babylon the glory of
Kingdoms, and the beauty of the Caldees excellency, shall be as when God
overthew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be
dwelt in from generation to generation; neither shall the Arabian pitch Tent
there, nor Shepherds make their folds there, but wild Beasts of the Desert
shall lie there, and their houses shall be full of doleful Creatures. And the
That is, the Hobgoblins, or Devils
Satyrs shall dance there, and the wild Beasts of the Islands shall cry in
their desolate places, and Dragons in their pleasant Palaces; and her time is
near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged, Isa. 13. 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. Thus will thou come down wonderfully. For in thee have they set light by
father and mother; in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
stranger: in thee have they vexed the fatherless and Ezekiel. 22 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
etc.
widow: in thee men carry tales to shed blood: in thee they eat upon the
Mountains, and in thee they commit lewdness. God has smitten his hands at thy
dishonest gain, and all the blood which has been in the midst of thee; God
will be Isa. 47. 1, 2, 3.
avenged of thee, but will not meet thee as a man. You have cast lots for my
People, says God; you have given a Boy for a Harlot, and a Girl for Wine, that
you may drink: You have made havoc of my young Converts to satisfy your lusts;
therefore, What have you to do with me, O Tire and Sidon, and all the Coasts of
Palestina? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me swiftly and
speedily, I will ^^el 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
return your recompense upon your own head: I will throw it as dirt in your
face again. And never talk of what thou wast once, for though thou wast full of
wisdom and perfect in beauty, though thou have been in Eden the Garden of God;
yea, though every Precious Stone for some time was thy covering, and thou the
very anointed Cherub that covers, walking upon the Mountain of God, and in
the midst of the Stones of fire; yet because (by reason of the multitude of thy
Merchandise) thou have sinned and art filled with violence, Therefore God will
cast thee, as profane, out of the Mountain of God, and will destroy thee, O
covering Cherub, from the midst of the Stones of fire; yea he will cast thee to
the ground, and lay thee before Kings that they may behold thee: And all they
that know thee among the People, shall be astonished at thee: thou shall be ^
terror, and never shall thou be any more, Ezekiel. 28. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? Though thou cloathest thy
self with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of Gold, though thou
paintest thy face with painting; in vain shall thou make thy self fair, thy
lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life, Jer. 4. 30.

And the Kings of the Earth do bring their glory and their honor to it. Mark,
They do not only forsake the crimson Harlot, neither do they content themselves
with eating her flesh, and burning her with fire, but they come over, they come
over to Jerusalem; they are conquered by the Grace of Christ, and Wisdom of the
Son of God. They shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome
them; for he is King of kings, and Lord of lords; and those that are with him,
are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful. Now they shall all give Ezra. 6. 7.
way to the Government of the King of kings, the Governor of the Jews, and
shall with gladness delight to see him rule his Spouse with his own Law, Rules
and Testament; they shall play the pranks of Jeroboam no longer, in making
Calves to keep the People from going up to Jerusalem to worship. Now they shall
count him also King of Nations, as well as King of Saints; and he shall wear the
Crowns, and they shall seek to him; Rev. 19. 12. and 15. 5. Jer, 10. 7. Isa.
52. 15. 2 Chronicles. 9. 23.

Verse. 25. And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall
be no night there.
This is the effect of what you read before; namely, of the coming in of the
Kings and Great ones of the Earth to this Jerusalem: For when the Whore is made
desolate, and naked, and burned with fire, and when the Kings also that loved
her, and that maintained her, are come in, and have closed with the Glory and
Beauty of this City, then what need is there to shut the Gates? Alas, all the
injuries that the Kings and Great Ones of the Earth have done to the Church and
Spouse of Christ in these days of the New Testament, it has been through the
Instigation and Witchcraft of this Mistress of Iniquity. The Horseman has lift
up both the bright Sword, and the glittering Nah. 3. 3, 4.
Spear, against the Saints of God, by reason of the multitudes of the Whordoms
of the wel-favoured Harlot, the Mistress of Witchcrafts, who sells Nations
through her Whordoms, and families through her Witchcrafts. Wherefore, I say,
this Gentlewoman being laid in her grave, and all her fat ones gone down to the
sides of the pit; these Kings will change their mind, and fall in love with the
true and chaste Matron, and with Christ her Lord: Now Isa. 2. 4. Jer. 33. 16.
when this is thus, this City must needs be safely inhabited as towns without
walls, and as a place, near to which there is neither Zec. 2. 4. and 14. 11.
Thief nor ravenous Beast.

Persecutors, while they remain in their spirit of outrage against the Church
and People of God, they are frequently in the Scripture compared to the
venomous Dragons, fierce Lions, and ravenous Jer. 51. 34, 37.
Wolves; all which at this day, shall be driven out of the World: that is, so
out, as never to molest the Church again, or to cause a Gate of this City to be
shut, through fear against them; as he says by the Prophet, In the habitation
of Dragons where each lay, shall be grass, with Isa. 35. 7.
^eeds and rushes. In the habitation of Dragons, that is, even in the places of
Persecutors, where each lay, shall be food for the Flock of Christ. The Dragon
is a venomous beast, and poisoneth all where he lies; he beats the Earth bare,
and venoms it, that it will bear no grass: as do the Persecutors where they
inhabit and lie. But behold, the days do come in which these Dragons shall be
removed, and the ground where they lay, be made fruitful and flourish, so that
even there shall be places for the flocks to lie down in; In the habitation of
Dragons where each lay, shall be grass, with reeds and rushes. No Lion shall be
there, nor any ravenous Beast shall be found thereon; but the Redeemed of the
Lord shall walk there, and the ransomed of the Lord shall Isa. 35. 9, 10.
return and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their
heads; they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee
away: according to that of Moses, The Lord will give peace in his Land, and his
People shall lie Lev. 26. 6.
down, and none shall make them afraid: For Isa. 32. 18
he will rid the evil Beasts out of the Land, and the Sword shall not go
through it more. And my People shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in
sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.

And the Gates shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall be no night
there. This word day, we may understand two ways; either for the day of
bringing in to fill this City, or for the day of her perfection and fullness.
Now if you take it with reference to the day in which her Converts are coming
in (as indeed it ought) why then, the Gates shall not be shut at all. Thy Gates
shall be open continually, Isa. 60. 11
they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces
of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought.

But again, This day of Grace, and of conversion of sinners, it must be looked
upon, either as the Church is in captivity and persecution, or as she is out:
now as she is in Captivity, so her longest day is usually accompanied with a
black and doubtful night of Temptation and Affliction; Wherefore this Day here
being spoken of, it is the Day of Grace that she shall have even when she is
absolutely delivered from the rage of the Beast, False Prophet and Whore.
Wherefore he is not content to say, the Gates shall not be shut at all by day,
but adds withal, for there shall be no night there; as who should say, I know
that commonly in the day of the Churches affliction, she is accompanied with
nights as well as days, but it shall not be so here, Thy Sun shall go no more
down, neither shall Isa. 60. 20.
thy Moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and
the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

Wherefore, John considering this, does quite exclude the night, saying, There
shall be no night there. Indeed, after this New Jerusalem has had her Golden
day in this world, I say, just toward the ending thereof, she will yet once
again be beset with raging Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 28 and 29.
which enemies will after the long safety and tranquillity of this City, through
the instigation of the Devil, come upon the breadth of the Earth, and encamp
about this holy City. But behold, in the midst of of this intention to swallow
her up, The Lord rains fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroys them all:
So that Gog, I say, though he may bring one only evening upon this Holy City,
after her long peace and rest among the sons of men, yet he shall not bring one
night upon her, nor cause a Gate thereof to be shut for ever. The Sun shall now
stand still in the midst of Jos. 10.
Heaven, and this night shall be thus prevented by this mavelous Judgment of
God; as another Prophet says, At evening-time Zech. 14. 7.
it shall be light: that is, though her enemies will at last still make, through
their enmity, one only attempt to swallow up all in everlasting oblivion: yet
they themselves shall fall down dead upon the Mountains of Israel, and be a
prey to this Jerusalem. Thus there will be only day accompanying the
Inhabitants of this City: For there shall be no night there.

Verse. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations to it.
This, as I said before, is to show us how heartily and how unfeignedly, both
the Nations and their Kings shall now come over to New-Jerusalem. They come
hand in hand, not the People without their Prince, nor the Prince without his
People; though it will and must be so in the times of Persecution: But now,
together THEY shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations to it.

Again, I told you before, that the Jews shall at this day be converted to the
Christian Faith, and shall have a great Name, and much of Heaven upon them in
this City. For indeed they are the firstborn, the natural branches, and the
like. Now when he says, They shall bring the glory and honor of the Nations
to it: I cannot think that by this should be understood only, or yet
principally, the outward pomp and treasure of the world, but that rather by
honor and glory we are here to understand the Heavenly Treasure and Glory that
the Saints shall continually pour forth into one another bosoms in this City:
in this City, I say, for at this day, as I have formerly showed you, there will
be found no Treasure any where but at Jerusalem; every Saint shall be here,
every Grace shall be here, the precious Stones of the Sanctuar; ythe precious
Sons of Sion shall not then, as now, lie scattered, some in the World, and some
in Mistress Babylons lap; neither shall any thing, pertaining to the Churches
privileges, be found in her at all for ever. There Rev. 18. 22, 23.
shall be heard no more at all in her any Harpers, Trumpeters, Pipers, or any
other heavenly Music in her; neither shall there be any more the sound of a
Millstone to grind us bread, nor the light of a Candle to guide us in the house,
nor yet the Voice of the Bridegroom [Christ] nor of the Bride his Wife, to
tempt or allure any that are seeking the Way of Life, to stay with 2. Chron.
36. 7.
her: all these things shall be brought to Jerusalem. Christians, you must
understand, that there is a time when all the Treasures of the Church are to be
found in Babylon, as in the days of old; but at this day, when this City is
built, not any of them shall be found there, but all Ezr. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and
7. 13, 14, 15, 16.
shall be brought and delivered up to Jerusalem again, as was also foreshewn in
the Type; and all places shall be void of the Treasure of Heaven, but Jerusalem.

Wherefore by the Glory and Honor of the Nations in this place, I understand,
That all the Treasures of the Church, and all the Graces that at this day lie
scattered here and there, some in one place and some in another; they shall be
found no where at that day but in this City, in the Church that walks according
to rule. Now the Reasons why I take this honor and glory to be meant of these
things, are,

First, Because thus it was in the time of the building of Jerusalem after the
Captivity; the Treasure of the Jews, which was become the Treasures of the
Provinces of Babylon, was again restored and brought to Jerusalem, as you may
see by the Scriptures now cited.

Secondly, Because I find indeed, that Ezekiel. 20 6, 25.
the milk and honey (...) the Land of Canaan (which is in our Gospel-language
the Gifts, Graces, and Treasures of the Church) it is called, The Glory of all
Cant. 4. 11.
Lands. Now, I say, seeing the milk and honey, which is the Comforts of the
Church and her Treasure, is called, the Glory of all Lands: I take Glory and
Honor in this place to signify the same thing also.

Thirdly, Because also I find, by comparing the Prophets, that the Christians
Glory and Honor, lies mostly, even principally in Heavenly and Spiritual
things; as in Faith, Love, Experience of God, of Grace, of Christ, and
Spiritual Life. I read, that at the building of of this City, the Jews and
Gentiles shall meet together, and that at that day they shall mutually be
partakers of each others glory. The Gentiles shall milk out, and be delighted
in the abundance of the Glory of Isa. 66. 10 11, 12, 13.
the Jews: and the Glory of the Gentiles shall be again extended unto the Jews,
like a mighty flowing stream: But I say, that this Glory and Honor should
consist in outward things, or that the Glory that is merely carnal, should be
principally here intended, I confess it grates too near the ground for me to
believe or rejoice in. Alas, I find that those souls that have not now the
tenth part of the Spirit and Life of heavenly things, that shall then be poured
forth; I say, I find that these are trampling on the World, and disdain the
thoughts of being taken with its Glory: Wherefore much less will it be esteemed
in that day, when the Glory and Goodness of God shall in that manner break
forth. Again, Can it be imagined that the chief of the Glory that the Gentiles
should bring to the Jews after a sixteen hundred years warming in the bosom of
Christ? I say is it imaginable that the great Crop of all they have reaped,
should consist in a little outward trumpery? or if it should, would it be a
suitable medicine in the least to present to the eyes of a broken and wounded
People, as the Jews will be at that day? or if the Glory that the Gentiles at
that day shall suck from the Jews were such as this, would it at all be as life
from the dead to them in a Gospel sense? The Church of the Gentiles shall be a
wall to Romans 11. 13, 14, 15.
the Jews at their return, but such a wall as will chiefly consist in spiritual
and heavenly safeguard, and in outward because of that: I am a Wall, says she,
and my breasts Cant. 8. 8, 9, 10.
are Towers, on which the Jews will build upon her a Palace of Silver. But must
this Wall, I say, consist chiefly in outward Glory, in the Glory of earthly
things? or must this Silver-Palace be of that nature either? no verily, but
when God has builded the City Jerusalem, and put his Church into such a state,
that upon all her Glory shall be a defense of Heaven, then shall the Jews, by
their coming into this City, build by their experience a Palace for spiritual
and heavenly pleasure, to solace and comfort their brethren withal. In a word
then, by Glory and Honor in this place, we are chiefly to understand the
spiritual and heavenly things of this Psalm. 61. 13.
City, which in the times of the reign of Antichrist have lain, some among the
Cant. 2. 14.
potsheards of the Earth, some again under Isa. 27. 13
the stayrs, some under this abuse and some under that; all which, shall be
brought, by the souls that shall be converted, forthwith to this City the
Church, where will be the Treasury of God, into which every one at that day
shall throw in of their abundance; but as for the glory of the world, the
Saints shall be above it; it shall be with them, as Silver and Wood was in the
days of Solomon, 1 Kin. 10. 21.
even as little worth as the stones in the street in their account.

Verse. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are
written in the Lambs Book of Life.
I am not yet convinced that the highest Church State that ever was, or ever
will be in this World, could possibly be so all of them the Elect of God, but
that there would get in among them some that had not saving Grace; the same
also I believe touching the state of this Jerusalem: But yet this I do believe
again, that the right and Gospel-Pattern is, That none be admitted into
Church Communion, but such who are visible Saints 1 Cor. 1. 1 2 Cor. 1. 1, Ephesians.
1. 12. Phil. 1. 1.
by Calling; the substance of which these words import, There shall not enter
into it any thing that [defileth] or that [worketh] abomination, or that
[maketh a lie;] which words do principally strike at a People that appear to be
loose, wicked, or ungodly; of which sort indeed, not one shall here at any
time, no not in any wise, be admitted Entrance: for now shall all the Forms,
and all the Ordinances, and all the forms of the Goings out of Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11.
the Church of God, and the Comings in to it, be so exactly opened to these
People, and they so punctual and distinct in Joel 3. 17 Zech. 14. 21. Ezekiel. 43.
12. Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7, 8.
the observation of them, that it will not be possible that a Canaanite should
be here for ever again found any more: This is the Law of the House, upon the
top of the Mountains, the whole limit thereof shall be holy; behold, this is
the Law of the House.

And as there shall at this day be none admitted here, but such as are in truth
visible Saints; so none must here continue but they that continue such: If any
of those stones that are put in for building into the House of God, shall
afterward have the Plague found on them; then the Priest shall command that
such stones be Lev. 14. 40.
taken away, and cast into the unclean place that is without the City. And
observe it, that Congregation on Earth that admits only of such Persons as are
visible Saints Number. 19. 22. Ephesians. 5. 11. Heb. 12 15 2 These. 3. 6, 14. 1 Cor.
5. 6 11, 12, 13
by calling and Profession, (though possibly some of them, as in the case of
Judas and Demas, may be known to God to be non-elect, yet) that Church is holy
round about the limits thereof: Provided also, that if at any time after that
the Plague appears, they orderly proceed to deal with them, (as here things
will be done to a tittle, and a hairs breadth.) Now the reason why the Church
may be said to have some within her that are none Elect, and yet be counted
holy still, it is, because the Church is to judge of Persons by their Words and
Lives; they know not the Heart absolutely: and therefore if in Word and Life a
man be as he ought, he is to be accounted a visible Saint, and orderly ought to
be received of the Church as such: So that I say, as I said before, these words
of bar^ing out Sinners out of the Church, they are not to be understood as if
they intended that those should be debarred visible Communion, that in Word and
Life appeared visible Saints, that are so judged by the Rules of Christ's
Testament; but that such should be from it shut out, that appeared visible
Sinners: Those that are Defilers, Workers of abomination, and Makers of Lies,
none of these shall enter.

But those that are written in the Lambs Book of Life. These words explain the
matter: Those, and those only, shall enter here, that are found written in the
Lambs Book of Life. Now by Book of Life, we are to understand two things in the
Scriptures of Truth: First, Either the Book of Gods eternal Grace and Mercy
through Christ, in which all the Elect are recorded for ever: Or, Secondly, That
Book of Life in which the Lord Jesus has all recorded that are visible Saints
by calling; for, for both these there is a Book of Life. For the first of
these, I judge these Scriptures do suit, Luke 10. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Phil. 4. 3.
and for the second, these, with that in the Text, Exodus 32. 32, 33. Rev. 22. 19.

Now the Book of Life in this place must not be so strictly taken as if it
included those only that were elect of God to eternal Life, but must be
understood of that Book wherein is recorded the Rules and Bounds of visible
Church Communion; and so all those that through the Gifts and Operations of
special or common Grace, do fall within the compass of those Rules and Bounds.
Thus it was in the Type, at the return out of Captivity, none were to be
admitted entrance into the Church, but those that could show their Privileges
by Genealogy, and the Records of the Ezra 2. 62, 63. Nehem. 7. 64, 65. and 2.
20.
Church; and to others it was said, That they had neither Portion, nor Lot, nor
Memorial in Jerusalem.

Now that by Book of Life in this place we are to understand that Book that
has in it the Bounds and Liberties of this City, and so every one that falls
within the compass of these Bounds and Privileges visibly, Consider,

First, They that are visible matter for visible Church Communion, they shall
be found within this City, and yet there shall not enter any, but those that
are written in the Lambs Book of Life.

Secondly, Now visible Church Communion does not absolutely call for only
invisible Saints, neither can it: for if the Church was to join with none but
those whom they knew to be the very Elect of God (as all invisible Saints are)
then she must join with none at all; for it is not possible that any Church
should be so infallible to judge in that manner of the Elect, as to discern
them always, and altogether from the non-Elect, which cannot be an invisible
Saint.

Thirdly, By Book of Life therefore, in this place, we are to understand, I
say, that Book that has written in it every visible Saint, whether they be
Elect, or not; and so such a Book that is capable of receiving in a man at one
time, and of blotting of him out again, as occasion does require, at another:
which thing is only applicable to that Book that binds and looses on the
account of a man's being a visible Saint, or a visible Apostate: which thing is
only applicable to the visible Rules of receiving or shutting out of visible
Church Communion; which Rules being the Rules of Christ's New Testament, it is
proper to call it the Book of Life; and is about the matter of going in or
going out of this very City, so called: If any man shall take Rev. 22. 18, 19.
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things that are
written in this Book. O how happy is he who is not only a visible, but also an
invisible Rev. 3. 5.
Saint! He, he shall not be blotted out of the Book of Gods eternal Grace and
Mercy; when others are liable to lose a share not only in Heaven, but to be
for ever blotted out of the Book that approves of visible Believers also.

Fourthly. But again, to explain the matter yet more: In the visible Church
there is not only Sons but Servants, that is, not only those that are truly
Elect, but such as have received a Gift for the perfecting the Church under
Ezekiel. 46. 16, 17.
Christ, in his Service here in this World: Now, I say, the Servant for the
time present has his place in the Church as well as the Son, though not the
place of a Son, but of a Servant, even a place of Service, as of Preaching,
Prophesying, administering 1 Cor. 12. 7
the Ordinances that are given to the Church, and the like; all which, a man
that has not Grace may do, and that by the appointment of Christ; thus Ephesians. 4.
9, 10, 11, 12 1 Cor. 13 1, 2, 3, 4. Mat. 25. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
was Judas, Demas, Hymeneus, Phyletus, and others; who sometimes were the
Servants of Christ in the Church, and did minister for him to them; yet
themselves, notwithstanding, such as were all that time strangers and aliens to
the life, and power and saving operations of the justifying and preserving
Grace of the Gospel: as he says also by the Prophet Isaiah, Strangers shall
stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of aliens shall be Isa. 61. 5.
your Plough men, and your Vine-dressers. For verily Christ will give to those
that have not his saving-grace, yet great knowledge and understanding in the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and will also make them for profit and
advantage in his Church, to feed their flocks, to plow up the fallow ground of
their hearts, and to dress their tender Vines: Yet, I say, they themselves
shall not be everlastingly saved, for they want his saving-grace. As Christ
says, The servant abides not in the house for Joh. 8. 35.
ever, but the Son abides for ever. As he says again in another Prophet, If
the Prince give a gift to any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his
sons; it shall be their possession by inheritance: but if he give a gift of
inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of
Liberty; Ezekiel. 46. 16, 17.
after it shall return to the Prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons for
them. Some indeed have grace as well as gifts; now they that are such, the profit
of their gifts shall be rewarded by virtue of their grace, but as for them that
have only a gift, when the work of a gift is done, then they cease to be any
longer of use in the Church, and therefore are forthwith shut out of the same,
but the Son abides for ever. Thus you see that as visible Church Communion
does not absolutely call for the Elect only, but admits, and that by the Book
of Rules, all that are visible and open Saints by calling: so also the Lord
Jesus himself does and will use some in his Church as his Officers and
Servants, that yet in a a strict sense are neither his Sons nor Members; Who
yet are within the bounds of that Book of Life that here he speaks of, as is
evident, because with Christ's allowance they are admitted into commnnion with
his Church, and by him also furnished with Gifts and Abilities to profit and
edify withal. Now observe, such a one is admitted, though but a Servant, yet
not by the Church, because but such a one. The Church receives no man upon the
account of gifts alone, but upon the account of the appearance of Grace; as of
Gospel-Repentance, of the Confession of Faith, and of a Conversation suitable
to the same: All which a man that is not elect may have the notion of, yea, the
Heb. 6 4, 5.
power though not the saving Power.

5. Further, this which I have said about the visible Church Communion, and so
consequently about the Book of Life, it must needs be a Gospel Truth; yea, a
thing for Truth in this New-Jerusalem: because, besides what has been said,
there will be found in this City, even at the coming of the Lord Jesus, (which
coming of his will not be for some time after the building and setting of it
up) I say, there will be then sound among them foolish Virgins, and such who
have not the saving-grace of God in their souls: But yet, 1. these very souls
shall be counted by the Church, yea, by Christ himself, for Virgins; that is,
such as had not defiled their Profession. 2. And will be such Virgins as have,
and hold every one her Lamp, even as the Wise themselves. 3. Such Virgins as
were, every one of them, gone forth from the pollutions of this evil-world. 4.
And so such as continued visible Saints, even till the Bridegroom came, for
then it is said in the margent, they cried, Our Lamps are going out. Matthew. 25.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
These, I say, be those gifted people that will have place in the Church, and
so place in the Book of Life here mentioned, which yet will (though they
continue hid from the Church) be discovered in the day of the Lord to be such,
as had only a gift, but not grace; and shall for their secret sins be cut off,
and cast away, notwithstanding they were visible Saints all their days.

To conclude then; If the Scripture says, that none that defiles, or that
works abomination, or makes a lie, shall enter into this holy City, which
yet is but the Church on Earth; with what face can Defilers think and say, they
shall possess a part among the Church which is in Heaven. Again, If many that
have received gifts from God, and that may be serviceable in his House, shall
yet be put out of doors at the coming of the Lord, What will they do that have
been, and yet continue both giftless and graceless, as visibly as the light
that shines? and that instead of being the Ploughmen and Vine-dressers of the
Church, prove Thieves, Robbers, Persecutors, and the like! yea, if many that
are within the bounds of that Book of Life that has the Records and Rules of a
rightly constituted visible Church, may yet perish, what will become of them
that never were so much as written therein! must they not perish rather! And
whosoever were not found written in the Book Rev. 20 16.
of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire.

Chap. 22. ver. 1. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as
Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.
HAving thus showed us this City, her Fashion, Glory, Inhabitants, and the
like: he now comes to show us her Provision and Maintenance, wherewith she is
kept in safety, life, peace and comfort, etc.

And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life. This Water of Life, is nothing
else but the manifold Grace of God in Christ, let forth to the Inhabitants of
this Jerusalem, wherewith she is watered and replenished, as the Earth with
rain from Heaven, for the good of those that drink thereof. For both the word
Water, and that of Life, they are but metaphorical sayings, under which is held
forth some better and more excellent thing. And indeed it is frequent with God
in Scripture to speak of his Grace and Mercy under the notion of Waters, of a
Fountain, a Sea, and the like; Zech. 13. 1, 2. Mica 7. 18, 19.

Now it is called Water,

First, Because no soul can be cleansed or effectually washed from its guilt
and Ephesians. 1. 7.
filth, but by the Grace of God. I washed thee with water, yea I thoroughly
washed away thy blood from thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16. 8, 9.

Secondly, It is called Water, because it also quenches the spiritual thrist
of them that by Faith do drink thereof: I will give, says Christ, to him that
is athirst Isa. 41. 18
of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. And again, He that drinks of
the Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, Rev. 2. 16. John 4. 14.

Further, As it is called Water, so it is called the Water OF LIFE, and that
upon a diverse account.

First, Because it is that which recovereth the soul that drinks thereof,
from the Death of Sin and the Curse of God, to a principle of Life and heavenly
Blessing. And it shall come to pass that everyone that lives, that moves
whithersoever the waters shall come, shall live. Ezekiel. 47. 9.

Secondly, It is called the Water of Life; because, that from it comes all
those heavenly and spiritual quicknings and revivings, that (like Aqua-vitae)
do fetch again, and cheer up the soul that was sinking, and giving up the Ghost
in this world. There is a River, the streams whereof make glad the City of God,
Psalm. 46. 4.

Thirdly, It is called the Water of Life, because, it heals the soul of all
its spiritual infirmities and diseases, wherewith by the reason of the
remainders of sin, the creature is most sadly anoyed and infected. And there
shall be a great multitude of Fish (of men he means, Mat. 4. 19.) because the
waters shall come thither; for they (the Fish) shall be healed, and every thing
shall live whither the Waters come, Ezekiel. 47. 9.

Fourthly and lastly; It is called the Water of Life, because that whosoever
does effectually drink thereof, shall die no more, but the Water that Christ
shall give him shall be in him a Well of water, springing up in him to eternal
life; wherefore he calls it in another place the Living Water, because the
quality and nature of it is to beget, to increase, to maintain, and preserve
life, John 4. 10, 14.

And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal etc. Mark, It
is Water, Water of Life, pure Water of Life, and clear as Crystal. These words,
pure and clear and that as Crystal, they are aded upon a double account.

First, To show you that it is Grace alone that saves the sinner.

And secondly, To show you, (...) this day the Doctrine of this Grace will be
by it self alone without the commixture of that dirt and trash that for a long
time, even to this day, has been thrown into it.

First, It shows us, that it is Grace alone that saves the sinner, pure
Grace, Grace that admits of nothing of ours to be in the least a helper in the
matter of our happiness; we are justified freely by his Grace through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ. As he says by the Prophet, I will pour
[CLEAN] water upon you, and you shall be clean, and from all your Idols will
[I] cleanse you. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord. Be ye ashamed,
and confounded for all your own evil ways, O House of Israel. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26,
27, 32, 33. It is clean water indeed, it is clear in the nature of it, clear in
the gift of it, and clear in the working of it: It washes freely, thoroughly
and perfectly: from all your Idols will I cleanse you, Rev. 21. 6. Ezekiel. 16. 9.
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26.

Secondly, This word pure, and clear as Crystal: It also shows us that at the
day of New Jerusalem the Doctrine of Grace shall be cleansed from all those
dirty and muddy inventions, that Sin, Satan and the Wisdom of this world has
thrown into this River, and into its goodly Crystal Streams; I say, at this day
they shall not come near it, neither shall the rubish they have already cast
into it any more be there for ever. I will destroy all the Beasts thereof (the
beastly men he means) from beside the great waters, neither shall the foot of
man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of Beasts trouble them. Then will I
make their Waters deep, and cause their Rivers to run like Oil, says the Lord
God, Ezekiel. 32. 13, 14.

And he [shewed] me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, etc. In
that he says, he saw this River, he gives us in a Mystery also to understand
how openly and plainly this River shall in all its Crystal Streams and
Cur-rents be apprehended and seen by the Children of this City; for in this
Vision he does as it were represent in his Person the Children of New
Jerusalem; as God said to Ezekiel in another case, Thou shall be their sign,
and they shall do as Ezekiel. 24 22, 27.
thou have done. * So here, I SAW, says John, a pure River of Water of Life. I
am in this a sign to the House of the Israel of God, and to the Inhabitants of
this City; they shall do as I have done, and shall also see as I have seen. As
says the Church and People of this City, As we have heard, so have we SEEN,
Psalm. 48. 8
in the City of the Lord of Hosts. And hence it is called an OPEN Fountain,
Zec. 13. 1, 2.
because, it shall be no more shut up or kept close for ever.

And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal [proceeding]
out of the Throne of God. This word, proceeding, has also in it two things.

First, An implicit declaration, whither it goes. And,

Secondly, A discovery of its gradual extention to those to whom it goes.

First, Touching to whom or whither it goes; it is let out both to the Jews and
Gentiles indifferently; and so it never yet was, since the Foundations of the
Jewish Church; for in the time of the old Testament it did run to the Jews in
special, and in the times of the New Testament hitherto, unto us the Gentiles
in special* ^ but now it shall in this manner be extended to sinners no longer;
not now to the Jews without the Gentiles, nor again, to them without the Jews,
but equally, and alike to both, and on them both it shall work alike
effectually: It shall be at that day, says the Prophet, that Living Waters
shall go out from Jersusalem; half of Zec. 14. 8
them toward the former Sea, and half of them toward the hinder Sea. By
Living Waters here, you are to understand the same with this in the Text; by
the former Sea, the People of the Jews, for they were Gods former People; and
by hinder Sea, the People of the Gentiles, for they are the younger Son: And
because the whole World consists of these two People, therefore Ezekiel in
his Vision ^uts them both together, calling them ^he Fish of one great Sea, to
which this Water of Life shall run, and upon whose Fish it shall have alike
operation, even ^o heal them, and make them live without respect either to this
or that party.

It shall come to pass that the Fishers (that Ezekiel. 47 10.
^s the Gospel Ministers) shall stand upon ^he River from En-gedi, even to
Eneglaim, they shall be a place to spread Nets, their Fish shall be according
to their kinds, as the Fish of the great Sea, Exceeding many; as another Isa.
60. 5.
Prophet says, The abundance of the Sea shall be converted to thee.

Thus much touching whither this Water goes.

And now to come to the manner of the extention of it in the way of its
proceeding. A thing that proceeds, it does what it does gradually, that is, by
degrees. First, it comes or goes so far, and then further, and afterward
further than that; till at last it ascends to the height and uppermost degree
that is allotted for its perfection: All which the Holy Ghost would have us
gather out of this word, it proceeds, or that John saw this Holy Water
proceeding: The which, the Prophet Ezekiel in a mystery unfoldeth to us,
saying, the first time he passed over this Water, it was up but to his ancles;
the second Ezekiel. 47 3, 4, 5.
time he passed through, it proceeded to his knees; the third time to his
loins, and last of all, became a River to swim in*

First, It is but up to the ancles, that is, but shallow, and signifies that,
first, the soul is but a little child in Gods things, such as the Apostle calls
Babes Children, little Children. 1 John 2. 12.


Secondly, Then from the ancles it proceeds to the knees, that is, somewhat
higher then the ancles, and signifies that the Christian grows from a Child
to a Young and Strong-man, one that is now gotten deeper into the things of
God, 1 John 2. 13.
and that is able to tug with, and overcome the wicked ones.

Thirdly, After this, it proceeds higher, even up to the loins; this signifies,
that as Grace makes men Children of God, and his Young Men, so also it makes
them Fathers, and Ancients in his Church; it makes them grave, knowing, solid
Guides, and Unfolders of the Mysteries of the Kingdom; these are such as are
instructed into the Kingdom of God, and that can bring out of their treasury
things new and old.

Fourthly, It yet proceeds higher, even to be above the head, a River to swim
in, and that such a River as can by no means be passed over. This signifies
our launching into Eternity; our being beyond all heights, depths, lengths and
breadths, in the open Visions and Enjoyments of Grace. For there the Glorious
Lord shall be unto us a place of BROAD Rivers, and Streams, wherein shall go no
Gallie with Oars, neither shall gallant Ships pass thereby, Isa. 33. 21. Thus
we begin Children, and wade up to the ancles in the things of God, and being
once in, it rises and proceeds to come up to our knees, then to our loins, and
last of all to be a River to swim in; a River so wide, so deep, and every way
so large, that can in no wise be passed over.

And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Having thus spoken to the Water,
what it is, as also to whom it extends it self, and how it proceeds: He now
comes to show us from whence and from whom it does come. It proceeds, says he,
from the Throne of God and of the Lamb, Out of the Throne of God; this Throne
of God, Exodus 25. 22. Heb. 4. 16.
it is in another place called the Mercy-Seat, and Throne of Grace, from which,
as always, so now in a special manner he will issue forth of himself in the
glory of the Gospel of the Grace of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to the
Inhabitants of this City. When he says therefore, that it does proceed out of
the Throne of God, it is as if he had said, I saw, that from the yearning
bowels of the great God did flow continually the Living Streams of the
everlasting Fountains of Grace, and that not only to, but in the midst of this
City, wherewith her Inhabitants are continually watered and their Pastures kept
always green and flourishing. Isa. 55. 1.
Ho every one that thirsts, Come ye to the Waters.

Proceeding out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb. In that this Water of
Life is said to proceed not only out of the Throne of God, but also of the
Lamb. It signifies and holds forth unto us two special things.

First, That the Throne of God is also made the Throne of the Lord Jesus
Christ, upon which he (as a reward of his Sufferings and Victory over Sin,
Satan and all Evils) is set down, and upon which he sits and rules as Lord and
Chief of all Worlds. He is set down on the Heb. 1. 2. and 10. 12. and 12. 2.
right hand of Power, on the right hand of the Majesty on high; as he says, To
him that overcomes will I grant to sit down with Rev. 3 21
me on my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father upon his
Throne. This being thus, it signifies that this City shall have her enjoyments
of Life, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost, by virtue of the Kingship of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as well as by the virtue of his Priestly and Prophetical Office.
The Church does in our days know a little what Joy, Peace and Life is to be
enjoyed from Christ, even through that dark and glimmering sight that she has
of the Offices of Christ in a mist; but she feels not yet what Joy she shall
have, and what Peace she shall enjoy when her Lord in all his Offices is
manifest before her, and when he in the glory of them does reign in the midst
of this Jerusalem. There are none of the Offices of the Lord Jesus yet upon the
Throne in his Church on Earth, though they be all upon the Throne in Heaven: O!
but the day is coming that they shall be all upon the Throne in the Church on
Earth, when they shall each of them in its full length, breadth, height and
depth bear sway among his People, and before all men* Then shall the Moon be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in
Mount-Zion, and in Jerusalem* and before his Ancients gloriously, Isa. 24* 23.

O that thou would rend the Heavens, that thou would come down, that the
Mountains might flow down at thy presence! O that the day were come that the
smoke should go forth of the Temple of God, that men might enter into it, and
there meet with God upon the Throne, and with Jesus in him upon the Throne in
all his Offices. It will be thus, thou Zion, Isa. 64. 1.
shortly, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children.

The second thing observable, is, That as all Grace comes from out of the
Throne of God, so it also proceeds, or comes out of the Throne of the Lamb:
that is, No Grace comes to any, but through the Victory and Conquest of the Lord
Christ: We are justified freely by his Romans 3. 24.
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Ephesians. 1. 7.
Christ Jesus: and again, We have Redemption through his Blood, even the
forgiveness of our Sins, according to the riches of his Grace. By which we may
gather, that when these things come to be in their own Purity among us; that
is, when Grace runs clear without the dirt and mud of the Traditions of men
commixed therewith, then will all that hold up false and erroneous Opinions, be
washed away: for this River will not only wash away the sins and filthiness of
those that are truly gracious, but it will also destroy the Heretic and
erroneous Person; it will be to them at that day as the red Sea was to the
Egyptians of old; which Sea, though it was a Wall on this hand, and on that, to
the Children of Israel, yet it destroyed the Egyptians that Heb. 11. 29
assayed to go through it, as Israel did. The reason also why we are at this day
in such confusion in matters of Religion, it is for want of the clear and pure
streams of this River of Water of Life; all which will be mended when there is
but one River to water this City, and that too the pure River of the Water of
Life, in all its streams as clear as Crystal; then shall all drink-in all
things into one Spirit, and be watered with the same Dews of Heaven.

Thus much of the Water of Life that belongs to this Jerusalem.

Verse. 2. And in the midst of the Street of it, and on either side of the River
was there the Tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of Fruits, and yielded her
Fruit every month; and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations.
This Tree of Life is the Lord Jesus Christ; and that he is here called a Tree,
rather then by other of his Names, it is to show us how fruitful and exceeding
advantageous he in all his Benefits will be to the Inhabitants of this City:
this is that Tree under whose Branches the Mat. 13. 31, 32.
Fowls of Heaven shall now most safely lodge, and find relief from the hot and
fainting Beams of the persecuting Sun of this world, as the Word does there
inform us.

Now before I come to speak to this Tree touching the manner of its Fruit, and
its often bearing, with the efficatiousness of its Leaves, which here he says
does heal the Nations; I will take notice of one or two general things that lie
before me, from the standing of the Tree in the midst of the street of this
City.

First then, In that he says this City has a Tree of Life in it; He alludes
to the Garden of Eden, the pleasant Paradise that God began the World withal;
whereby he signifies, that as the World began with a Paradise, so also it
shall end with a Paradise, when Sin and Satan have done their worst: This New
Jerusalem shall be the wind-up of the world, and in it shall stand the Tree of
Life, as well as there stood one in the goodly Garden which was the beginning
thereof. In which Paradise there shall be no Tree of Knowledge, or the Law of
Works to bear sway, and to cause that the Sons of God shall be thrust out
thence for their eating of its forbidden Fruits; no, the Tree of Life alone
shall here bear sway, and rule; whose Fruit is only healthful, and the Leaves
thereof for Medicine.

Now this Tree of Life being in the midst of this City, it signifies that the
Inhabitants of it shall be sweetly shadowed, refreshed and defended with its
coolness, and also sweetly nourished and comforted with its dainties: And hence
it is that the Scriptures do hold him forth in his benefits to his Church,
under these very notions: As the Apple Tree is among the Trees of the Wood, so
is my Beloved Cant. 2. 3.
among the Sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet to my taste. Indeed the shadow of this Tree of Life, as always it is
refreshing to the tempted and weary, so now it will be far more: They that
dwell Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7.
under his shadow, shall return; they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the
Vine, and the scent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon. Mark, 1. His
shadow will make us return, that is, to our first Love; to the days of our
youth, to our young, fresh, tender, and flourishing Faith, Love and
Self-denial, that we received in the days of our Espousals. 2. As it will make
us return to these, so it will make us revive in these; they shall return, and
revive; they shall revive as the Corn; as the Corn does when in the heat of
Summer after long scorching, it it covered with cool Clouds, and watered with
the bottles of Heaven. 3. As is shall make them return and revive, so it shall
make them grow; they shall grow as the Vine, that is, speedily, fruitfully, and
spreadingly. 4. This is not all, but the smell of Saints in those days shall
be excellent, They shall revive as the Corn, they shall grow as the Vine, and
shall send forth their scent as the Wine of Lebanon. This Tree is a
Perfuming-Tree, and makes them also that abide under the shadow thereof, to
smell as sweet smelling Myrrh; it makes them smell as the Wine of thy Grace, O
Lord, and as the fragrant Ointments of Heaven. When the Spouse did but touch
where her Lord had touched before her, it made her hands drop with Myrrh, and
her fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh. O they will be green, savoury, reviving,
flourishing, growing Christians, that shall walk the street of New-Jerusalem! I
am, says he, a green Fir Tree, from me Hos. 14. 8
is thy Fruit found.

But again; As he shall be thus profitable to his People for shadow and
reviving; so he will be in the midst of the Street of it for food, for
refreshing, and replenishing that way. I sat down under his shadow with great
delight, said she, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. Ezekiel tells us, that
this Tree is all Trees; Ezekiel. 47 12.
And on the bank of the River, on this side, and on that, were [all Trees] for
meat. Indeed Christ is all Trees; yea, there is more to be found in him for the
food of the Soul, than there can be on all Trees for the food of the Body. He
is a Fir Tree for tallness, greenness and strength; He is an Olive for fatness,
a Vine for sweetness Hos. 14. 8. Romans 11. 12* John 15. 1, 2. Cant. 2. 13.
and goodness; for therewith is refreshed the heart both of God and man. What
shall I say? he is the Almond-tree, the Fig Tree, the Apple Tree, all Trees; The
Tree of Life also in the midst of the Paradise of God.

To conclude. Seeing Christ is said to be in the midst of the Street of this
City, it shows unto us with what, at all occasions, the actions of the Saints
of this City shall be seasoned. The Street, you know I told you, is the Way of
Holiness in this City; the place of Spiritual recreation and solace. Now in the
very midst of this Street there stands this Tree, which being thus, it shows
us how wonderfully Christ, as a Tree of Life, will be in all the words and
deeds of the Inhabitants of this Jerusalem; they will walk in Christ, they will
talk in Christ, they will do all they do in Christ; or rather Christ will be
found in all their ways, even as the Tree of Life is found in the midst of the
Street of this City: they shall walk up and down Zech. 10. 12.
in my Name, says the Lord.

Again, In that this Tree is said to stand in the midst of the Street, it
shows unto us how common and free his benefits will now be also. The Plumbs,
and Figs, and Grapes and Apples of this Tree, will be open to every Passenger;
not a Boy nor a Girl that now shall play in thy Street, O Jerusalem, but shall
eat of the Fruits of the Tree that stands in he midst of thee, as of common
Jer. 31. 4, 5.
things.

And in the midst of the Street of it, and and [on either side] of the River
was there the Tree of Life. As this Tree does stand in the midst of the Street
of this City, so it also stands one each side of the River of the Water of
Life, of which you have heard before. Now when he says, the Tree is on either
side of the River; whence by the way note yet again, That both the Water of
Life, and also the Tree of Life, they are both to be enjoyed by the Inhabitants
of this City in the way of Holiness; the Tree is in the midst of the Street,
and the River runs through or between the very tables of the heart of this Tree
of Life; on either side of the iver was there the Tree of Life.

Again, In that it is said that this Tree of Life is on either side of the
River; it argues that they who come at any time at this River for water to
quench their thirst, and to make them live, they must come to it by the Tree of
Life, which is Christ. In more easy terms, read it thus; There is none can
partake of the Grace Col. 2. 3, 9.
of God but by the man Christ Jesus, which is this Tree of Life; for this Tree,
John 1. 16.
this Christ, does stand on either side of the River, to signify that all
Grace to us comes through his bloody Wounds, John 14. 6.
Death and Victory. I am the Way, says Christ, the Truth and the Life, no man
comes to the Father but by me.

And on either side of the River was there the Tree of Life. Mark, But one
Tree, and yet such a Tree whose body reached as far as the River reached;
indeed Ezekiel says this Tree is all Trees for meat, yet not to show that
there is more Trees of Life than one, but to show that all that can be thought
of that is good for soul-nourishment is to be found in this one, that is in
Christ Jesus: and it is further evident, that though he says all Trees, as if
he meant many, yet he spoke but metaphorically, to show thereby the fullness of
Christ; because, John does understand him so, calling it one Tree, to wit, the
Tree of Life. But mark again; so far as the River goes, so far the Tree goes,
so that where you cannot find the Tree of Life, be sure there is none of the
Water of Life. No Christ, no Grace; He that has the Son has life, John 3. 36.
but he that has not the Son shall not see 1 John 5. 12.
life, but the wrath of God abides upon him: For on either side of the River
was [there] the Tree of Life.

Which bare twelve manner of [Fruits.] This word, Fruits, it may be taken two
ways, either as it relates to God, or as it relates to man (for as I said
before, Judge. 9. 9, 13.
the Fruits of this Tree refreshes the heart both of God and man.)

Now if it be taken with reference to God, then it signifies the complete
satisfaction that by the worthiness of the Fruits of the Passion of Christ is
given to God for the salvation of the Church; this City of God. He suffered to
finish transgression, Dan. 9. 24, 26. Matthew. 3. 17.
to make an end of sin, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness; by this, I
say, is the heart of God refreshed, and in this does it rest.

2. If Fruit here be taken with reference to men, then it signifies the
Happiness and Glory that those for whom he dyed and rose again, should receive
by this means. His Fruit I have showed you is sweet to the taste of his Church,
which Fruit is the effect of his undertaking for Sinners, and the comfortable
savor of it in the soul.

Which bare [twelve] manner of Fruits. In that he says, the Fruits are twelve,
he herein alludeth to the twelve Tribes of the Israel of God; for which twelve
Tribes here will be found a suitable measure of Food, healing Food: I will
multiply Ezekiel. 3^ 30.
the Fruit of the Tree, says God, and also the increase of the Field, that you
may receive no more reproach of Famine among the Heathen.

Again, These that John calls twelve manner of Fruits, the Prophet Ezekiel
calls, all manner of Fruit for meat: For indeed, as I showed before, there is
that to be found in Christ, both for fullness and variety, that is not to be
found in Heaven and Earth beside. Here is Fruit for Body, Fruit for Soul, Fruit
for Babes, Fruit for Strong-men, Fruit for Fathers, yea, for glorified Saints
and Angels: Fruits, variety of Fruits, even twelve manner of Fruits.

2. By twelve manner of Fruits, he does also allude to the Apostles, who are
called, twelve, and are those who have made provision for the House of God
according to the twelvefold manner of the Dispensation of God unto them, and of
the twelve fold manner of Operation of that holy Spirit, which wrought in every
one of them severally as he pleased: which twelve were before figured out unto
us by the twelve Officers of King Solomon (the ^ King. 4. 7.
Type of Christ) which twelve were to make provision for the House of the King
according to the season of the year, and each man his month in the year. Which
very thing the holy Ghost also does here cast his eye upon, and that makes him
bring in the words of every month, saying, it yeeld^ its Fruit every month: For
indeed, what ever you read of, concerning this City in this description of
John, you find something or other in the Writings of the Prophets that gives
ground for such expressions. Wherefore seeing the Officers of Solomon were
twelve, and the Apostles of Christ twelve also; and seeing the Officers of
Solomon made provision for his house, each man his month in a year, and the
Fruits of this Tree of Life is called twelve manner of Fruits: I do take the
twelve manner of Fruits here to be signified by the provision of Solomon's
Officers according to the twelve seasons of the year, and they a Type of 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 3. 2. Heb. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14.
the twelvefold Doctrine of the twelve Apostles of the Lord Christ, for it is
their Doctrine that is the bread of the Church, yea, the milk for the Babe, and
the strong meat for men.

And yielded her Fruit every month. As this confirms what I have said before;
so it further shows us these three things.

First, That the effectual Fruits of Christ for the saving of the world, they
are to be had especially, at certain seasons: It yielded her Fruit every Month.

Secondly, It shows also that at the building of this Jerusalem, these
Seasons will be very thick and quick; she yielded her Fruit every month.

Thirdly, It shows us, also, the abundance of provision that this holy City
shall then enjoy from the Tree of Life, even all manner of Fruit, every Month.

1. For the first, That the Gospel has and will be especially effectual at
certain Seasons for the saving of the sons of men: it is showed us by the
descending of the Angel into the Pool of Bethesda to trouble the water, which
as it was at certain seasons, so he that in those seasons first stepped in, he
only was made whole o^ Joh. 5. 4.
whatsoever disease he had. It is showed us also in that Parable of the Lord's
hiring men to work in his Vineyard; which time of hiring, though it lasts in
general from the first hour to the eleventh yet so, as that there were vacant
seasons between hiring-times, and hiring-times Mat. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
quit through the whole day; he went out at the first, third, sixth, ninth, and
eleventh hour, and not at every hour to hir^ Laborers. For as God has
appointed out before hand the number of his Elect so also he has determined in
his good Gal. 1. 15, 16. Hos. 6. 11 Jer. 2. 24
pleasure the day of their bringing in, and will then have them as certainly as
the wild Ass is found in her month. Of which times and seasons, because men are
ignorant, therefore they should with all faithfulness wait upon God in all the
Joh. 5. 8.
seasons of his Grace for their souls, even as he did for his body; who because
he would be there at all seasons, brought thither his bed and couch to rest
there.

Secondly, As by the Fruit of this Tree being yielded at certain seasons, We
may gather that there are certain seasons in which the Word in an especial
manner shall be blessed and made successful to the salvation of many souls: So
again, in that he says, This Fruit is yielded every month, it signifies that
in the days of the building of the City, the New-Jerusalem, these Seasons will
be very thick and quick. Lift up thine eyes, says God to this City, all these
gather themselves together, to come unto thee; thy sons shall come from far,
and thy daughters from the ends of the Earth. All the Flocks of Kedar shall be
gathered together unto thee (so that thou wandering by, shall say) Who are
these that fly as a cloud, and as Doves to the windows. For I will make thy
Mountain a way, and my high ways shall Isa. 49. 11, 12. Isa. 60. 7, 8.
be exalted. Behold these shall come from far, and lo these from the North and
the West, and those from the Land of Sinim.

Thirdly, In that she is said to yield not only Fruit, but all manner of Fruit;
and that not only one manner of Fruit now, and another then, but all manner of
Fruit, and that, every month: it argues also, that at this day Jerusalem shall
have abundance of heavenly and spiritual provision, and of variety of dainties
for her solace and refreshment; always new, I say, and immediately from the
Tree. The Fruits of the Vine shall at that Jer. 31. 5.
day be upon the Mountains of Samaria, and shall be eaten as common things,
says the Prophet. Fear not, O Land, be glad and rejoice; for the Lord will do
great things. Be not afraid, ye Beasts of the field, for the Pastures of the
Wilderness do spring: for the Tree bears her Fruit; the Fig Tree and the Vine
do yield their Strength. Be glad ye Children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord
your God; for he has given you the former and the latter rain moderatly, and
he will cause it to come down to you, the rain, the former and the latter rain
in the first month; and the Floors shall be full of Wheat, and Joel 2. 21 22,
23, 24 25.
the Fats shall overflow with Wine and Oil. And I will restore unto you that
which the Canker-worm, the Catterpillar, and the Palmer-worm has eaten, and
you shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and shall praise the Name of the
Lord. And then shall Zech 3. 10.
every one, not only, sit under his own Vine and under his own Fig Tree, but
from thence they shall call each to other, to give to each other their
dainties, and none shall make them afraid.

And the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations. By Leaves
here, we may understand the blessed and precious Promises, Consolations and
Encouragments that by virtue of Christ's undertaking for us, we have every
where growing upon the new Covenant; which Promises and Encouragments they are,
and will be, most freely handed to the wounded conscience that will be tossed
upon the restless waves of doubt and unbelief, as was the Olive-leaf by the
Dove brought home to Noah, when he was tossed upon the Genesis 11.
waves of that outrageous Flood that then did drown the world.

But again, by this word, the Leaves, You may conceive, that still he has his
eye to the Paradise in which at first God placed Adam and his Companion, for
'twas to Leaves they fled for covering, after they had transgressed against
their ^^n. 3. 7.
Maker. Now then, in his saying the Leaves are for healing, it is as if he had
said, the Paradise that will be toward the latter end of the world, will far
outstrip the Paradise that first was planted in the beginning thereof; for as
the Tree of Life, which is the Christ and Savior, shall stand where did the
Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, which is the Old Covenant, and Law of
Works: So the Leaves of this Tree shall be for healing, and for covering the
nakedness of poor transgressors; though the Leaves that Adam found in the first
Paradise, do what he could, did leave him naked.

Christ's Leaves are better than Adams Aprons. Ezekiel says, that these Leaves
Ezekiel. 47 12.
are for medicine, that is, they are for healing, says John; the which may
most fitly be applied to the blessed promise of Grace, for as a Leaf for
Medicine, when applied to a sore in the body does supple, molify, and heal the
wound; so the word of Promise when rightly applied to the soul, it does supple,
molify and heal the wounded conscience; He sent his word and healed them, and
delivered them from their distractions. O that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wondrous works to the Children of men! Psalm. 107.
20, 21.

And the Leaves, etc. There is yet another Mystery lies in these words.

He does not say, And the Fruits thereof are for the healing of the Nations,
but the Leaves; by which he would have us to understand, that all the benefits,
and privileges that we do here receive from Christ, they are as inferior to
the Glory we shall have from him when we come to Heaven, as inferior, I say, as
the Leaves are to the Fruit. Again, The comfort and sweetness that at any time
we receive from the Lord, it is not before, but after a Promise is suitably
applied, even as the Fruit of the Tree with which the body is comforted, is not
before, but after the Leaves have put forth themselves. Wherefore Christ might
well say to Nathaniel (and that after he had received some refreshment from a
Leaf) John 1. 50.
Thou shall see greater things than these; and Paul, That yet a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory is laid up for 2 Cor. 4. 17.
all Believers: for indeed, indeed, the Glory that God has prepared for us
against the day of God, it does, and will more outstrip the most high Enjoyment
of the highest Saint in New-Jerusalem (notwithstanding their Enjoyment will be
so eminent) than does the sweetest Fruit outstrip the Leaf that hangs on that
Tree: And the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.

If the Leaves be so good, O Lord, let us enjoy the Fruit; and not a little, or
earnest, but the whole Harvest thereof in thy Kingdom.

Thus much touching this Water and Tree of Life.

Verse. 3. And there shall be no more Curse, but the the Throne of God shall be
in it, and his Servants shall serve him.
This is the conclusion of the whole Discourse; and it shows unto us the
blessed effect of the blessed recovering of this City to her first and
primitive state. These words therefore, they are only applicable to this state
of the Church.

For there has no state of the Church been yet in the world, but that state
has been liable to a Curse; but this state, to wit, the state she will be in
at her building again, will be a state without parallel, a state properly her
own. And there shall be no more Curse.

By Curse in this place we are chiefly to understand, not the taking away of
the Curse, the eternal Curse which separates between God and the soul for ever;
for so the Curse in this sense has always been taken away, by virtue of the
terms, the general terms of the New Covenant, and that in common for every
Saint in all ages: But by Curse here, we are Gal. 3. 13 Zeph. 1. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17.
to understand that, or those Curses, that do, and have frequently befallen the
Church for her Sin and Apostasy; as Isa. 43. 28
namely, the giving up his People to their own darkness and ignorance; his
suffering Jer. 29. 18. and 44. 8, 12. Amos 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
them to swerve from his true Worship and Ordinances; his giving them up into
the hand of those that hate them, to become among them a hissing, a taunt, a
reproach, and a byword, as it is at this day: his taking away from them the
means, to wit, the outward Word of the Gospel, and suffering them to be even at
the point to famish for the want thereof. These and other things are the Curses
that he here says shall be no more among his People; for indeed they shall
not, because the Gospel-Pattern shall never be removed more; nor their Light to
see, nor their Love to practice, never be Isa. 33. 16.
diminished more; Their defense, also, shall be the munition of Rocks; bread
shall be given them, and their waters shall be sure: As here, you find the Tree
and River of the Water of Life are fixed now in the midst of this City.
Wherefore now the Church (as I have all-along showed you) shall have her Sun at
the height; her Light as the light of seven days, and shall go no more down
for ever: Also she shall never be pulled down; She shall be a Tabernacle that
shall never be pulled down, neither shall one of the cords thereof be loosed,
or one of her stakes again removed. There shall be no more Curse.

But the Throne of God shall be in it. Indeed, here lies the reason of all
blessedness to any People, even the Presence of God. Now the Presence of God is
with his People, either at times and seasons, or all together: He will not be
to this City a God of times and seasons, Zeph. 3. 17.
even like a wayfaring man that tarries but Jer. 14. 8, 9.
for a night, as He used to be to his People of old, but here he will abide,
rest, Zech. 2. 10, 11.
and dwell, I will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 43. 9.
and my House shall be built in it, says the Lord; and again, I will dwell in
the midst of Jerusalem for ever: wherefore John considering this, he says,
there shall be here no more any Cnrse, but the Throne of God. God will now when
he returns to Jerusalem, bring his Seat with him, to signify his sitting down
in the midst his People, to be their company-keeper for ever.

But the Throne of God shall be in it. By this word Throne, we are to
understand, yet further, these particular things.

First, How blessed a state this City will be in at all times, for the answer
of of prayer; the Throne of God will be in the midst of them; the Throne of
Grace, the Mercy-Seat, they will be open now to all the Inhabitants of this
City; yea, the fame thereof shall so spread, that it shall be rumored among all
Nations, that in Jerusalem God will be found speedily; that in Jerusalem the
God of Heaven and eternal Mercy is found at all times by them that seek his
face. My House, Isa. 56. 7.
says he, shall be called, a House of Prayer for all Nations. Yea, many
People, and strong Nations shall at that day come to seek the Lord at
Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. And at that day, the very Fasts of the
House of God, shall Zech. 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.
be to the House of Judah, Joy and gladness, and cheerful Feasts; therefore
Love, Truth and Peace.

Secondly, The Throne of God being now established in this City, what a
government, what rule, what a life of holiness and godliness, what dread and
majesty will now be in the hearts of all the Sons o^ this City! How to an hairs
breadth Isa. 48. 17
will he command and guide them with his eye at all times, when they should
either turn to to the right hand or to the left: What Wisdom (I say) what
Holiness, what Grace and Life will be found in all their words and actions? The
Throne of God is among them, from which there will come continual influence,
light and splendour into all their hearts. Hear the Word of the Lord, O ye
Nations, and declare it in the Isles afar off. He that scattered Jacob, will
gather him, and keep him, as a Shepherd does his Sheep: for the Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that is stronger than he.
Therefore they shall come, and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord, for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil, and
for the young of the Flock and of the Herd; and their Jer. 31. 1^ 11, 12, 13.
soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all.

Thirdly, The Throne of God being in this City, there is also thereby
discovered what sway and commanding an Authority this City will have at this
day, (as I have already showed you) over all the Earth: The Lord shall roar out
of Zion, and shall utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the
Earth shall Isa. 2. 9, 10. Joel 3. 16
shake; but the Lord shall be the Hope of his People, and the Strength of the
Children of Israel. This was figured forth by the Throne of Solomon, in the
days when that City was in its prosperity; which Throne, to show the majesty
and commanding awe that then that City had over all, both far and near; it had
for the bearers of the steps twelve Lions, six on 1 Kings 10. 18, 19 20.
this side, and six on that side of the Throne. This City shall then be the
Head and Chief, but the Tail and Reproach no more: Glorious things are spoken
Psalm. 87. 3
of thee, O City of God.

And his Servants shall serve him. That is, him only: Indeed his Servants serve
him always, but yet withal they do too too often serve with the wills and lusts
of men even in their Service and worshipping God; that is, they serve him in
much Affliction, Temptation, Fear and Persecution, but then they shall serve
him without any of these: Yea, they shall take them Captives whose Captives
they were, and they shall rule over their Oppressors. And it shall come to pass
in that day (O City) that the Lord shall Isa. 14. 23
give thee [REST] from thy Sorrow, and from the hard Bondage wherein thou wast
made to serve, and thou shall serve the Lord Luke 1. 74, 75.
thy God without fear in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of
thy life.

And they shall see his face. This also argues a very great dispensation of
Grace and Mercy to this Jerusalem. When God did deliver up his People into the
hand of the King of Babylon, Deuteronomy. 31 17. Jer. 33. 5
he said, it should be done in fury and in anger, and that for their wickedness
he would hide his face from his City. Wherefore by the sight of his face here,
we are to understand that glorious visible appearance of God that then will be
for this City and People in the face of all the world: For by the Face of God,
1 Pet. 3. 12. Job 6. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
we are to understand the discovery of his Severity, Providence and wonderful
Outgoings among the sons of men; as also the glorions breaking forth of Grace,
Mercy and Forgiveness through Christ Jesus; all which, the People of God shall
then most marvellously see and behold.

First, They shall see his Severity and Judgments upon the Whore.

Secondly, They shall see how God by his strange Judgments and works of Wonder
has brought this about: Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Rev.
15. 4.
Name? for thou only art holy; for all Nations shall come and worship before
thee^ for thy Judgments are made manifest. Judge. 5* 11.
They that are delivered from the noise of Archers in the places of drawing
water; there shall they rehearse the righteous Acts of the Lord even the
righteous Acts toward the Inhabitants of his Villages in Israel.

Thirdly, And as for his Mercy, they Psalm. 148. 14.
shall see that their Horn is exalted, and that they are near to him. Praise ye
the Lord.

And his Name shall be in their foreheads. And his Name] That is, his Fear and
Image, it shall appear in all their doings. Sometimes he says he will write
his Fear and Law in their hearts and minds. Which Fear and Law is all one with
that which in this place he calls his Name in their foreheads. The forehead
of a man is the place, above all parts of the body, that is most naked and
plain to be beheld of all that pas^ by; wherefore when he says their Fathers
Name shall be in their foreheads; it is, as if he had said, The Profession of
my People shall now be open, and the beauty of it apparent to all beholders; I
will make them, says God, a Name and Zeph. 3. 20.
a Praise among all the People of the Earth, when I turn back your Captivity
before your eyes. Every Face shall then shine with Oil, as well as every heart
be replenished with Milk and Wine. This was held forth by the Memorial that the
Israelites were to wear at God's command, Exodus 13 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 5. 8.
between their eyes: Which Memorial, was the Doctrine of Unleavened-Bread, and
of the Paschal-Lamb, the Doctrine of Faith and Holiness. Wherefore by Name
here, he means the Faith and Holiness of the Gospel, which in those days shall
walk openly with Honor, with Reverence and Esteem before all men. At this day
the World will, as I have said, be so far off from opposing and persecuting,
that they shall wonder and tremble and fear before this People; yea, be taken,
affected, and pleased with the welfare of this Beloved. The Mountains and the
Hills shall break forth before Isa. 55. 12
her into singing, and all the Trees of the Field shall clap their hands: All
Nations shall call them blessed; for they shall be a delight some Land, says
the Lord of Hosts, Malac. 3. 12. The Waters of Noah shall now be no more, the
tumultuous Multitudes shall now be gone, and there Isa. 54. 9. Psalm. 65. 7. and
89. 9. Rev. 21. 1, 2. Genesis 8. 4, 5, etc.
will be no more Sea: Now therefore the Doves may be gathering their
Olivebranches, and also find rest for the soals of their feet, while the Ark
shall rest upon the Mountains of Ararat.

The Wolf shall (now) dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with
the Kid; the Calf and the young Lion, and the Fatling together; and a little
Child shall lead them. The Lion shall eat Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 56. 25.
straw like an Ox. And the little Child shall play at the hole of the Asp,
and the weaned Child shall put his hand into the Cockatrices den. They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain, says the Lord.

Blessed is he whose lot it will be to see this holy City descending and
lighting upon the place that shall be prepared for her situation and rest! Then
will be a Golden World; Wickedness shall then be ashamed, especially that which
persecutes the Church: Holiness, Goodness, and Truth, shall then with great
boldness, countenance, and reverence, walk upon the face of all the Earth. From
the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, my Name shall be
great among the Gentiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered to my
Mal. 1. 11.
Name, and a pure Offering: for my Name shall be Great among the Heathen, says
the Lord of Hosts. 'Twill be then always Summer, always Sunshine, always
pleasant, green, fruitful, and beautiful to the Sons of God. And it shall come
to pass in that day that the Mountains shall drop down new Wine, and the Hills
shall flow with Milk, and all the Rivers of Judah shall flow with Water; and a
Fountain shall come forth of the House of the Lord, and shall water the valley
Joel 3. 18 20.
of Shittem; and Judah shall dwell for ever, even from Generation to
Generation. And the name of the City shall be from that day, THE LORD IS THERE.
[Oh Blessedness!] And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true. And
Rev. 22. 6
the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his Servants,
things that MUST SHORTLY be done.

I conclude therefore with that earnest Groan of Moses the Man of God: O
satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice, and be glad all our
days! Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil. Let thy Work Psalm. 90. 14, 15, 16, 17.
appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory to their Children; and let the Beauty
of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the work of our hands; yea,
the work of our hands, establish thou it.

Amen.
THE END.

