THE GREATNESS OF THE SOUL, And unspeakableness of the Loss thereof; with the
Causes of the Losing it.

First Preached at Pinners-Hall, and now Enlarged, and Published for Good.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wild, at the Sign of the Map of the World in St.
Paul's- Churchyard, MDCXCI.

THE GREATNESS OF THE SOUL, And unspeakableness of the Loss thereof, etc.
MARK 8. 37. Or What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?
I Have chosen at this time to handle these Words among you, and that for
several reasons, 1. Because the Soul, and the Salvation of it, are such great,
such wonderful great things, nothing is a matter of that concern as is, and
should be the Soul of each one of you. House and Land, Trades and Honors,
Places and Preferments, What are they to Salvation? to the Salvation of the
Soul? 2. Because I perceive that this, so great a thing, and about which
Persons should be so much concerned, is neglected to amazement, and that by the
most of Men: Yea, who is there of the many thousand (that sit daily under the
sound of the Gospel) that a^ concerned, heartily concerned about the Salvation
(...) their Souls? that is concerned, I say, as the Natu^^ of the thing
requires. If ever a Lamentation wa^ fit to be taken up in this Age, about,
for, or con^cerning any thing, it is about, for, and concerning the horrid
neglect, that every where puts forth it se^ with reference to eternal
Salvation. Where is on^ Man of a thousand? yea, Where is there two of te^
thousand that do show by their Conversations public^ and private, that the
Soul, their own Souls, are considered by them, and that they are taking that
car^ ^or the Salvation of them as becomes them, to wit^ as the weight of the
Work, and the Nature of Sa^^vation requires. 3. I have therefore pitched upon
this Text at this time; to see, if peradventure the Discourse which God shall
help me to make upon it will (...) ^en you, rouse you off of your Beds of ease
(...) and pleasure, and fetch you down upon you^ Knees before him, to beg of
him Grace to be con^cerned about the Salvation of your Souls. And the in the
last Place, I have taken upon me to do thi^ that I may deliver, if not you, yet
my self; and tha^ I may be clear of your Blood, and stand quit, a^ to you,
before God, when you shall for neglect b^ damned, and wail to consider that you
have lost you Souls. When I say, says God to the Wicked, the (...) surely dye:
Ezekiel. 3. 18, 19.
and thou the Prophet or Preacher give him not warning, nor speak to warn
the Wicke^ ^om his wicked way to save his life. The same wicke^ Man shall dye
in his iniquity: but his blood will I requir^ at thy hand. Yet if thou warn the
Wicked, and he tur^ not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way; (...)
^all dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy ^oul.

Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

In my handling of these Words. I shall first speak ^o the occasion of them,
and then to the words themselves.

The occasion of the Words was, for that the People that now were Auditors to
the Lord Jesus, and that followed him, did it without that consideration ^s
becomes so great a Work: That is, The genera^ty of them that followed him, were
not for consi^ering first with themselves, what it was to profess Christ, and
what that Profession might cost them.

And when he had called the People unto him the great ^ultitudes that went with
him, Luke 14. 25.) with is Disciples also, he said unto them, whosoever will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and ^ollow me. (ver.
34.) Let him first sit down and ^ount up the Cost and the Charge he is like to
be at, (...) he follows me. For following of me is not like fol^owing of some
other Masters. The Winds sits always (...) my Face, and the foaming Rage of the
Sea of this World, and the proud and lofty Waves thereof, do ^ontinually beat
upon the sides of the Bark or Ship that my self, my Cause, and my Followers are
in: ^e therefore that will not run hazzards, and that (...) afraid to venture a
drowning, let him not set foot unto this Vessel: So whosoever does not bear his
Cross, and come after me, he cannot be my Disciple. For which ^f you intending
to build a Tower, s^^teth not down first and counts the Cost, whether he have
sufficient to finish (...) Luke 14. 15 26. 27 28, 29.

True, To Reason this kind of Language tends to ^ast Water upon weak and
beginning Desires, but (...) Faith it makes the things set before us, and the
^reatness, and the glory of them more apparently excellent and desirable.
Reason will say, Then who will profess Christ that has such course
entertainment at the beginning? but Faith will say, Then surely the things that
are at the End of a Christians race in this World, must needs be unspeakably
glorious; since whoever has had but the knowledge and due consideration of
them, have not stuck to run hazzards, hazzards of every kind, that they might
embrace and enjoy them. Yea, says Faith, it must needs be so, since the Son
himself, that best knew what they were, even, For the joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set down on the
Right Hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12. 2.

But I say, There is not in every Man this knowledge of things, and so by
consequence not such consideration as can make the Cross and self denial
acceptable to them for the sake of Christ, and of the things that are where he
now sits at the Right Hand of God ( Col. 3. 2, 3, 4.) Therefore our Lord
Jesus does even at the beginning give to his followers this instruction. And
lest any of them should take distaste at his Saying, he presents them with
the consideration of three things together: namely, The Cross, the Loss of Life
and the Soul; and then reasons with them for the same, saying, Here is the
Cross, the Life and the Soul. 1. The Cross, and that you must take ^p. if you
will follow me. 2. The Life, and that you may save for a time, if you cast me
off^ 3. And the Soul, which will everlastingly perish if you come not to me,
and abide not with me. Now consider what is best to be done, will you take up
the Cross come after me and so preserve your Souls from perishing? or will you
shun the Cross to save your lives, and so run the danger of eternal damnation?
Or, as you have it in John (will you love your life till you lose it? or will
you hate your life and save it) (...) that loves his life shall lose it, and
he that hates his ^e in this World shall keep it unto life eternal, John 12. ^
5. As who should say, He that loves a temporal ^ife, he that so loves it, as
to shun the profession ^f Christ to save it, shall lose it upon a worse
account, ^han if he had lost it for Christ and the Gospel; but ^e that will set
light by it for the love that he has to Christ, shall keep it unto life
Eternal.

Christ having thus discoursed with his followers a^out their denying of
themselves, their taking up their Cross and following of him: does in the next
^lace put the Question to them, and so leaves it upon them for ever, saying,
For what shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his
own ^oul? (ver. 36) As who should say, I have bid you ^ake heed that you do not
lightly, and without due consideration, enter into a profession of me and of my
Gospel (for he that without due consideration shall ^egin to profess Christ,
will also without it forsake ^im, turn from him, and cast him behind his back)
and since I have even at the beginning laid the con^deration of the Cross
before you, it is because you should not be surprised and overtaken by it
unawares, and because you should know that to draw back from ^he after you have
laid your hand to my Plough will make you Luke 10. 62.
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Now ^^nce this is so, there is no less lies
at stake than Sal^ation, and Salvation is worth all the World, yea, ^orth ten
thousand Worl^s if there should be so many: And since this is so also it will
be your wisdom to begin to process the Gospel with expectation of the ^ross and
tribulation for to that are my Gospellers in ^his World appointed: 2 These. 3, ^
And if you begin thus and should it, the Kingdom and Crown shall be yours: for
as God counts it a righteous thing to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, so to you who are troubled and endure it* for we count them happy,
says, James, that endure, Jam. 1. 12. and 5. 11.) rest with Saints, when the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel, etc. And if no less lies at stake than Salvation then is a Man's Soul
and h^s all at the stake: and if it be so, What will it profit a Man, if by
forsaking of me he should get the whole World? For what shall it profit a Man,
if he shall get the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

Having thus laid the Soul in one balance, and the World in the other, and
affirmed that the Soul outbids the whole World, and is incomparably for value
and worth beyond it; in the next place, he descends to a second question (which
is that I have chosen at this time for my Text) saying, Or what shall a Man
give in exchange for his Soul?

In these Words we have first a supposition, and such an one as stands upon a
double bottom.

The Supposition is this, That the Soul is capable of being lost, or thus, it is
possible for a Man to lose his (...). The double bottom that this supposition
is grounded upon, is, 1. A Man's ignorance of the worth of his Soul, and of the
danger that it is in: And the second is, for that Men commonly do set an higher
price upon present ease and enjoyments than they do upon eternal Salvation. The
last of these does naturally follow upon the first; for if Men be ignorant of
the value and worth of their Souls, as by Christ in the Verse before is
employed; what should hinder but that Men should set an higher esteem upon that
with which their carnal desires are taken, then upon that about which they are
not concerned, and of which they know not the worth.

But again, As this by the Text is clearly supposed, so there is also something
implied: namely, That it is impossible to possess some Men with the worth of
their Souls, until they are utterly and everlastingly lost. What shall a Man
give in exchange for his Soul? That is Men, when their Souls are lost, and shut
down under the Hatches in the Pits, and Hells, in endless perdition and
destruction: Then they will see the worth of their Souls, then they will
consider what they have lost, and truly not till then. This is plain, not only
to sense, but by the natural scope of the words, What shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? Or what would not those that are now for sin made to see
themselves lost, by the light of Hell Fire (for some will never be convinced
that they are lost, till with rich Dives they see it in the light of Hell
Flames:)* say, what would not such, if they had it, Luke 16. 22, 23.
give in exchange for their immortal Souls, or to recover them again from that
place and torment?

1. The first is, That the loss of the Soul is the highest, the greatest Loss;
a Loss that can never be repaired or made up. What shall a Man give in exchange
for his Soul? that is, to recover or redeem his lost Soul to liberty.

I shall observe two Truths in the Words.

2. The second Truth is this, That how unconcerned and careless soever some now
be, about the Loss or Salvation of their Souls: yet the day is coming (but it
will then be too late) when Men will be willing, had they never so much, to
give it all in exchange for their Souls. For so the Question implies, what
shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? What would he not give? What would
he not part with at that day; the day in which he shall see himself damned, if
he had it, in exchange for his Soul?

The first Observation or truth drawn from the words is cleared by the Text,
what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? That is, There is not any
thing, nor all the things under Heaven, were they all in one Man's Hand, and
all at his disposal, that would go in exchange for the Soul, that would be of
value to fetch back one lost Soul, or that would certainly recover it from the
confines of Hell. Psalm. 49. 8.
The redemption of the Soul is precious, it cease for ever. And what says
the words before the Text but the same; For what shall it profit a Man, if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? What shall profit a Man that
has lost his Soul? nothing at all, though he has by that Loss gained the whole
World; for all the World is not worth a Soul, not worth a Soul in the Eye of
God, and judgment of the Law. And it is from this consideration that good Elihu
cautioneth Job to take heed, because there is wrath (says he) beware, lest he
take thee away with his stroke: when a great Ransom cannot deliver thee. Will
he esteem thy Riches? no not Gold, nor all the Forces of Strength, Job 36. 18,
19. Riches and Power, What is there more in the World, for Money answers all
things? that is, all but Soul-concerns: it can neither be a price for Souls
while here, nor can that with all the Forces of Strength recover one out of
Hell Fire.

Doct. 1. ^o then, The first Truth drawn from the Words stands firm; namely,
That the L^ss of the Soul is the highest, the greatest Loss, a Loss that can
never be repaired or made up.

In my discourse upon this subject, I shall observe this method:

I. I shall show you what the Soul is.

II. I shall show you the greatness of it.

III. I shall show you what it is to lose the Soul.

IV. I shall show you the cause for which Men lose their Souls, and by this
time the Greatness of the Loss will be manifest.

I. I shall show you what the Soul is, both as to the various names it goes
under, as also by describing of it by its powers and properties, though in all
I shall be but brief, for I intend no long discourse.

I. The Soul is often called the Heart of Man, or that, in and by which things
to either good or evil have their rise: thus desires are of the Heart or Soul,
yea before desires, the first conception of good or ev^lare in the Soul, the
Heart. The Heart understands, wills, affects, reasons, judges, but these are
the faculties of the Soul; wherefore Heart and Soul, are often taken for one
and the same. Prove. 23. 26. Mat. 15. 19. 1 Pet. 3. 15. Ps. 26. 6.
My Son, give me thy Heart. Out of the Heart proceeds evil thoughts, etc.

2. The Soul of Man is often called the Spirit of a Man: because it not only
gives Being, but life to all things and actions in, and done by him. Hence
Soul and Spirit are put together as to the same action. Isa. 26. 9.
Wi^h my Soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my Spirit within me
will I seek thee early: when he says, yea with my Spirit I will seek thee; he
explaineth not only with what kind of desires he desired God, but with what
principal matter his desires were brought forth: It was with my Soul, says he,
to wit, With my Spirit within me. So that of Mary, My Soul, says she, does
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: not, that
Soul and Spirit are in this place to be taken for two superior Powers in Man:
but the same great Soul is here put under two names or terms, to show that it
was the principal part in Mary, to wit, her Soul that magnified God, even that
part that could spirit, and put life into her whole self to do it. Indeed
sometimes Spirit is not taken so largely, but is confined to some one power or
faculty of the Soul; Joh 20. 3.
As the Spirit of my Understanding; and be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind;
and sometimes by Spirit, we a^e to understand other things, but many times by
Spirit we must understand the Soul, and also by Soul the Spirit.

3. Therefore by Soul we understand the Spiritual, the best, and most noble
part of Man, as distinct from the Body, even that by which we understand,
imagine, reason, and discourse. And indeed (as I shall further show you
presently) the Body is but a poor empty Vessel, without this great Thing,
called the SOUL Jam. 2. 26.
The Body without the Spirit or Soul, is dead, or nothing but a clod of dust
(her Soul departed from her, for she died.) It is therefore the chief and most
noble part of Man.

4. The Soul is often called the Life of Man, not a Life of the same Stamp and
Nature of the Bruit: for the Life of Man, that is, of the rational Creature, is
that, as he is such, wherein, consists and abides the Understanding, and
Conscience, etc. Wherefore then a Man dies, or the Body cease to act, or
live in the exercise of the thoughts, which formerly used to be in him: When
the Soul departs, as I hinted even now, her Soul departed from her, for she
died; and as another good Man says, Ps. 146. 4.
In that very day their thoughts perish, etc. The first Text is more
emphatical: Her Soul was in departing (for she dyed.) There is a Soul of a
Beast, a Bird, etc. but the Soul of a Man is another thing: it is his
Understanding, and Reason, and Conscience, etc. And this Soul, when it departs,
he dies. Nor is this life, when gone out of the Body annihilate, as is the Life
of a Beast; no, this in it self is immortal, and has yet a Place and Being when
gone out of the Body it dwelt in; yea, as quick, as lively is it in its Senses,
if not far more abundant than when it was in the Body; but I call it the Life,
because so long as that remains in the Body, the Body is not dead. And in this
sense it is to be taken where he says, He that loses his life for my sake,
shall save it unto life eternal: And this is the Soul that is intended in the
Text, and not the Breath, as in some other places is meant. And this is
evident, because the Man has a Being, a sensible Being, after he has lost the
Soul; I mean not by the Man, a Man in this World, nor yet in the Body or in the
Grave; but by Man we must understand either the Soul in Hell, or Body and Soul
there after the Judgment is over. And for this the Text also is plain, for
therein we are presented with a Man sensible of the damage that he has
sustained by losing of his Soul: What shall a Man give in exchange for his
Soul? But,

5. The whole Man goes under this denomination: Man consisting of Body and
Soul, is yet called by that part of himself, that is most chief and principal.
Romans 13. 1.
Let every Soul (that is, let every Man) be subject to the higher Powers. Then
sent Joseph, and called his Father Jacob to him, and all his Kindred,
threes^ore and fifteen Souls, Acts 7. 14. By both these, and several other
places, the whole Man is meant, and is also so to be taken in the Text; for
whereas here he says, What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the the
whole World and l^se his own Soul? It Is said elsewhere, Luke 9. 25.
For what is a Man advantaged if he shall gain the whole World and lose
H^MSELF? and so consequently, or, What shall a Man give in exchange (for
himself) for his Soul? his Soul when he dies, and Body and Soul in and after
Judgment?

6. The Soul is called Good Man's Darling. Ps. 22. 20.
Deliver Lord (said David) my Soul from the Sword^ my Darling, from the Power
of the Dog: So again in another place he says, Ps. 35. 17.
Lord how long will thou look on, rescue my Soul from destruction, my darling
from the Power of the Lions? My darling, this Sentence must not be applied
universally, but only to those in whose Eyes their Souls, and the redemption
thereof is precious. My Darling, most Men do by their actions say of their
Soul, my drudge, my slave; nay, thou slave to the Devil and Sin: for what sin,
what lust, what sensual and beastly lust is there in the World, that some do
not cause their Souls to bow before and yield unto? But David here, as you see,
calls it his Darling, or his choice and most excellent thing; for indeed the
Soul is a choice thing in it self, and should, were all wise, be every Man's
darling or chief treasure. And that it might be so with us, therefore our Lord
Jesus has thus expressed the worth of the Soul, saying, What shall a Man give
in exchange for his Soul? But if this is true, one may see already what misery
he is like to sustain, that has, or shall lose his Soul; he has lost his Heart,
his Spirit. his best Part, his Life, his darling, himself, his whole self, and
so in every sense, his all: And now what shall a man, What would a Man, But
what can a Man that has thus lost his Soul, himself, and his all, give in
exchange for his Soul? Yea, What shall the Man that has sustained this L^ss to
recover all again, since this Man, or the Man ^ut under this Question, must
needs be a Man that is gone from hence, a Man that is cast in the judgment, and
one that is gone down the Throat of Hell?

But to pass this, and to proceed: I come next to describe the Soul unto you,
by such things as it is set ^ut by in the Holy Scriptures, and they are in
general ^hree.

I. The Of the Powers of Faculties of the Soul.
Power of the Soul.

II. The Senses, the Spiritual Senses of the Soul.

III. The Passions of the Soul.

I. We will discourse of the Powers, I may call them the Members of the Soul;
for as the Members ^f the Body being many, do all go to the making up ^f the
Body, so these do go to the completing of the ^oul.

1. There is the Understanding; which may be ^ermed the Head, because in that
is placed the Eye ^f the Soul: and this is that which, or by which the ^oul
discerns things that are presented to it, and that either by God, or Satan:
This is that by which Man conceives, and apprehends things so deep and great
that cannot by Mouth, or Tongue, or Pen ^e expressed.

2. There is also belonging to the Soul, the Con^ience, in which I may say is
placed the seat of Judgment; for as by the Understanding things are let in
Sword^ the Soul, so by the Conscience the evil or good ^f such things are
tried, especially when in the.

3. Place the Judgment, which is another part of his noble Creature, has
passed, by the light of the ^nderstanding, his verdict upon what is let in to
the ^oul.

4. There is as also the Fancy or Imagination, another part of this great
thing* the Soul; and a most curious thing this Fancy is: It is that which
presents to the Man the idea, form or figure of that, or any of those things
wherewith a Man is frighted or taken, pleased or displeased. And,

5. The mind (another part of the Soul) is that unto which this Fancy
presents its things to be considered of, because, without the mind nothing is
entertained in the Soul.

6. There is the memory too, another part of the Soul; and that may be called
the Register of the Soul: for it is the memory that receives and keeps in
remembrance what has passed, or has been done by the Man, or attempted to be
done unto him: And in this part of the Soul, or from it will be fed the Worm
that dies not when Men are cast into Hell; also from this Memory will flow
that peace at the day of Judgment, that Saints shall have in their service for
Christ in the World.

7. There are the Affections too, which are as I may call them, the Hands and
Arms of the Soul; for they are they that take hold of, receive and embrace what
is liked by the Soul: And it is a hard thing to make the Soul of a Man cast
from it what its affections cleave to and have embraced. Hence the Affections
are called for, when the Apostle bids Men Col. 3.
seek the things above; set your Affections upon them, says he: or as you have
it in another place, Lay hold of them; for the Affections are as hands to the
Soul, and they by which it fasrneth upon things.

8. There is the Will, which may be called the Foot of the Soul, because by
that the Soul, yea, the whole Man is carried, hither and thither, or else held
back, and kept from moving.

These are the golden Things of the Soul; though in carnal Men they are every
one of them made use of in the Service of Sin and Satan. For the Unbelieving
are throughout impure, as is manifest, because their Tit. 1. 15.
Mind and Conscience (two of the Masterpieces of the Soul) are defiled: for if
the most potent Parts of the Soul are engaged in their service, what think you,
do the more inferior do? But I say, so it is, the more is the pity: nor can any
help it, This work cease for ever, unless the great God who is over all, and
that can Souls, shall himself take upon him to sanctify the Soul* and to
recover it, and persuade it to fall in love with another Master.

But I say, What is Man, without this Soul, or Eccl. 3. 19. 20, 21.
wherein lies his preeminence over a Beast? no where that I know of. For both
(as to Man's Body) go to one place, only the Spirit or Soul of a Man goes
upward, to wit, to God that gave it, to be by him disposed of with respect to
things to come, as they have been and have done in this life. But,

2. I come in the next place Of the Senses of the Soul.
to describe the Soul by its Senses, its spiritual Senses, for so I call them:
for as the Body has Senses partaining to it, and a^ it can see, hear, smell,
feel and taste, so can the Soul; I call therefore these the Senses of the Soul,
in opposition to the Senses of the Body, and because the Soul is the Seat of
all spiritual Sense, where supernatural things are known and enjoyed; not that
the Soul of a natural Man is spiritual in the Apostles sense, for so none are,
but those that are born from above, nor Cor. 3. 1, 2. 3.
they so always neither. But to go forward.

1. Can the Body see? Has it eyes? so has the Soul. The Eyes of the
Understanding Ephesians. 1. 18. Of Sight.
being enlightened. As then the Body can see Beasts, Trees, Men, and all visible
things, so the Soul can see God, Christ, Angels, Heaven, Devils, Hell, and
other things that are invisible, nor is this property only peculiar to the
Souls that are illuminated by the Holy Ghost; for the most carnal Soul in the
World shall have a time to see these things, but not to its comfort; but not to
its joy, but to its endless woe and misery, it dying in that condition.
Wherefore Sinner, Job. 35. 14.
say not thou, I shall not see him, for Judgment is before him, and he will
make thee see him.

2. Can the Body bear, Of hearing.
has it ears? so has the Soul (See Job 4. 12, 13.) It is the Soul, not the
Body, that hears the Language of things invisible. It Is the Soul that hears God
when he speaks in and by his Word and Spirit, and it is the Soul that hears the
Devil when he speaks by his illusions and temptations. True, there is such an
Union between the Soul and the Body, that oft-times if not always, that which
is heard by the Ears of the Body, does influence the Soul, and that which is
heard by the Soul, does also influence the Body; but yet as to the Organ of
Hearing, the Body has one of his own distinct from that of the Soul, and the
Soul can hear and regard even then when the Body does not, nor cannot. As in
time of sleep, deep sleep and trances, when the Body lies by as a thing that
is useless. For God peaks once, Job. 33. 14, 15, 16.
yea twice, yet Man (as to his Body) perceives it not. In a Dream, in a Vision
of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon Men, in slumbrings upon the Bed.
Then opens he the Ears of Men and seals their instruction, etc. this must
be meant of the Ears of the Soul, not of the Body; for that at this time, is
said to be in deep sleep; moreover, this hearing, it is a Hearing of Dreams and
the Visions of the Night. Jeremiah Jer. 31. 26.
also tells us, That he had the rare and blessed Visions of God in his sleep;
and so does Daniel too, by the which they were greatly comforted and refreshed:
but that could not be, was not the Soul also capable of hearing? Dan. 10, 8, 9.
I heard the Voice of his words (said Daniel) and when I heard the Voice of his
words, I was in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the Ground.

3. As the Soul can see and hear, so it can Of tasting.
taste and relish, even as really as does the Palate belonging to the Body. But
then the thing so tasted must be that which is suited to the Temper and Palate
of the Soul. The Souls taste lies not in, nor is exercised about meats, the
Meats that are for the Body. Yet the Soul of a Saint can taste Heb. 6. 5. Ps.
19. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
and relish God's word, and does oft-times find it sweeter than Honey,
nourishing as Milk, and strengthening like to strong Meat. The Soul also of
Sinners and of those that are unsanctified, can taste and relish, though not
the Things now mentioned, yet things that agree with their fleshly minds* and
with their polluted and defiled, and vile affections. They can relish and taste
that which delights them; yea they can find Soul-delight in an Alehouse, a
Whore-house, a Playhouse. Ay, they find pleasure in the vilest things, in the
things most offensive to God, and that are most destructive to themselves: This
is evident to sense, and is proved by the daily practice of Sinners. Nor is the
Word barren as to this; They feed on ashes, Isa. 44. 20 c. 55. 2. Hos. 4. 8.
they spend their Money for that which is not Bread, yea, they eat and suck
sweetness out of sin, They eat up the Sin of my People as they eat Bread.

4. As the Soul can see, hear Of Smelling.
and taste, so it can smell, and bring refreshment to it self that way. Hence
the Church says, Cant. 5. 5. 13.
Her Fingers dropped with sweet smelling Myrrh: and again, she says of her
beloved, That his Lips dropped sweet smelling Myrrh. But how came the Church to
understand this, but because her Soul did smell that in it, that was to be
smelled in it, even in his word and gracious visits. The poor World indeed
cannot smell, or savor any thing of the good and fragrant scent and sweet that
is in Christ: but to them that believe, His name Cant. 1. 3.
is as an ointment poured fourth, and therefore the Virgins love him.

5. As the Soul can see, taste, hear, and smell, Of feeling. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 2.
so it has the sense of feeling, as quick and as sensible as the Body: He
knows nothing that knows not this; he whose Soul is past feeling, has his
Conscience ^eared with an hot Iron. Nothing so sensible as the Soul, nor
feels so quickly the Love and Mercy, or the Anger and Wrath of God. Ask the
awakened Man, or the Man that is under the Convictions of the Law, If he does
not feel? and he will quickly tell you, That he faints and dies away by reason
of God's hand and his wrath that lies upon him: read the first eight Verses of
the 38 th. Psalm. (if thou know nothing of what I have told thee by
experience) and there thou shall hear the Complaints of one whose Soul lay at
present under the Burden of guilt, and that cried out that without help from
Heaven, he could by no means bear the same. They also that know what the Peace
of God means, and what an eternal weight there is in Glory, know well that the
Soul has the sense of feeling, as well as the sense of seeing, hearing, tasting
and smelling: but thus much for the senses of the Soul.

Thirdly, I come in the next place to describe the Soul, by the Passions of the
Soul. The Passions of the Soul, I reckon, are these and such like: to Wit,
Love, Hatred, Joy, Fear, Grief, Anger, etc. Of the Passions of the Soul.
And these Passions of the Soul are not therefore good, nor therefore evil,
because they are the Passions of the Soul: but are made so by two things, to
wit, Principle and Object. The Principle I count that from whence they flow,
and the Object that upon which they are pitched. To explain my self,

1. For that of Love, This is a strong Passion, the Holy Ghost says, Of Love,
Cant. 8* 6, 7.
It Is strong as Death, and cruel as the Grave. And it is then good, when it
flows from Faith, and pitches it self upon God in Christ as the Object; and
when it extends it self to all that is good, whether it be the good Word, the
good Work of grace, or the good Men that have it, and also to their good lives.
But all Soul-love flows not from this principle, neither has these for its
object. How many are there that make the Object of their Love, the most vile of
Men, the most base of things, because it flows from vile Affections, and from
the Lusts of the Flesh? God and Christ, good Laws, and good Men, and their holy
lives, they cannot abide, because their love wants a Principle that should
sanctify it in its first motion and that should steer it to a goodly Object,
but that is the first.

2. There is Of Hatred.
Hatred, which I count another Passion of the Soul: And this, as the other, is
good or evil, as the Principle from whence it flows, and the Object of it are.
Ye that Ps. 97. 10.
love the Lord, hate evil^ then therefore is this passion good, when it
singleth out from the many of things that are in the World* that one filthy
thing called Sin, and when it setteh i^ self, the Soul, and the whole Man
against it, and in^gageth all the Powers of the Soul to seek and inven^ its
ruin: But alas, where shall this Hatred be found* What Man is there whose Soul
is filled with his passi^on thus sanctified by the Love of God, and tha^ makes
sin which is God's enemy, the only object o^ its indignation? How many be
there, I say. who^ hatred is turned another way, because of the malig^nity of
their minds.

They hate Pr^v. 1. 2^ Deuteronomy. 7. 10. 2 Chr. 1^. 2. Ps. 34. 21. Prove. 29. 1^ Job
21. 14. Mal. 3. 14. Prove. 8. 12.
Knowledge.

They hate God.

They hate the Righteous.

They hate God's ways.

And all is because the Grace of final fear is not the Root and Principle from
whence their hatred flows For the Fear of the Lord is to hate evil; wherefore
where this grace is wanting for a Root in the Sou^ there it must of necessity
swerve in the letting out ^ this passion, because the Soul where grace is
wanting is not at liberty to act simply, but is biased by the Power of Sin,
that while grace is absent, is prese^ in the Soul.

And hence it is, that this Passion (which when acted well, is a Virtue) is so
abused and made to exercise its force against that for which God never ordained
it, nor gave it license to act.

3. Another Passion of the Soul is Of Joy.
joy, and when the Soul rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the 1 Cor.
13. 6.
Truth. This Joy is a very strong Passion, and will carry a Man through a world
of difficulties: it is a Passion that bears up, that supporteth and
strengthens a Man, let the Object of his joy be what it will. It Is this that
makes the Soul fat in goodness, if it have its object accordingly, and that
which makes the Soul bold in wickedness, if it indeed does rejoice in iniquity.

4. Another passion of the Soul is Of Fear.
Fear, natural fear (for so you must understand me of all the Passions of the
Soul, as they are considered simply, and in their own nature.) And as it is
with the other Passions, so it is with this, it is made good or evil in its
acts, as its principle and objects are; when this passion of the Soul is good,
then it springs from sense of the greatness and goodness, and Majesty of God;
also God himself is the object of this fear; I will Mat. 10. 18. Luke 12. 5.
forewarn you (says Christ) whom ye shall fear, Fear him that can destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him: But in all Men this
passion is not regulated and governed by these Principles and Objects; but is
abused and turned through the Policy of Satan, quite into another channel. It
is Numb. 41. 9. 2 Kings 17. 38. 7.
made to fear Men, to fear Idols, to fear Devils and Witches, yea it is made to
fear all the foolish, ridiculous and apish Fables, that every old Woman or
Atheistical Fortune Tellers, has the Face to drop before the Soul. But fear is
another passion of the Soul.

5. Another passion of the Soul is Grief, Of Grief.
and it as those aforenamed, acts even according as it is governed. When
holiness, is lovely and beautiful to the Soul, and when the Name of Christ is
more precious than life, then will the Soul sit down and be afflicted, because
Men keep not God's Law. I beheld Psalm. 119. 158.
the Transgressors and was grieved, because they keep not thy word: So Christ,
he looked round about with anger, Being grieved for the Mark. 3. 5*
hardness of their hearts. But it is rarely seen that this passion of the Soul
is thus exercised. Almost every body has other things for the spending of the
heat of this passion upon: Men are grieved that they thrive no more in the
World; grieved that they have no more carnal, sensual and worldly honor;
grieved that they are suffered no more to range in the Lusts and Vanities of
this life: but all this is because the Soul is unacquainted with God, sees no
beauty in holiness, but is sensual and, wrapped up in clouds and thick darkness.

6. And lastly, There is Of Anger.
Anger; which is another passion of the Soul: And that as the rest, is extended
by the Soul, according to the Nature of the Principle by which it is acted, and
from whence it flows* And in a word, to speak nothing of the fierce^ness and
power of this passion, it is then cursed* when it breaks out beyond the
bounds that God has set it, the which to be sure it does when it shall by its
fierceness or irregular mo^tion, run the Soul into sin. Be angry and Ephesians. 4.
26, 27.
sin not is the Limitation wherewith God has bounded thi^ ^assion: and
whatever is more than this, is a gi^ing place to the Devil.

And one reason among others, Why the Lord does ^o strictly set this bound, and
these limits to anger, (...) that it is so furious a Passion, and for that it
^ill so quickly swell up the Soul with sin, as they say, Toad swells with its
poison. Yea, it will in a moment ^o transport the Spirit of a Man, that he
shall quickly ^orget himself, his God, his Friend and all good ^ule: but my
business is not now to make a Com^ent upon the Passions of the Soul, only to
show ^ou that there are such, and also which they are.

And now from this description of the Soul, what ^ollows but to put you in mind
what a noble, power^ul, lively, sensible thing the Soul is, that by the Text is
supposed may be lost, through the heedles^ess, or carelessness, or slavish fear
of him whose Soul ^t is; and also to stir you up to that care of, and la^our
after the Salvation of your Soul, as becomes the Weight of the Matter; if the
Soul were a trivial Thing, or if a Man though he lost it, might yet himself be
happy, it were another matter: but the ^oss of the Soul is no small loss, nor
can that Man that has lost his Soul, had he all the World, yea the whole
Kingdom of Heaven in his own power, be but ^n a most fearful and miserable
condition: but of these things more in their place.

Having thus given you a Description of the Of the greatness of the Soul when
compared with the Body.
Soul, what it is: I shall in the next place show you the Greatness of it: And
the first thing that I shall take occasion to make this manifest by, will be
showing you the Disproportion that is betwixt the and the Body: And I shall do
it in these followi^ particulars,

1. The Body is called The Body an House for the Soul.
the House of the (...) an House for the Soul to dwell in. Now every bo^ knows
that the House is much inferior to him, (...) by God's Ordinance is appointed
to dwell therei^ that it is called the House of the Soul, you find Paul to the
Corinthians; For 2 Cor. 5.
we know, says h^ if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolve we
have a Building of God, an House not made wi^ hands, eternal in the Heavens. We
have then an Ho^ for our Soul in this world, and this House is the Body, for
the Apostle can mean nothing else: the^^fore he calls it an earthly House. If
our earthly House Our House. But who does he personate, if he says, T^ is an
House for the Soul: for the Body is part of h^ that says, Our House?

In this manner of Language he personates his (...) with the Souls of the rest
that are saved; and the to do, is common with the Apostles, as will be easi^
discerned by them that give attendance to Reading Our earthly Houses; or as Job
says, Job. 4. 19. chapter 13. 12.
Houses (...) Clay, for our Bodies are Bodies of Clay: your r^^membrances are
like unto ashes, your bodies are bodies clay. Indeed he after makes mention of
an Hou^ in Heaven, but that is not it about which he no^ speaks; now he speaks
of this earthly House whi^ we have, we, our Souls, to dwell in, while on the
side Glory, where the other House stands, as rea^ prepared for us when we shall
flit from this to that or in case this should sooner, or later be dissolve* ^ut
that is the first, The Body is compared to the House, but the Soul to him that
inhabiteth the House: Therefore as the Man is more noble than the House (...)
dwells in, so is the Soul more noble than the Body. and yet alas, with grief be
it spoken, How common ^s it for Men to spend all their care, all their time,
^ll their strength, all their wit, and parts for the ^ody and its honor and
preferment, even as if the ^oul were some poor, pitiful, sorry inconsiderable
and under-thing* not worth the thinking of, or not ^orth the caring for. But,

2. The Body clothing for the Soul. Luke 12. 23. ^ Cor. 5. 2, 3, 4.
The Body is called the Clothing, and the Soul that which is clothed therewith.
Now every body ^nows that the Body is more than Raiment, even car^al sense will
teach us this: But read that pregnant place; For we that are in this Tabernacle
do groan, being ^urdened (that is with mortal flesh) not for that we would be
unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality ^ight be swallowed up of life. Thus
the greatness of ^he Soul appears in the preference that it has to the ^ody:
The Body is its Raimen^. We see that above all Creatures, Man, because he is
the most noble among ^ll visible Ones, has for the adoring of his Body, that
more abundant comeliness: it is the Body of Man, not of Beast that is clothed
with the richest Ornaments; ^ut now what a thing is the Soul* that the Body it
^elf must be its clothing! no suit of apparel is by God thought good enough
for the Soul, but that which is made by God himself, and that is that curious
thing ^he Body. But oh! how little is this considered, ^amely, The greatness of
the Soul: It Is the Body, the Clothes, the suit of Apparel that our foolish
fancies ^re taken with: not at all considering the richness and excellency of
that great and more noble part* the Soul; for which the Body is made a Mantle
to wra^ it up in; a Garment to cloth it withal. If a Ma^gets a rent in his
Cloths, it is little in comparison o^ a rent in his Flesh; yea, he comforts
himself when he looks on that rent. saying, thanks be to God, it (...) not a
rent in my Flesh. But ah! on the contrary how many are there in the World, that
are more troubled for that, they have a Rent, a Wound, o^ a Disease in the
Body, than for that they have Soul* that will be lost and cast away. A little
Rent in the Body dejecteth and casts such down, but they are not at all
concerned, though their Soul is now, an^ will yet further be torn in pieces.
Psalm. 50. 22.
Now therefore consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you i^ pieces,
and there be none to deliver: but this is the second thing whereby, or by which
the greatness o^ the Soul appears; to wit, in that the Body, that excellent
piece of God's Workmanship, is but a Garment, or Clothing, for the Soul. But,

3. The Body a Vessel for the Soul. 1 These. 4. 4.
The Body is called a Vessel, or a Case, for the Soul to be put and kept in.
That ev^ry one of yo^ should know how to possess his Vessel in sanctification
an^ honor: The Apostle here does exhort the People to abstain from
fornication: which in another place h^ says, is a Sin against the Body. And
here again h^ says, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
This is the Will of God, your sanctification that you should abstain from
Fornication, that the Body be not defiled, that every one of you should know
how t^ possess his Vessel* in sanctification and honor: His Vessel his Earthen
Vessel, as he calls it in another place, For we have this treasure in Earthen
Vessels: Thus then the Body is called a Vessel, yea every Man's Body is hi^
Vessel. But what has God prepared this Vessel for, and what has he put into it?
Why* many things this Body is to be a Vess^l for, but at present God has put
into it that curious thing, the Soul, Cabinets that (...) rich and costly
things of themselves, are not made nor designed to be Vessels to be stuf^ or
filled with trumpery and things of no value: no, these are prepared for Rings
and J^wel, for Pearls, for Rubies and things that are choice. And if so, what
shall ^^e then think of the Soul, for which it is prepared, and that of God,
the most rich and excellent Vessel in ^he World, surely it must be a think of
worth, yea, of more worth than is the whole World besides. But alas! Who
believes this talk? do not even the most of Men so set their minds upon, and so
admire the glory of this Case or Vessel, that they forget once with seriousness
to think, and therefore must of necessity be a great way off of those suitable
esteem^, that becomes them to have of their Souls. But oh, ^ince this Vessel,
this Cabinet, this Body is so curiously made, and that to receive and contain,
what thing is ^^at for which God has made his Vessel! And what is ^at Soul that
he has put into it? Wherefore thus ^n the third Place is the greatness of the
Soul made ^anifest, even by the Excellency of the Vessel, the Body, that God
has made to put it in.

4. The Body a Tabernacle for the Soul. 2 Pet. 1. 14. Joh. 21. 18, 19. 2 Cor.
5. 1.
The Body is called, a Tabernacle for the ^oul. Knowing shortly I must put off
this my Tabernacle, that is, my Body by Death: So again, For we know that ^ our
Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved we ^ave a b^ilding of God, etc.
In both these places, by ^aberna^le can be mean^ nothing but the Body;
therefore both the Apostles in these sentences do personate their Souls, and
speak as if the Soul wa^ the All of a Man: yea, they plainly tell us, that the
Body is but the House, Cloths, Vessel and Tabe^nacle for the Souls. But what a
famous thing there^fore is the Soul?

The Tabernacle of old, was a place erected for worship but the Worshippers
were far more excelle^^ than the place; so our Body is a Tabernacle for the
Soul to worship God in, but must needs be accounte^ much inferior to the Soul,
for as much as the wor^ shippers are always of more honor than the place the^
worship in: as he that dwells in the Tabernacle^ has more honor than the
Tabernacle. Romans 1. 9.
I serv^ (says, Paul) God and Christ Jesus with my Spirit or So^^ in the
Gospel; but not with his Spirit out of, but i^ this Tabernacle. The Tabernacle
had Instruments o^ worship for the Worshippers, so has the Body for the Soul,
and we are bid to Romans 6. 13.
yield our Members as I^struments of righteousness unto God. The Hands, Feet^
Ears, Eyes and Tongue (which last is our glor^ when used right) are all of them
Instruments of th^^ Tabernacle, and to be made use of by the Soul, the
In^habiter of this Tabernacle for the Souls performance^ of the service of God.

I thus discourse, to show you the greatness of the Soul.

And in mine Opinion there is something, if no^ very much in what I say. For
all Men admire the Body both for its manner of building. and the curi^ous way
of its being compacted together. Yea, the further Men, wise Men, do pry into
the wonderfu^ work of God, that is put forth in framing the Body^ the more
still they are made to admire: and yet, a^ I said, this Body is but a House, a
Mantle, a Vessel^ Tabernacle for the Soul. What then is the Soul it ^elf? But
thus much for the first particular.

2. We will now come to other things that show us ^he Greatness of the Soul. And

1. It is called God's breath of life. The Soul is called God's breath. Genesis 2.
7.
And the Lord God formed Man, that is, the Body, of the Dust of ^he Ground, and
breathed into his Nostrils the breath of ^ife, and he became a living Soul. Do
but compare ^hese two together, the Body and the Soul: The Body is made of
Dust, the Soul is the Breath of God. Now if God has made this Body so famous,
as indeed he has, and yet it is made but of the Dust of the Ground, and we all
do know what inferior matter that is, what is the Soul, since the Body is not
only its House and Garment, but since its self is made of the breath of God?
But further, it is not only said, That the Soul is of the Breath of the Lord,
but that the Lord breathed into him the breath of Life: to wit, a living
Spirit, for so the next words infer; And Man became a living Soul. Man, that
is, the more excellent part of him, which for that it is principal, is called
Man, that bearing the denomination of the whole: or Man, the Spirit and natural
Power, by which as a reasonable Creature the whole of him is acted; became a
living Soul. But I stand not here upon definition, but upon demonstration: the
Body that noble Part of Man, had its Original from the Dust: for so says the
word, Dust thou art (as to thy Body) and to Genesis 3. 19.
Dust shall thou return; but as to thy more noble part thou art from the breath
of God, God putting forth in that a mighty work of creating Power, and 1. Cor.
15. 45.
Man was made a living Soul. Mark my reason, There is as great a disparity
betwixt the Body and the Soul, as is between the Dust of the Ground, and that
her^ called the breath of life of the Lord. And, note further^ That as the Dust
of the Ground did not lose, but gai^ glory by being formed into the Body of a
Man: so the breath of the Lord, lost nothing neither, by being mad: living
Soul. O Man! do thou know what thou art?

2. The Soul, God's Image. Genesis 1. 26, 27.
As the Soul is said to be of the breath o^ God: so it is said to be made after
God's own Image^ even after the similitude of God. And God said let t^ mate Man
in our Image, after our likeness. So Go^ created Man in his own Image, in the
Image^ of God created he him. Mark in his own Image, in the Image of God
created he him; or as James has it, Jam. 3. 9.
l^is made after the similitude of God; like him, having in it, that which
bears semblance with him. I do^ not read of any thing in Heaven or Earth, or
under the Earth, that is said to be made after this manner or that is at all so
termed, save only the Son of God himself. The Angels are noble Creatures, and
for present employ, are made a little higher than Man himself: But Heb. 2.
that any of them are said to be made after God's own Image, after his own
Image, even after the similitude of God, that I find not. This character the
holy Ghost in the Scriptures of Truth gives only of Man, of the Soul of Man:
for it must not be thought that the Body is here intended in whole or in part;
for though it be said, Phil. 2.
That Christ was made after the similitude of sinful flesh: yet it is not said,
That sinful flesh is made after the similitude of God; but I will not dispute:
I only bring these things to show how great a thing, how noble a thing the Soul
is; in that at its Creation God thought it worthy to be made, not like the
Earth, or the Heavens, or the Angels, Ceraphims, Seraphins, or Archangels; but
like himself, his own self; saying Let ^s make man in our own likeness. So he
made man in ^is own Image. This I say, is a Character above all Angels, for as
the Apostle said, To which of the An^el^ said he, at any time, thou art my Son?
So, of which of them has he at any time said, This is or shall be made in, or
after mine image, mine own Image? O what a thing is the Soul of Man! that,
above all the Creatures in Heaven or Earth, being made ^n the Image and
similitude of God.

3. The Soul, God's desire
Another thing by which the greatness of the Soul is made manifest is this: It
is that (and that only, and to say this is more than to say, it is that above
all the Creatures) that the great God desires communion with. He has set apart
his that is godly for himself: that is, for communion with his Soul: therefore
the Spouse says concerning him, Cant. 7. 10.
His desire is toward me; and therefore he says again, I will 2 Cor. 6. 16.
dwell in them, and walk in them, To dwell in, and walk with, are terms that
intimate communion and fellowship, as John says, 1 John 1. 1, 2.
Our fellowship, truly our fellowship, is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. That is, our Soul-fellowship, for it must not be understood of
the Body, though I believe that the Body is much influenced when the Soul has
communion with God; but it is the Soul, and that only, that at present is
capable of having and maintaining of th^s blessed communion. But I say, What a
thing is this, that God, the great God, should choose to have fellowship and
communion with the Soul above all. We read indeed of the greatness of the
Angels, and how near also they are unto God; but yet there are not such terms
that bespeak such familiar acts between God and Angels, as to demonstrate that
they have such communion with God, as has, or as the Souls o^ his People may
have. Where has he called them hi^ Love, his Dove, his fair one? And where,
when h^ speaks of them, does he express a communion tha^ they have with him,
by the similitude of (...) Love? I speak of what is revealed, the secret thing
belong to the Lord our God. Now by all this i^ manifest the Greatness of the
Soul. Men of greatnes^ and honor, if they have respect to their own glory will
not choose for their familiars, the base and ras^^ Crew of this World; but will
single out for their fellows, fellowship and communion, those that are mo^^
like themselves. True, the King has not an equal^ yet he is for being familiar
only with the Nobles o^ the Land; so God, with him none can compare: ye^ since
the Soul is by him singled out for his walking Mate and Companion, it is a sign,
it is the highe^ born, and that upon which the blessed Majesty looks^ as upon
that which is most meet to be singled out for communion with himself.

Should we see a Man familiar with the King, we would even of our selves
conclude he is one of the Nobles of the Land; but this is not the Lot of every
Soul (some have fellowship with Devils, yet not because they have a more base
Original than those that lie in God's bosom, but they through sin. are
degenerate, and have chosen to be great with his Enemy) but all these things
show the Greatness of the Soul.

4. The Soul, a Vessel for Grace.
The Souls of Men are such as God count^ worthy to be the Vessels to hold his
Grace, the Graces of the Spirit in. The Graces of the Spirit; what like them,
or where here are they to be found, save in the Souls of Men only? of Ps. 51.
6. Ps. 45. 13.
his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace; received, into what?
Into the hidden Parts, as David calls it. Hence the King's Daughter is said to
be all glorious within, because adorned and beautified with the Graces of the
Spirit. For that which David calls the hidden part, is the inmost part of the
Soul; and it is therefore called the hidden Part, because the Soul is
invisible, nor can any one living infallibly know what is in the Soul but God
himself. But I say, the Soul is the Vessel into which this golden Oil is
poured, and that which holds, and is accounted worthy to exercise and improve
the same. Therefore the Soul is it which is said to love God. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3,
4. Isa. 26. 9.
Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? and therefore the Soul is that which
exercises the Spirit of Prayer, With my Soul have I desired thee in the night,
and with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early. With the Soul also Men are
said to believe, and into the Soul God is said to put his Fear. This is the
Vessel into which the wise Virgins got Oil, and out of which their Lamps were
supplied by the same. But what a thing, what a great thing therefore is the
Soul, that, that above all things that God has created, should be the chosen
Vessel to put his Grace in. The Body is the Vessel for the Soul, and the Soul
is the Vessel for the Grace of God. But,

5. The Price of the Soul.
The Greatness of the Soul is manifest by the Greatness of the Price that
Christ paid for it to make it an Heir of Glory; and 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1. Pet. 1.
18, 19.
that was his procious Blood. We do use to esteem of things according to the
Price that is given for them, especially when we are convinced that the
purchase has not been made by the Estimation of a Fool. Now the Soul is
purchased by a Price that the Son, the wisdom of God thought fit to pay for the
redemption thereof, what a thing then is the Soul? Judge of the Soul by the
Price that is paid for it, and you must needs confess (unless you count the
Blood that has bought it, an unholy thing) that it cannot but be of great
worth and value. Suppose a Prince, or some great Man, should on a sudden
descend from his Throne or Chair of State to take up, that he might put in his
bosom, some thing that he had espied, lying trampled under the Feet of those
that stand by; would you think that he would do this for an old Horse-shooe, or
for so trivial a thing as a Pin or a Point? nay, would you not even of your
selves conclude, that, that thing for which the Prince, so great a Man, should
make such a stoop, must needs be a thing of very great worth? Why, this is the
case of Christ and the Soul: Christ is the Prince, his Throne was in Heaven,
and as he sat there, he espied the Souls of Sinners trampled under the Foot of
the Law and Death, for sin: now what does he, but comes down from his Throne,
stoops down to the Earth, 1. Cor. 8. 9.
and there since he could not have the trodden-down Souls without price, he
lays down his Life and Blood for them. But would he have done this for
inconsiderable things? no nor for the Soul of Sinners neither, had he not
valued them higher than he valued Heaven and Earth besides. This therefore is
another thing by which the Greatness of Soul is known.

6. The Soul immortal. Luke 12. 4. Mat. 10. 28.
The Soul is immortal, it will have a sensible Being for ever, none can kill
the Soul. If all the Angels in Heaven, and all the Men of Earth should lay all
their strength together, they cannot kill, or annihilare one Soul: no, I will
speak without fear, ^f it may be said, God cannot do what he will not do; then
he cannot annihilate the Soul: but notwithstanding all his wrath and the
vengeance that he will inflict on sinful Souls, they yet shall abide with
sensible Beings, yet to endure, yet to bear punishment. If any thing could kill
the Soul, it would be death, but death cannot do it, neither first nor second,
The first cannot, for when Dives Luke 16. 22, 23.
was slain as to his Body by death, his Soul was found ali^^ in Hell, He lift
up his Mark 9.
Eyes in Hell being in torment. The second death cannot do it, because it is
said, their Worm never dies, but is always torturing them with his gnawing; but
that could not be, if time or lying in Hellfire for ever, could annihilate the
Soul. Now this also shows the Greatness of the Soul, that it is that which has
an endless life, and that will therefore have a Being endlesly. O what a thing
is the Soul!

The Soul then is immortal, though not eternal. That is eternal that has
neither beginning nor end; and therefore eternal is properly applicable to none
but God; hence he is called Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
the eternal God. Immortal is that, which though it has a Beginning, yet has
no end, it cannot dye, nor cease to be; and this is the state of the Soul. It
cannot cease to have a Being, when it is once created, I mean a living sensible
Being. For I mean by living, only such a Being as distinguishes it from
annihilation or uncapableness of sense and feeling. Hence as the rich Man is
after death, said to Luke 16. 22, 23.
lift up his Eyes in Hell; so the Beggar is said, when he dyed, to be carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. And both these sayings, must have respect
to the Souls of these Men; for as for their Bodies, we know at present it is
otherwise with them. The Grave is their House, and so must be till the Trumpet
shall sound, and the Heavens pass away like a Scroul.

Now (I say) the Immortality of the Soul, shows the Greatness of it, as the
eternity of God, sh^^ the greatness of God. It cannot be said of any Angel, but
that he is immortal, and so it is, and ought to be said of the Soul. This
therefore shows the Greatness of the Soul, in that it is as to abiding, so like
unto him.

7. It Is the Soul that acts the Body.
But a word or two more, and so to conclude this Head. The Soul! why, it is the
Soul that acts the Body in all those things (good or bad) that seem good and
reasonable, or amazingly wicked. True, the Acts and Motions of the Soul, are
only seen and heard in and by the Members and Motions of the Body, but the Body
is but a poor Instrument, the Soul is the great Agitator and Actor. Jam. 2 26.
The Body without the Spirit is dead. All those famous Arts and Works, and
Inventions of Works that are done by Men, under Heaven, they are all the
Inventions of the Soul, and the Body as acting and laboring therein, does it
but as a Tool Eccl. 7. 9.
that the Soul makes use of, to bring his Invention unto maturity. How many
things have Men found out to the amzing of one another, to the wonderment of
one another, to the begetting of endless Commendations of one another in the
World, while in the mean time the Soul, which indeed is the true Inventor of
all is overlooked, not regarded, but dragged up and down by every lust, and
prostrate, and made a slave to every silly and beastly thing? O the Isa. 44. 20.
amazing darkness that has covered the Face of the Hearts of the Children of
Men, that they cannot deliver their Soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my
Right Hand? though they are so cunning in all other matters. Take Man in
Matters that are abroad, and far from home, and he is the mirror of all the
Word: but take him at home, and put him upon things that are near him, I mean
that have respect to the things that concern his Soul, and then you will find
him the greatest Fool that ever God made. But this must not be applied to the
Soul simply, as it is God's Creature, but to the Soul sinful, as it has
willingly apostatized from God, and so suffered it self to be darkened, and that
with such thick and stupefying darkness, that it is bound up and cannot, it
has a Napkin of sin bound so close before its Eyes, that it is not able (of it
self) to look to, and after those things which should be its chiefest concern,
and without which it will be most miserable for ever.

8. Further, The Soul capable of having to do with invisibles.
as the Soul is thus curious about Arts and Sciences, and about every excellent
thing of this Life. So it is capable of having to do with invisibles; with
Angels good or bad; yea, with the highest and supreme Being, even with the holy
God of Heaven. I told you before, that God sought the Soul of Man to have it
for his Companion, and now I tell you, that the Soul is capable of communion
with him (when the darkness that sin has spread over its face is removed.) The
Soul is an intelligent Power, it can be made to know, and understand depths,
and heights, and lengths, and breadths, in those high, sublime and spiritual
mysteries, that only God can reveal and teach; yea, it is capable of diving
unutterably into them. And herein is God the God of glory much delighted and
pleased, to wit, That he has made himself a Creature that is capable of
hearing, of knowing, and of understanding of his mind, when opened and revealed
to it. I think I may say without offense to God or Man, That one reason why God
made the World, was that he might manifest himself not only by, but to the
works which he made; but (I speak with reverence) how could that be, if he did
not also make some of his Creatures capable of apprehending of him in those
most high Mysteries and Methods, in which he purposed to reveal himself? but
then, what are those Creatures which he has made (unto whom when these things
are shown) that are able to take them in, and understand them, and so to
improve them to God's glory as he has ordained and purposed they should, but
Souls? for none else in the visible World are capable of doing this but they.
And hence it is, that to them, and them only, he begins to reveal himself in
this World. And hence it is that they, and they only are gathered up to Heb.
12. 23.
him, where he is (for they are they that are called the spirits of just Men
made perfect) the Spirit of a Beast goes downward Eccl. 3. 21. c. 12. 7.
to the Earth, it is the Spirit of a Man that goes upward to God that gave it;
for that, and that only is capable of beholding and understanding the glorious
Visions of Heaven, as Christ said, John 17. 24.
Father I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before
the Foundation of the World. And thus the greatness of the Soul is manifest.
True, the Body is also gathered up into glory, but not simply for its own sake,
or because that is capable of it self to know and understand the glories of its
Maker; but that has been a Companion with the Soul in this World, has also been
its House, its Mantle, its Cabinet and Tabernacle here: It has also been it, by
which the Soul has acted, in which it has wrought, and by which its excellent
appearances have been manifested. And it shall also there be its copartner and
sharer in its glory. Wherefore as the Body here did partake of Soul
Excellencies, and was also conformed to its spiritual and regenerate
Principles; so it shall be hereafter a partaker of that Glory with which the
Soul shall be filled; and also be made suitable by that glory, to become a
partaker and copartner with it of the eternal Excellencies which Heaven will
put upon it. In this World it is a gracious Soul (I speak now of the
Regenerate) and in that World, it shall be a glorious one. In this World the
Body was conformable to the Soul as it was gracious and in that World it shall
be conformable to itt, as its glorious: conformable, I say, by partaking of
that Glory, that then the Soul shall partake of; yea, it shall also have an
additional glory to adorn, and make it yet the more capable of being
serviceable to it, and with it in its great acts before God in eternal glory.

O, What great things are the Souls of the Sons of Men!

9. But again, as the Soul is thus capable of enjoying The Soul capable of
diving into the Depths and Mysteries of Hell.
God in Glory, and of prying into these Mysteries that are in him: so it is
capable with great prosundity to dive into the mysterious depths of Hell. Hell
is a place, and state utterly unknown to any in this visible World, excepting
the Souls of Men; nor shall any for ever be capable of understanding the
Miseries thereof, save Souls and fallen Angels. Now I think as the Joys of
Heaven stand not only in speculation or in beholding of Glory, but in a
sensible Enjoyment and unspeakable Pleasure, which these Psalm. 16. 11.
Glories will yield to the Soul: So the Torments of Hell will not stand in the
present lashes and strokes which by the Flames of eternal Fire God will scourge
the Ungodly with; but the Torments of Hell stand much, if not in the greatest
part of them, in those deep thoughts and apprehensions, which Souls in the next
World will have of the Nature and Occasions of Sin; of God, and of separation
from him; of the Eternity of those Miseries, and of the utter Impossibility of
their help, ease, or deliverance for ever. O, damned Souls will have thoughts
that will clash with Glory, clash with Justice, clash with Law, clash with it
self, clash with Hell, and with the everlastingness of Misery; but the Point,
the Edge, and the Poison of all these thoughts will still be gauling, and
dropping, and spuing out their stings into the Sore, grieved, wounded, and
fretted place, which is the Conscience, though not the Conscience only. For I
may say of the Souls in Hell, that they all over are but one wound, one sore.
Miseries as well as mercies, sharpen and make quick the Apprehensions of the
Soul. Behold Spira in his Book* Cain in his Guilt, and Saul with the Witch of
Endor, and you shall see Men ripened, Men enlarged and greatned in their
fancies, Isa. 33. 14. Psalm. 50. 3. Rev. 14. 10, Mark 9. 44, 46.
imaginations and apprehensions, though not about God, and Heaven and Glory;
yet about their Loss, their Misery, and their Woe, and their Hells.

10. Nor does their ability The Ability of the Soul to bear.
to bear (if it be proper to say they bear, those dolors which there for ever,
they shall endure) a little demonstrate their greatness. Everlasting burning,
devouring fire, perpetual pains, gnawing worms, utter darkness and the ireful
words, face and strokes of divine and infinite Justice, will not, cannot, make
this Soul extinct, as I said before: I think it is not so proper to say, the
Soul that is damned for Sin does bear these things, as to say it does ever sink
under them; and therefore their place of torment is called the bottomless Pit,
because they are ever sinking, and shall never come there where they will find
any stay. Yet they live under wrath, but yet only so as to be sensible of it,
as to smart and be in perpetual anguish by reason of the intollerableness of
their burden. But does not their thus living, abiding, and retaining a Being
(or what you will call it) demonstrate the greatness and might of the Soul?
Alas! Heaven and Earth are short of this greatness, for these though under less
judgment by far, do fade and wax old Heb. 1.
like a Moth-eaten Garment, and in their time will vanish away to nothing.

Also we see how quickly the Body, when the Soul is under a fear of the rebukes
of Justice; How soon I say, it wastes, molders away, and crimbleth into the
Grave; but the Soul is yet strong and abides sensible to be dealt withal for
Sin, by everlasting burnings.

11. The Soul by God's Ordinance Heb. 9. 27. The might of the Soul further
shown.
while this world lasts, has a time appointed it to forsake and leave the Body
to be turned again to the Dust as it was, and this separation is made by death:
Therefore the Body must cease for a time to have sense or life, or motion; and
a little thing brings it now into this state: But in the next World the wicked
shall partake of none of this; for the Body and the Soul being at the
Resurrection rejoyned, this death that once did rend them asunder, is for ever
overcome and extinct; so that these two which lived in Sin *must for ever be
yoked together in Hell. Now there the Soul being joined to the Body, and death
which before did separate them, being utterly taken away; the Soul retains not
only its own being, but also continues the Body to be, and to suffer sensibly
the Pains of Hell without those decays that it uses to sustain.

And the Reason why this death shall then be taken away, is, because Justice in
Mat. 10. 28.
its bestowing its rewards for transgressions, may not be interrupted: but that
Body and Soul as they lived Luke 12. 5.
and acted in sin together, might be destroyed for sin in Hell together:
Destroyed, I say, but with such a 2 These. 1. 8, 9.
Destruction, which though it is everlasting, will not put a Period to their
sensible suffering, the vengeance of eternal Fire.

This death therefore, though that also be the Wages of Sin, would now, were it
suffered to continue, be an hindrance to the making known of the Wrath of God,
and also of the created Power and Might of the Soul. 1. It would hinder the
making known of the Wrath of God, for it would take the Body out of the way,
and make it incapable of sensible suffering for sin, and so removing one of the
Objects of Vengeance, the Power of God's Wrath would be so far undiscovered. 2.
It would also hinder the Manifestation of the Power and Might of the Soul,
which is discovered much by its abiding to re^in its own being while the Wrath
of God is grap^ng with it: and more, by its continuing to the Body (...)
sensible being with it self.

Death therefore must now be removed, that the ^oul may be made the Object of
Wrath without ^olestation or interruption. That the Soul, did I ^y? yea, that
Soul and Body both might be so. Death ^ould now be a Favor, though once the
Fruit of ^in, and also the Wages thereof, might it now be ^uffered to continue:
because it would case the Soul ^f some of its burden. For a tormented Body
cannot but be a burden to a Spirit, and so the wise Man ^nsmuates, when he
says, The Spirit of a Man will ^stain his infirmity: that is, bear up under it,
but ^et so, as that it feels it a Burden. We see that because of the Sympathy
that is between Body and ^oul, how one is burdened if the other be grieved. A
sick Body is a Burden to the Soul, and a wounded Spirit is a Burden to the
Body: A wounded Spirit who ^an bear? but death must not remove this burden,
but the Soul must have the Body for a Burden, and the Body must have the Soul
for a Burden, and both must have the Wrath of God for a Burden. O therefore,
here will be burden upon burden, and all upon the Soul, for the Soul will be
the chief Seat of this burden. But thus much to show you the Greatness of the
Soul.

I shall now come to the second Thing which was propounded to be spoken to: and
that is to show you what we are to understand Of the Loss of the Soul.
by losing of the Soul, or what the Loss of the Soul is, What shall a Man give
in exchange for his Soul.

1. The Loss of the Soul He that loses his Soul, loses himself.
is a Loss, in the Nature of it peculiar to it self. There is no such Lo^ as to
the Nature of Loss as is the Loss of the So^ For that he that has lost his
Soul, has lost himse^ In all other Losses it is possible for a Man to save
him^self, but he that loses his Soul, loses himself; F^ Luke 9. 25.
what is a Man advantaged, if he gain the who^ World, and lose himself? So Luke
has it. Wherefor^ the Loss of the Soul is a Loss that cannot be parallel^ He
that loses himself, loses his all, his lasting a^ for himself is his all, his
all in the most comprehen^ sive Sense: What mattereth it what a Man gets, i^ by
the getting thereof he loses himself? Suppose^ Man goes to the Indies for
Gold, and he loadet^ his Ship therewith, but at his return, that Sea tha^
carried him thither, swallows him up, now what ha^ he got? but this is but a
lean Similitude with re^ ference to the Matter in hand, to wit, to set fort^
the Loss of the Soul. Suppose a Man that has bee^ at the Indies for Gold,
should at his return himself be taken by them of Algiers, and there made a
Slav^ of, and there be hunger-bit, and beaten till his bon^ are broken; What
has he got? What is he advantaged by his rich adventure? perhaps you will say,
He has got Gold enough to obtain his ransom: Indeed this may be, and therefore
no similitude can^ be found, that can fully amplify the Matter. For wha^ shall
a Man give in exchange for his Soul? It is a Loss that stands by it self,
there is not another like it: or unto which it may be compared, it is only like
it self, it is singular, it is the chief of all losses, the highest, the greatest
Loss. For what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? A Man may lose his
Wife, his Children, his Estate, his Liberty, and his Life, and have all made up
again, and have all restored with ^dvantage, and may therefore, notwithstanding
all ^ese losses, be far enough off from losing of himself; Luke 14. 25. Mark.
8. 35.
for he may lose his life and save it: yea, some^imes the only way to save that
is to lose it: but ^hen a Man has lost himself, his Soul, then all is gone, ^o
all intents and purposes. There is no word says, ^e that loses his Soul, shall
save it: but contrary-wise, ^he Text supposes, that a Man has lost his Soul,
and ^hen demands if any can answer it, What shall a Man ^ive in exchange for
his Soul? All then that he gains that loses his Soul is only this, he has
gained a Loss, ^e has purchased the Loss of Losses, he has nothing ^eft him now
but his Loss; but the Loss of himself, of his whole self. He that loses his
life for Christ, shall save it, but he that loses himself for Sin, and for ^he
World, shall lose himself to perfection of loss; ^e has lost himself, and
there is the full Point.

There are several things fall under this first head, upon which I would touch
a little.

1. He that has lost his Soul He that has lost himself will never be more at
his own dispose.
has lost himself: Now he that has lost himself, is no more at his own dispose;
while a Man enjoys himself, he is at his own dispose. A single Man, a free Man,
a rich Man, a poor Man, any Man that enjoys himself is at his own dispose. I
speak after the manner of Men; but he that has lost himself is not at his own
dispose. He is as I may say, now out of his own hands: he has lost himself, his
Soul self, his own self, his whole self by Sin, and Wrath, and Hell has found
him: he is therefore now no more at his own dispose, but at the dispose of
Justice, of Wrath and Hell. He is committed to Prison, to Hell Prison, there to
abide, not a pleasure, not as long and as little time as he will, but the Term
appointed by his Judge: Nor may he the^ choose his own affliction, neither for
manner, me^sure, or continuance. It Is God that will spread the Fire and
Brimstone under him, it is God that w^ pile up wrath upon him, and it is God
himself the will blow the Fire. And the Breath of the Lord, like (...) Stream
of Brimstone Isa. 30. 33.
does kindle it: And thus it (...) manifest that he that has lost himself, his
Soul is n^ more at his own dispose, but at the dispose of the^ that find him.

2. Again, As he that has lost himself He that has lost himself, is no^ at
liberty to dispose of what he has.
is no^ at his own dispose, so neither is he at liberty to dispos^ of what he
has, for the Man that has lost himself has something yet of his own. The Text
implie^ that his Soul is his when lost, yea when that and hi^ all, himself is
lost: but as he cannot dispose of himself, so he cannot dispose of what he
has: let m^ take leave to make out my meaning; If he that i^ lost, that has
lost himself, has not, notwithstanding^ some thing that in some sense may be
called his own then he that is lost is nothing. The Man that is i^ Hell has yet
the Powers, the Senses and Passions (...) his Soul; for not he nor his Soul
must be though^ to be stripped of these; for then he would be lowe^ than the
Brute; but yet all these since he is ther^ are by God improved against himself;
or if you will the Point of this Man's Sword is turned against hi^ own Heart,
and made to pierce his own Liver.

The Soul by being in Hell, loses nothing of it^ aptness to think, its
quickness to pierce, to pry, an^ to understand: nay, Hell has ripened it in all
the^ things; but I say, the Soul with its Improvements a^ to these (or any
thing else) is not in the hand of hi^ that has lost himself to manage for his
own advan^age, but in the Hand, and in the Power, and to be ^isposed as is
thought meet by him into whose re^enging hand by sin he has delivered himself:
to wit, ^n the Hand of God: so then God now has the Vi^tory, and disposes of
all the Powers, Senses and ^assions of the Soul for the chast^zing of him that
^as lost himself. Now the Understanding is only ^mployed and improved in, and
about the appre^ending of such things as will be like Daggers at the ^eart: to
wit about Justice, Sin, Hell and Eternity, ^o grieve and break the Spirit of
the Damned; yea, ^o break, to wound, and to tear the Soul in pieces. ^he depths
of Sin which the Man has loved, the ^ood Nature of God whom the Man has hated,
the Blessings of Eternity which the Soul has despised shall now be understood
by him, more than ever: ^ut yet so only, as to increase grief and sorrow, by
^mproving of the good and of the evil of the things ^nderstood, to the greater
wounding of the Spirit: therefore now, every touch that the Understanding ^all
give to the Memory will be as a touch of a r^d ^ot Iron; or like a draught of
scalding Lead poured ^own the Throat. The Memory also lets these ^ings down
upon the Conscience with no less terror and perplexity. And now the Fancy or
Imagination ^oth start and stare like a Man by fears, bereft of ^its, and does
exercise it self, or rather is exercised ^y the Hand of revenging Justice, so
about the ^readth and depth of present and future punish^ents, as to lay the
Soul as on a burning Rack. Now ^so the Judgment, as with a mighty Maul drives
^o^n the Soul in the sense and pangs of everlasting ^isery, into that Pit that
has no bottom; yea, it ^eth again, and as with a Hammer it rivetteth every
^rful thought and apprehension of the Soul so fast that it can never be loosed
again for ever and ever. Alas! Now the Conscience can sleep, be dull, be
misled, or flatter no longer; No, it must now cry out, understanding will make
it; Memory will make it; fancy or imagination will make it: Now I say, it will
cry out of Sin, of Justice, and of the Terribleness of the Punishment that has
swallowed him up that has lost himself. Here will be no forgetfulness, yet
nothing shall be thought on but that which will wound and kill; here will be no
time, cause or mean^ for diversion, all will stick and gnaw like a Viper. N^
the memory will go out to, where Sin was heretofore committed, it will also go
out to the Word that did forbid it. The V^derstanding also, and the Judgmen^
too, will now consider of the pretended Necessit^ that the Man had to break the
Commandments o^ God, and of the seasonableness of the Cautions, an^ of the
Convictions which were given him to forbea^ by all which more load will be laid
upon him that h^ lost himself; for here all the Powers, Senses a^^ Passions of
the Soul must be made self-burner^ self-tormenters, self executioners by the j^
Judgment of God; also all that the Will sha^ do in this place, shall be but to
wish for eas^ but the wish shall only be such as shall on^^ seem to lift up,
for the Cable Rope of despair sha^ with violence pull him down again. The will
i^ deed will wish for ease, and so will the mind, etc. b^ all these wishers
will by wishing arrive to no mo^ advantage but to make despair which is the mo^
twinging stripe of Hell to cut yet deeper into t^^ whole Soul of him that has
lost himself: Where for after all that can be wished for: they return again^
their burning Chair, where they sit and bewail the^ misery. Thus will all the
Powers, Senses and P^^^ons of the Soul of him that has lost himself, (...) of
his own power to dispose for his advantage; and will be only in the Hand and
under the Management of the revenging Justice of God.

And herein will that state of the Damned be worse than it is now with the
fallen Angels; for though the fallen Angels are now cast down to Hell, in
Chains, and sure in themselves at last to partake of eternal judgment; yet at
present Job. 1. 7. chapter 2. 2.
they are not so bound up as the lamned Sinners shall be: for not withstanding
their Chains and their being the Prisoners of the horrible Hells: yet they have
a kind of liberty granted them, and that liberty will last till the time
appointed; to tempt, to plot, to contrive and invent their mischiefs against
the Son of God and his. And though Satan knows that this at last will work for
his future condemnation, yet at present he finds it some diversion to his
trembling mind, and obtains through his being so busily employing of himself
against the Gospel and its professors, something to sport and refresh himself
withal; yea, and does procure to himself some small crumbs of minutes of
forgetfulness of his own present misery, and of the Judgment that is yet to
pass upon him; but this privilege will then be denied to him that has lost
himself, there will be no cause nor matter for diversion; there it will (as in
the old World) rain day and night Revel. 14. 10, 11.
Fire and Brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven upon them; misery is fixed, the
Worm will be always sucking at, and gnawing of, their Soul: Also as I have said
before, all the Powers, Senses and Passions of the Soul will throw their Darts
inwards, yea, of God will be made to do it to the utter unspeakable and endless
torment of him that has lost himself. Again,

3. All therefore that he that has lost himself can do, is to sit down by the
Loss; Do I say he can do this? Oh! if that could be, it would be to such a
Mercy; I must therefore here correct my self, They cannot sit down by the Loss.
that they cannot do, for to sit down by the Loss, implies, a Patient enduring,
but there will be no such grace as patience in Hell with him that has lost
himself; here will also want a bottom for patience, to wit, the Providence of
God for a Providence of God, though never so dismal, is a bottom for patience
to the afflicted: but Men go not to Hell by Providence, but by Sin. Now Sin
being the Cause other effects are wrought; for they that go to Hell, and that
there miserably perish, shall never say it was God by his providence that
brought me hither, and so shall not have that on which to lean and stay
themselves.

They shall justify God, and lay the sault upon themselves, concluding that it
was sin with which their Souls did voluntarily work; yea, which their Souls did
such in as sweet Milk, that is the Cause of this their torment. Now this will
work after another manner and will produce quite another thing than patience,
or a Patient enduring of their torment; for their seeing that they are not only
lost, but have lost themselves, and that against the ordinary means that of God
was provided to prevent that loss; yea, when they shall see what a base thing
Sin is, how that it is the very worst of things, and that which also makes all
things had; and that for the sake of that they have lost themselves; this will
make them ^ret, and gnash and gnaw with anger themselves; this will set all the
Passions of the S^ul save love (for that I think will be stark dead) all in a
Rage, all in a self-tormenting Fire. You know there is nothing that will sooner
put a Man into, and manage his rage against himself, than will a full
Conviction in his Conscience, that by his own only folly, and that against
caution, and council and reason to the contrary, he h^th brought himself into
extreme distress and misery. But how much more will it make this fire burn,
when he shall see all this is come upon him for a Toy for a Bauble, for a thing
that is worse than nothing.

Why this is the case with him that has lost himself and therefore he cannot
sit down by the Loss, cannot be at quiet under the Sense of his Loss. For
sharply and wonderful piercingly, considering the Loss of himself, and the
Cause thereof which is Sin, he salls to a tearing of himself in pieces with
thoughts as hot as the Coals of Juniper, and to a gnashing upon himself for
this; also the divine Wisdom and Justice of God helps on this self-tormenter
in his self-^ormenting work, by holding the Justice of the Law against which he
has offended, and the unreasonableness of such offense continually before his
Face. For if to an enlightened Man who is in the door of hope, the sight of all
past evil Practices will work in him vexation of Spirit to see what fools we
were, Eccl. 1. 14.
how can it but be to them that go to Hell a vexation, only to understand the
Report, the Report that God did give them of Sin, of his Grace, of Hell, and of
everlasting Damnation; Isa. 28. 19.
and yet that they should be such fools to go thither. But to pursue this head
no further I will come now to the next thing.

2. As the Loss of the Soul The Loss of the Soul a double Loss.
is in the Nature of the Loss, a Loss peculiar to it self. So the Loss of the
Soul is a double Loss; it is, I say, a Loss that i^ double, lost both by Man
and God; Man has lost it, and by that Loss has lost himself, God has lost it,
and by that Loss it is cast away. And to make this a little plainer unto you, I
suppose it will be readily granted that Men do lose their Souls, but now how
does God lose it? The Soul is God's as well as Man's; Jer. 38. 16. Ezekiel. 18. 4.
Man's because it is of themselves, God's because it is his Creature; God has
made us this Soul, and hence it is that all Souls are his.

Now the Loss of the Soul does not only stand in the Sin of Man, but in the
Justice of God; hence he says, What is a Man advantaged, if he gains the whole
World, and lose himself, Luke 9. 25.
or be cast away. Now this last clause [ or be cast away] is not spoken to show
what he that has lost his Soul has done (though a Man may also be said to cast
away himself) but to show what God will do to those that have lost themselves:
what God will add to that Loss. God will not cast away a righteous Man, but God
will cast away the Job 8. 20. Mat. 13. 48.
wicked, such a wicked one as by the Text is under our consideration. This then
is that which God will add, and so make the sad state of them that lose
themselves double. The Man for Sin has lost himself, and God by Justice will
cast him away: according to that 1. Sam. 25. 29.
of Abigail to David, The Soul of my Lord, said she, shall be bound in the
bundle of life with the Lord thy God, and the Souls of thine enemies, them
shall he sling out, as out of the midst of a Sling. So that here is God's hand
as well as Man's; Man's by Sin, and God's by Justice. God shall cast them away;
wherefore in the Text abovementioned, he does not say, or cast away himself,
as meaning the act of the Man whose Soul is lost, but, or be cast away,
supposing a second Person joining with the Man himself in the making up of the
greatness of the Loss of Soul: to wit, God himself, who will verily cast away
that Man who has lost himself. God shall cast them away; that is, exclude them
his favor or protection, and deliver them up to the due reward of their deed!
he shall shut them out of his Heaven, and deliver them up to their Hell; he
shall deny them a share in his Glory, and shall leave them to their own shame;
he shall deny them a Portion in his Peace, and shall deliver them up to the
Torments of the Devil and of their own guilty Consciences; he shall cast them
out of his affection, pity and compassion, and shall leave them to the Flames
that they by Sin have kindled, and to the Worm or biting Cockatrice that they
themselves have hatched, nursed and nourished in their bosoms. And this will
make their loss double, and so a Loss that is loss to the uttermost: a Loss
above every Loss. A Man may cast away himself, and not be cast away of God; a
Man may be cast away by others, and not be cast away of God; yea, what way
soever a Man be cast away, if he be not cast away for Sin, he is safe, he is
yet sound, and in a sure hand: But for a Man, so to lose himself as by that
loss to provoke God to cast him away too, This is fearful.

The casting away then, mentioned in Luke, is a casting away by the Hand of
God, by the revenging Hand of God, and it supposes two things.

I. God's abhorrence of such a Soul.

II. God's just repaying of it for its wickedness by way of retaliation.

1. It supposes God's abhorrence of the Soul: that which we abhor that we cast
from us, and put out of our favor and respect with disdain, and a loathing
thereof: So when God teaches Israel to loath and abhor their Idols, he bids
them Isa. 30. 22. Mat. 13. 48. Mat. 25. 41.
to cast away their very covering as a slinking and menstruous Cloth, and t^
say unto it, get you hence. He shall gather the good into Vessels, and cast the
bad away. Cast them out of my presence: Well but whither must they go? the
Answer is into Hell, into utter darkness, into the Fire that is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Wherefore to be cast away of God, it shows unto us
God's abhorrence of such Souls, and how vile and loathsome such are in his
divine eyes. And the Similitude of Abigail's sling mentioned before, does yet
further show us the greatness of this abhorrence, The Souls of thine enemies,
said she, God shall sling out as out of the middle of a Sling. When a Man casts
a Stone away with a Sling, then he casts it farthest from him. For with a
Sling he can cast a Stone farther than by his hand; and he, says the Text,
shall cast them away as with a Sling. But that is not all neither, for it is
not only said, That he shall sling away their Souls, but that he shall sling
them away as out of the middle of a Sling. When a Stone is placed to be cast
away, just in the middle of a Sling, then does the Slinger cast it furthest of
all. Now God is the Slinger, abhorrence is his Sling, the lost Soul is the
Stone, and it is placed in the very middle of the Sling, and is from thence
cast away: and therefore it is said again, That such shall go into utter outer
darkness, that is, furthest off of all. This therefore shows us how God abhors
that Man that for sin has lost himself: And well he may; for such an one has
not only polluted and defiled himself with Sin (and that is the most offensive
thing to God under Heaven) but he has abused the handy Work of God. The Soul,
as I said before, is the Workmanship of God, yea, the top-piece that he has
made in all the visible World, also he made it for to be delighted with it, and
to admit it into communion with himself: now for Man ^hus to abuse God; for a
Man to take his Soul, which ^s God's, and prostrate it to Sin, to the World, to
the Devil, and every beastly Lust, flat against the Command of God, and
notwithstanding the Soul was also his; this is horrible, and calls aloud upon
that God whose Soul this is, to abhor, and to show by all means possible his
abhorrence of such an one.

2. As this casting of them away, supposes God's abhorrence of them: so it
supposes God's just repaying of them for their wickedness by way of
retaliation.

God all the time of the exercise of his long suffering and forbearance toward
them did call upon them, wait upon them, send after them by his Messengers, to
turn them from their evil ways: but they Hos. 11. 2.
despised at, they mocked, the Messengers of the Lord; also they shut their
eyes, and would not see, they stopped their ears and would not understand, and
Rev. 10. 21. Job 21. 14. 1^. Mal. 3. 14.
did harden themselves against the beseeching of their God. Yea, all that day
long he did stretch out his hand toward them, but they chose to be a
rebellious and gainsaying People; yea they said unto God, Depart from us, and
what is the Almighty that we should pray unto him?

And of all these things God takes notice, writes them down, and seals them up
for the time to come, and will bring them out, and spread them before them,
saying, I have called and you have refused, I have stretched out mine hand and
no Man regarded, I have exercised patience and gentleness, and long suffering
toward you, and in all that time you despised me, and cast me behind your
back; and now the time, and the exercise of my patience, when I waited upon
you, and suffered your manners, and did bear your contempts and scorns is at an
end: wherefore I wi^ now arise and come forth to the judgment that I have
appointed.

But Lord, says the sinner, we turn now.

But now, says God, turning is out of season, the day of my patience is ended.

But Lord, says the Sinner, behold our cries.

But you did not, says God, behold nor regard m^ cries.

But Lord, says the Sinner, Let our beseeching fin^ place in thy compassions.

But, says God, I also beseeched, and I was not heard.

But Lord, says the Sinner, our sins lie hard upon us.

But I offered you pardon when time was, says God, and then you did utterly
reject it.

But Lord, says the Sinner, let us therefore have i^ now.

But now the Door is shut, says God.

And what then? Why then by way of retaliation, God will serve them as they
have served him, and so the wind-up of the whole will be this, They shall have
like for like. Time was when they would have none of him, and now will God have
none of them. Time was when they cast God behind their back, and now he will
cast away their Soul. Time was when they would not heed his calls, and now he
will not heed their cries. Time Zach. 11. 8.
was when they abhorred him, and now his Soul also loatheth them. This is now
by way of retaliation, like for like, scorn for scorn, repulse for repulse,
contempt for contempt; according to that which is written, Therefore it came to
pass, that as I cried, c. 7. 11, 12, 13.
and they would not hear: so ^hey cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord.
And ^hus I have also showed you that the Loss of the Soul ^s double, lost by
Man, lost by God.

But Oh! who thinks of this? who, I say, that ^ow makes light of God, of his
word, his servants and ways, once dreams of such retaliation, though God to
^arn them has even in the day of his patience, threatened to do it in the day
of his wrath: saying, because I called and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would
none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your
fear comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes
like a Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early but they shall
not find me. I will do unto them as they have done unto me, and what
unrighteousness is in all this. But,

3. As the Loss of the Soul is a Loss peculiar to it self, and a Loss double;
So in the third place, it is a Loss most fearful, because it is a Loss attended
with the most heavy Curse of God. This is manifest both in the giving of the
rule of Life, and also in, and at the time of execution for the breach of that
Rule. It is manifest at the giving of the Rule, Cursed be he that Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Gal. 3. 10.
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them; and all the People shall
say, Amen: It is also manifest that it shall be so at the time of Execution;
Depar^ Mat. 25. 41.
from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. What this Curse is, none do know so well as God that gives it, and as
the fallen Angels, and the Spirits of damned Men that are now shut up in the
Prison of Hell and bear it. But certainly it is the chief and highest of all
kind o^ curses: To be cursed in the Basket, and in the stor^ in the Womb, and
in the Barn, in my Cattle, and i^ my Body, are but Flea-bitings to this, though
the^ are also unsupportable in themselves; only in gene^ral, it may be
described thus: But to touch upon this Curse, it lies in a deprivation of all
good; an^ in a being swallowed up of all the most fearful miserie^ that an
holy, and just, and eternal God can righteously inflict, or lay upon the Soul
of a sinful Man Now let reason here come in and exercise it self in the most
exquisite manner: Yea, let him now count up all, and all manner of curses and
torments that (...) reasonable and an immortal Soul is, or can be made capable
of, and able to suffer under, and when he ha^ done, he shall come infinitely
short of this great A^^thema, this master curse which God has reserved amongst
his Treasuries, and intends to bring out in that day of battle and war, which
he purposes to make upon damned Souls in that day. And this Go^ will do,
partly as a retaliation as the former, and partly by way of Revenge. 1. By way
of Retaliation: As he loved cursing, so let it come-unto him; a^ he delighted
not in blessing; so let it be far from him. Again, As he clothed himself with
cursing Psalm. 109. 17, 18, 19, 20.
like as with a Garment; so let it come into his Bowels like Water, and like
Oil into his Bones; let it be unto him as (...) Garment which covers him, and
for a Girdle wherewith he is girded continually; Let this, says Christ, be the
reward of mine Adversaries from the Lord, etc. 2. As this Curse comes by way of
Retaliation, so it comes by way of Revenge. God will right the wrongs that
Sinners have done him, will repay vengeance for the despite and reproach
wherewith they have affronted him, and will revenge the quarrel of his
Covenant. And the beginning of revenges are terrible, what Deuteronomy. 33. 41, 42.
then will the whole execution be, when he shall come in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of Jesus
Christ? And therefore this Curse is exeecuted in wrath, in jealousy, in anger,
in fury; yea, the 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.
Heavens and the Earth shall be burned up with the fire of that jealousy in
which the great God will come, when he comes to curse the Souls of Sinners,
and when he comes to defy the ungodly.

It is little thought of, but the manner of the coming of God to judge the
World, declares what the Souls of impenitent Sinners must look for then. It is
common among Men, when we see the Form of a Man's countenance changed, when we
see Fire sparkle out of his Eyes, when we read rage and fury in every cast of
his Face, even See Dan. 3. 19, 23.
before he says ought, or does ought either, to conclude that some fearful
thing is now to be done. Why, it is said of Christ when he comes to judgment,
that the Heavens and the Earth fly away (as not being able to endure his looks)
that his Angels are clad in Rev. 20. 11, 12. 2 Pet. 3. 7. 2 These. 1. 8, 9.
flaming fire, and that the Elements melt with fervent heat, and all this is
that the Perdition of ungodly Men might be completed, from the presence of the
Lord, in the heat of his anger, from the glory of his power. Therefore God will
now be revenged, and so ease himself of his Enemies, when he Ps. 68. 21.
shall cause Curses like Milstones to fall as thick as Hail on the hairy Scalp
of of such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses. But 4. As the Loss of the
Soul is a Loss peculiar to it self, a Loss double, and a Loss most fearful; so
it is a Loss everlasting. The Soul that is lost, is never to be found again,
never to be recovered again, never to be redeemed again. It Is banishment from
God, is everlasting, the fire in which it burns, and by which it must be
tormented is a Fire that is ever, everlasting Fire, everlasting burnings, the
Adder, the Snake, the Stinging-worm, dies not, nor is the Fire quenched; and
this is a fearful thing. A man may endure to touch the Fire with a short touch
and away, but to dwell with everlasting burnings, that is fearful. Oh, then
what is dwelling with them, and in them for ever and ever^ We use to say, light
burdens far carried are heavy, what then will it be to bear that burden, that
guilt, that the Law, and the justice and wrath of God will lay upon the lost
Soul for ever? Now tell the Stars, now tell the drops of the Sea, and now tell
the blades of Grass that are spread upon the Face of all the Earth if thou
can, and yet sooner may thou do this than count the thousands of millions
of thousands of years that a damned Soul shall lie in Hell. Suppose every Star
that is now in the Firmament was to burn (by himself one by one) a thousand
years apiece; would it not be a long while before the last of them was burned
out? and yet sooner might that be done, than the damned Soul be at the end of
punishment.

There are three things couched under this last head that will fill up the
punishment of a Sinner.

The first is that it is everlasting.

The second is, that therefore it will be impossible for the Souls in Hell ever
to say, now we are got ha^ way through our sorrows.

The third is, and yet every moment they shall en^dure eternal punishment.

The first I have touched upon already, and therefore shall not enlarge, only I
would ask the wanton or unthinking Sinner, whether twenty or thirty, or forty
years of the deceitful pleasures of sin, is so rich a prize as that a man may
well venture the ruins that everlasting burnings will make upon his Soul, for
the obtaining of them, and living a few moments in them. Sinner, consider this
before I go any further, or before thou read one line more. If thou have a
Soul, it concerns thee; if there be a Hell it concerns thee; and if there be a
God that can, and will punish the Soul for Sin everlastingly in Hell, it
concerns thee: Because,

In the second place it will be impossible for the damned Soul ever to say, I
am now got half way through my sorrows. That which has no end, has no middle.
Sinner, make a round Circle or Ring upon the Ground, of what bigness thou will:
this done, go thy way upon that Circle or Ring, until thou come to the End
thereof; but that, say thou, I can never do, because it has no end: I
Answer, But thou may as soon do that, as wade half way through the lake of
Fire that is prepared for impenitent Souls. Sinner, What will thou take to make
a Mountain o^ Sand that will reach as high as the Sun is at Noon? I know thou will not be engaged in such a Work, because it is impossible thou should
ever perform it: But I dare say, the task is greater when the Sinner has let
out himself to Sin, for a Servant, because the wages is everlasting burnings. I
know thou may perform thy service, but the wages, the judgment, the
punishment is so endless, that thou, when thou have been in it more millions of
years than can be numbered, art not, nor never yet shall be able to say, I am
half way through it: And yet,

3. That Soul shall partake of (every moment) that punishment that is eternal.
Even as Sodom an^ Gomorrha, and the Jude 7.
Cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and
going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire.

1. They shall endure eternal punishment, in the nature of punishment. there is
no punishment her^ wherewith one Man can chastise another, that ca^ deserve a
greater Title than that of transient or temporary punishment, but the
punishment there is eternal, even in every stripe that is given, and in every
moment that it grapleth with the Soul: even ever^ twinge, every gripe, and
every stroke that justice inflicteth, leaves anguish that in the nature of
punishment is eternal behind it. It is eternal, because i^ comes from God and
lasts for ever and ever. The justice that inflicts it has not a beginning, and
it (...) this justice in the operations of it, that is alway^ dealing with the
Soul.

2. All the workings of the Soul under this punishment, are such as cause it in
its sufferings to endur^ that which is eternal. It can have no thought (...)
the end of punishment, but it is presently recalled b^ the decreed gulf that
binds them under perpetu^^ punishment. The Luke 16. 26.
great fixed gulf they know will keep them in their present place, and not
suffe^ them to go to Heaven; and now there is no other place but Heaven or Hell
to be in, for then the Eart^ and the works that are therein will be burned u^
Read the Text, But ^ Pet. 3. 10.
the Day of the lord, will co^^ as a Thief in the Night, in the which the
Heavens she pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall m^ with
servent heat, and the Earth also, and the Wor^ that are herein shall be burnt
up. If then there will be ^o third place, it stands in their minds, as well
as ^n God's decree, that their punishments will be e^ernal: So then sorrows,
anguish, tribulation, grief, ^oe and pain, will in every moment of its abiding
upon the Soul, not only flow from thoughts of what ^as been, and what is, but
also from what will be, and that for ever and ever. Thus every thought that is
truly grounded in the cause and nature of their ^tate will roll, toss, and
tumble them up and down (...) the cogitations and fearful apprehensions of the
^stingness of their damnation. For I say, their ^inds, their memories, their
understandings and con^iences will all, and always be swallowed up with ^or
ever: yea, they themselves will by the means of ^hese things be their own
tormenters for ever.

3. There will not be spaces, as Days, Months, Years and the like, as now,
though we make bold so ^o speak (the better to present our thoughts of each
others capacities) for then there shall be time no ^onger; also day and night
shall then be come to an and. He Job 26. 10.
has compassed the Waters with bounds, un^il the day and night come to an end,
until the end of ^^ght with darkness. Now when time, and day, and night, are
come to an end, then there comes in ^ternity, as there was before the day and
night, or ^ime was created: and when this is come, punish^ent nor glory must
none of them be measured by ^ays, or months, or years; but by eternity it self.
Nor shall those concerned either in misery or glory, ^eckon of their now new
state, as they used to reckon ^f things in this World: but they shall be suited
in their capacities, in their understandings, and appre^ensions, to judge and
count of their condition, according, as will best stand with their state in
eter^nity.

Could we but come to an understanding of thing done in Heaven and Hell, as we
understand ho^ things are done in this World, we should be strang^ amazed to
see how the change of places and of conditions, has made a change in the
understandings (...) Men, and in the manner of their enjoyment of things But
this we must let alone till the next World, a^ until our lancing into it, and
then whether we be (...) the Right or Left Hand ones, we shall well know the
state and condition of both Kingdoms. In the mea^ time let us addict our selves
to the Belief of the Scri^tures of Truth, for therein is revealed the way (...)
Mat. 25. 33.
that of eternal life, and how to escape the dam^nation of the Soul. But thus
much for the Loss (...) the Soul, unto which let me add for a conclusion the^
Verses following.

These cry alas, but all in vain,
They stick fast in the mire;
They would be rid of present pain,
Yet set themselves on fire;
Darkness is their perplexity,
Yet do they hate the light;
They always see their misery,
Yet are themselves all night.
They are all dead, yet live they do,
Yet neither live nor dye:
They dye to weal, and live to woe;
This is their misery.
Now will confusion so posse^s
^hese Monuments of ire,
and so confound them with distress,
and trouble their desire;
That what to think, or what to do,
^r where to lay their head,
^hey know not: it is the damned's woe:
^o live and yet be dead.
These castaways would fain have life,
^ut know they never shall:
^hey would forget their dreadful plight,
^ut that sticks fast'st of all.
God, Christ and Heaven, they know are best,
^et dare not on them think:
^hey know the Saints enjoy their rest,
^hile they their tears do drink.
And now I am come to the fourth thing, that is, ^o show you the cause of the
Loss of the Soul. That Men have Souls, that Souls are great things, that Souls
may be lost, this I have showed you ^lready: Wherefore I now proceed to show
^ou the cause of this Loss. The cause is laid ^own in the Eighteenth Chapter of
Ezekiel in ^hese words, Behold Ezekiel. 18. ^.
all Souls, says God, are mine, ^s the Soul of the fallen, so also the Soul of
the Sun is ^ine: the Soul that sins it shall dye. It is sin then, ^r sinning
against God, that is the cause of dying, of ^amning in Hell Fire, for that must
be meant by dy^ng: otherwise, to dye according to our ordinary acceptance of
the notion, the Soul is not capable of, being indeed immortal, as has been
before assert^ So then the Soul that sins that is, and per^vering in the
same, that Soul shall dye, be cast a^^or damned. Yea, to ascertain us of the
undoubt^ Truth of this, the Holy Ghost does repeat it aga^^ and that in this
very Chapter, saying, The Verse 20.
S^ that sins, it shall dye.

Now the Soul may diverse ways be said to si^^ against God. As

1. In its receiving of sin into its bosom, and in (...) retaining, and
entertaining of it there. Sin m^^ first be received before it can act in, or be
acted (...) the Soul. Our first Parents first received in the s^gest, or
motion, and then acted it. Now it is (...) here to be disputed, when sin was
received by t^^ Soul, so much as whether ever the Soul received si^ for if the
Soul has indeed received sin, into it se^ then it has sinned, and by doing so,
has made it se^ an object of the wrath of God, and a firebrand of H^^ I say, I
will not here dispute when sin was receiv^ by the Soul, but it is apparent
enough, that it r^ceived it betimes, because in old time, every Ch^^ that was
brought unto the Lord, was to be redeeme^ and that at a Ex. 13. 13. c. 34. 20.
Num^ 18. 15, 16.
Month old: which to be sure, u^ very early; and employed that then, even then,
the Soul in God's judgment stood before him as defil^ and polluted with sin.
But although I said, I w^^ not dispute at what time the Soul may be said to
r^ceive sin, yet it is evident that it was precedent (...) the redemption made
mention of just before, and (...) before the Person redeemed had attained to
the Ag^ of a Month. And that God might in the Languag^ Moses, give us to see
cause of the necessity of this ^emption, he first distinguishes, and says,
The ^^lling of a Cow, or the firstling of a Sheep, or the ^stling of a Goat,
did not need this redemption, for ^^ey were clean or holy. But the firstborn
of Men, ^^o was taken in lieu of the rest of the Children, and ^^e firstling of
unclean Beasts, thou shall surely redeem, ^th he. But why was the firstborn of
Men coupled ^th unclean Beast, but because they were both un^an. But how? I
Answer, the Beast was unclean by ^od's ordination, but the other was unclean by
sin. ^ow then it will be demanded, How a Soul before it as a Month old, could
receive sin to the making of (...) self unclean? I Answer, There are two ways
of ^^ceiving, one active, the other Passive: This last the way by which the
Soul at first receives sin, and (...) so receiving (...) becomes culpable,
because polluted ^d defiled by it. And this passive way of receiving often
mentioned Ex. 27. 3. 2 Chr. 4. 5. Mat. 13. 20, 22, 23.
in Scripture. Thus the pans ^^ceived the ashes: thus the molten Sea received
three ^^ousand Baths: thus the Ground receives the Seed: and this receiving is
like that of the Wool, which ^^ceiveth the Dye, either Black, White or Red;
and as the Fire that receives the Water till it be all ^uenched therewith, or
as the Water receives such ^^inking and poisonous matter into it, as for the
^^ke of it, it poured out and spilt upon the Ground. ^ut whence Psalm. 51.
should the Soul thus receive sin? I an^^er, from the Body, while it is in the
Mothers Belly, ^he Body comes from polluted Man, and therefore (...) polluted (
Who can bring Job 14. 4.
a clean thing out of an ^^clean?) The Soul comes from God's hand, and
therefore as so, is pure and clean; but being put into this Body, it is
tainted, polluted, and defiled w^ the faint, stench and filth of sin: nor can
this ste^^ and filth be by Man purged out, when once from (...) Body got into
the Soul; sooner may the Blackam^^ change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots,
than (...) Soul, were it willing, might purge it self of this p^^lution. Though
thou wash thee with Nitre, and take (...) much Soap, yet thine iniquity is
marked before me, (...) the Lord God.

2. But as I said, the Soul has not only received (...) but retains it, holds
it, and shows no kind of r^^^^stance. It is enough that the Soul is polluted
(...) defiled, for that is sufficient to provoke God to (...) it away; for
which of you would take a Cloth anno^ed with stinking ulcerous Sores to wipe
your Mo^^withal, or to thrust it into your bosoms? and (...) Soul is polluted
with far worse pollution than a^^ such can be; but this not all, it retains Sin
as (...) Wool retains the Dye, or as the infected Water ^^^ceives the stench
or poisonous scent. I say, it ^^^tains it willingly, for all the Power of the
Soul is (...) only captivated by a seizure of sin upon the Soul, (...) it
willingly, heartily, unanimously, universally (...) leth in with the natural
filth and pollution that is sin, to the estranging of it self from God, and
obtaining of an intimacy and compliance with (...) Devil.

Now this being the state and condition of (...) Soul from the Belly; yea from
before it sees the li^^^ of this World. What can be concluded, but (...) God is
offended with it? For how can it otherw^^^^ be, since there is holiness and
justice in God? He (...) those that are born of a Woman, whose Original (...)
by carnal conception with Man, are said to be Serpents so soon as born. Psalm.
58. 3, 4.
The wicked, and all (...) are so, go astray as soon as they are born, speaking
^^^es. Their Poison is the Poison of a Serpent, they are (...) the deaf Ad^er
that stops his Ear. They go a^ay from the Belly, but that they would not do,
if ^^^ght of the Powers of their Soul was unpolluted, ^ut their Poison is the
Poison of a Serpent. Their Poy^^n what is that? their pollution, their original
pol^^tion, that is as the Poison of a Serpent. To wit, ^ot only deadly, for so
Poison is; but also heredita^y. It comes from the old One, from the Sire and
^am; yea it is also now become connatural to and with them, and is of the same
date with the Child as ^orn into the World. The Serpent has not her Poy^on in
the Original of it, either from imitation, or from other infective things
abroad, though it may by ^uch things be helped forward and increased, but she
brings it with her in her bowels, in her nature, and ^it is to her as suitable
to her present condition as is that which is most sweet and wholesome to other
of the Creatures. So then every Soul comes into the World as poisoned with sin;
nay, as such which have Poison connatural to them, for it has not only received
sin as the Wool has received the Dye, but it retains it. The infection is
got so deep, it has taken the bl^ck so effectually, that the ^ire, the very
Fire of Hell can never purge the Soul there from.

And that the Soul has received Ezekiel. 16.
this infection thus early, and that it retains it so surely, is not only
signified by Childrens coming into the World besmeared in their Mothers Blood,
and by the Firstborn's being redeemed at a month old; but also by the first
inclinations and actions of Children when they are so come into the World. Who
sees not, that lying pride, disobedience to parents, and ^^poerisie do put
forth themselves in Children be^^ they know that they do either well or ill in
so doi^^ or before they are capable to learn either of the arts by imitation,
or seeing understandingly (...) same things done first by others? He that sees
(...) that they do it naturally, from a principle, from (...) inherent
principle, is either blinded, and has ^^^tained his darkness by the same sin as
they, or (...) suffered himself to be swayed by a delusion from him who at
first infused this spawn of sin into Ma^^ nature.

Nor does the averseness of Children to morali^^ a little demonstrate what has
been said. For as (...) would make a Serpent sick, should one give it strong
Antidote against his Poison; so then a^^ Children, and never more than then
disturbed (...) their minds, when a strict hand and a stiff rein b^ moral
discipline is maintained over and upon them True, sometimes restraining gra^e
corrects them but that is not of themselves. But more often hypocrisy is the
great and first moving Wheel to all their seeming compliances with admonitions,
which indulgent Parents are apt to overlook; yea, and sometimes through
unadvisedness to commit for the principles of grace. I speak now of that which
comes before conversion.

But as I said before, I would not now dispute, only I have thought good thus
to urge these things to make my assertion manifest, and to show what is the
cause of the damnation of the Soul.

3. Again, As the Soul receives sin, and retains it so it also does entertain
it; that is, countenance, smile upon, and like its complexion and nature well.
A Man may detain, that is, hold fast a thing which yet he does not regard; but
when he en^^rtains, then he ^^^untenances, likes, and delights in the company.
(...) then is first received by the Soul, as has been (...) explained, and by
that reception is polluted and ^^^^filed. This makes it hateful in the Eyes of
Justice, is now polluted. Then secondly, this sin is not ^^ly received but
retained, that is, it sticks so fast, ^^^des so fixedly in the Soul, that it
cannot be gotten it, this is the cause of the continuation of abhor^nce: for if
God abhors because there is a Being of (...) there, it must needs be that he
should continue to ^hor, since sin continues to have a Being there. But ^^^^en,
in the third place, sin is not only received, (...) ^etained, but entertained
by the now defiled and pol^^ted Soul: wherefore this must needs be a cause of
^e continuance of anger, and that with aggravati^^^: When I say, entertained, I
do not mean, as ^^^en entertain their Enemies, with small and great ^ot; but as
they entertain those whom they like, and ^^ose that are got into their
affections.

And therefore the wrath of God must certainly be (...) out upon the Soul, to
the everlasting damnation ^f it.

Now that the Soul does thus entertain sin is mani^est by these several
particulars.

1. It has admitted it with complacence and de^^ght into every Chamber of the
S^ul: I mean it has ^een delightfully admitted to an ente^tainment by all ^e
powers or faculties of the Soul. The Isa. 65. 12. C. 66. 3.
Soul ^ath chose it rather than God, it also at God's com^and refuses to let
it go, yea, it chooses that ^octrine, and loves it best (since it must have a
^octrine) that has most of sin, and baseness in it. ^hey Isa. 30. 10.
say to the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophecy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smoothings, Prophecy deceits.

These are signs that the Soul with liking has e^^tertained sin: And if there
be at any time, as indee^ there is, a Warrant issued out from the Mouth (...)
God to apprehend, to condemn and mortify sin. Wh^^ then,

2. These shifts the Souls of Sinners do presently make for the saving* of sin
from those things that b^ the World Men are commanded to do unto it.

1. They will if possible hide it, and Prove. 28. 13. Job 20. 12, 13.
not suffe^ it to be discovered. He that hides his sins shall (...) prosper.
And again, They hide it and refuse to let (...) go. This is an evident sign
that the Soul has a favou^ for sin, and that with liking it entertains it.

2. As it will hide it, so it will excuse it, and plea^ that this and that
piece of wickedness is no such ev^^^thing, Men need not be so nice and make
such (...) puther about it, calling those that cry out so hotly against it, Men
more nice than wise: Hence the Prophets of old used to be called madmen, and
the World would reply against their doctrine; Wherei^ Mal. 1. 6, 7* C. 3. 8, 13.
have we been so wearisome to God, and what have (...) spoken so much against
him?

3. As the Soul will do this, so to save sin, it wi^^ cover it with names of
virtue, either moral or civil* and of this God greatly complains, yea, breaks
ou^ into anger for this, saying, W^ Isa. 5. 20.
to them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light an^
light for darkness; and put bitter for sweet, and swee^ for bit^er.

4. If convictions and discovery of sin be so stron^ and so plain, that the
Soul cannot deny but that it (...) sin, and that God is offended therewith:
then it will give flattering promises to God that it will indeed put it away,
but yet it will prefix a time that shall be long first, if it also then at all
performs it, saying yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little
folding of sin in mine arms, till I am older, till I am richer, till I have had
more of the sweetness and the delights of sin. Thus, Their Isa. 66. 3.
Soul delights in their abominations.

5. If God yet pursues, and will see whether this promise of putting sin out of
doors shall be fulfilled by the Soul, why then it will be partial in God's Law,
it will put away some, and keep some; put away the grossest and keep the
finest; put away those that can best be spared, and keep the most profitable
for Mal. 2. 9.
a help at a pinch.

6. Yea, If all sin must be abandoned, or the Soul shall have no rest, why then
the Soul and Sin will part (with such a parting as it is) even as Phaltiel
parted with David's Wife, 2 Samuel 3. 16. Ruth. 1. 14.
with an ill will and a sorrowful mind, or as Orpha left her Mother with a Kiss.

7. And if at any time they can, or shall meet with each other again, and no
Body never the wiser: O what courting will be betwixt Sin and the Soul; and
this is called Ezekiel. 8. 12.
doing of things in the dark.

By all these and many more things that might be instanced, it is manifest that
sin has a friendly entertainment by the Soul, and that therefore the Soul is
guilty of damnation: For what do all these things argue, but that God, his
word, his ways and graces are out of favor with the Soul, and that sin and
Satan are its only pleasant companions. But, Secondly, That I may yet show you
what a great thing sin is with the Soul that is to be damned. I wi^ show how
sin by the help of the Soul is managed from the motion of sin, even till it
comes to the very act; for sin cannot come to an act without the help o^ the
Soul. The Body does little here, as I shall further show you anon.

There is then a motion of sin presented to the Soul (and whether presented by
sin it self, or the Devil, we will not at this time dispute) motions of sin and
motions to sin there are, and always the end o^ the motions of sin are to
prevail with the Soul t^ help that motion into an act. But I say, Isa. 57. 5.
Jer. 5. 8.
There is a motion to sin, moved to the Soul; or as Jame^ calls it a
conception: Now behold how the Soul deal^ with this motion, in order to the
finishing of sin that death might follow.

1. This motion is taken notice of by the Soul: but is not resisted nor striven
against, only the Soul lift^ up its eyes upon it, and sees that there is
present, (...) motion to sin; a motion of sin presented to the Soul that the
Soul might Midwife it from the Conceptio^ into the World.

2. Well, Notice being taken that a motion to sin i^ present, what follows, but
that the fancy or im^gi^nation of the Soul takes it home to it, and does no^
only look upon it and behold it more narrowly, bu^ begins to trick and trim up
the sin to the pleasing o^ it self and of all the Powers of the Soul. That this
is true, is evident, because God finds fault with the imagination as with
that which lends to sin, the first hand, and that gives to it the first lift
toward its being helped forward to act. And Romans 7. 5.
God sa^ that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth (tha^ Genesis 6. 5, 12,
13.
^s, many abominable actions were done: for all flesh had corrupted God's way
upon the Earth.) But how came this to be so? why, every imagination of the
thoughts, or of the motions that were in the Heart to sin, was evil, ^nly evil,
and that continually. The imagination of the thoughts was evil, that is, such
as tended not to deaden or stifle, but such as tended to animate and forward
the motions or thoughts of sin into action; every imagination of the thoughts,
that which is here called a thought, is by Paul to the Romans called a motion:
now the imagination should and would, had it been on God's side, so have
conceived of this motion of and to sins, as to have presented it in all its
features so ugly, so ill favored and so unreasonable a thing to the Soul, that
the Soul should forthwith have let down the Sluice, and pulled up the Draw
bridge, put a stop with greatest defiance to the motion now under
consideration: but the imagination being defiled, it presently at the very
first view or noise of the motion of sin, so acted as to forward the bringing
the said motion or thought into act. So then, the thought of sin, or motion
thereto, is first of all entertained by the imagination and fancy of the Soul,
and thence conveyed to the rest of the Powers of the Soul to be condemned, if
the imagination be good; but to be helped forward to the act, if the
imagination be evil. And thus the evil imagination helps the motion of, and
to, sin toward the act, even by dressing of it up in that guise and habit that
may best delude the Understanding Judgment and Conscience: and that is done
after this manner; Suppose a motion of sin to commit fornication, to swear, to
steal, to act covetously, or the like, be propounded to the fancy and
imagination; the imagination if evil presently dresseth up this motion in that
gar^ that best suiteth with the nature of the Sin. As if it be the Lust of
Uncleanness, the^ is the Motion to sin dressed up in all the imaginable
pleasureableness of that Sin; if to Covetousness, the^ is the Sin dressed up in
the Profits and Honors that attend that Sin, and so of Theft and the like; but
if the Motion be to swear, hector or the like, then i^ that Motion dressed up
with valor, and manliness: and so you may count of the rest of sinful Motions,
and thus being trimmed up like a Bartholomew Baby, it is presented to all the
rest of the Powers of the Soul, where with joint consent it is admired and
embraced to the firing and inflaming all the Powers o^ the Soul.

And hence it is that Men are said to inflame themselves with their Idols under
every g^een Tree: An^ to be as fed Horses, neighing after their Neighbor's
Isa. 57. 5. Jer. 5. 8.
Wife: for the Imagination is such a forceable Power, that if it puts forth
it self to dress up and present a thing to the Soul, whether that thing be evil
or good, the rest of the Faculties cannot withstand it. Therefore when David:
prayed for the Children of Israel, he said, I have seen with joy, thy People,
which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee; that is, for preparations
to build the Temple. O Lord God, says he, keep this for ever in the
Imagination 1 Chronicles. 29. 17, 18.
of the Thoughts of the Heart of thy People for ever, and prepare their hearts
unto thee. He knew that as the Imagination was prepared, so would the Soul be
moved, whether by evil or good; therefore as to this he prays that their
imagination might be engaged always with apprehensions of the beauteousness of
the Temple, that they might always, as now, offer willingly for its building.

But as I said, when the Imagination has thus set forth Sin to the rest of the
Faculties of the Soul, they are presently entangled and fall into a flame of
love thereto: this being done, it follows that a Purpose to pursue this Motion,
till it be brought unto act, is the next thing that is resolved on. Thus Esau
after he had conceived of that profit that would accrue to him by murdering of
his Brother, fell the next way into a Resolve to spill Jacob's Blood. And
Rebecca sent for Jacob, and said unto him. Genesis 27. 42. Jer. 49. 30.
Behold thy Brother Esau as touching thee, does comfort himself, purposing to
kill thee. Nor is this purpose to do an evil without its fruit, for he
comforted himself in his evil purpose; Esau as touching thee does comfort
himself; purposing to kill thee.

The Purpose therefore being concluded, in the next place the Invention is
diligently set to work to find out what means, methods, and ways will be
thought best to bring this purpose into practice, and this motion to sin into
action. Esau invented the Gen 27. 42. 2 Samuel 11. 13.
Death of his Brother, when his Father was to be carried to his Grave; David
purposed to make Vriah Father his Bastard-Child, by making of him drunk. Amnon
purposed to ravish Tamar, and the means that he invented to do it, were by
feigning himself sick. Absalom purposed to kill Amnon, and invented to do it
Luke 22* 3, 4, 5, 6.
at a Feast. Judas purposed to sell Christ, and invented to betray him in the
absence of the People. The Jews purposed to kill Paul, and invented to entreat
the Judge of a Blandation to send for him, Acts 23. 12, 13, 14, 15.
that they might murder him as he went.

Thus you see how sin is in the Motion of it handed through the Soul; First, it
comes into the Fancy or Imagination by which it is so presented to the Soul, as
to inflame it with desire to bring it into act, so from this desire the Soul
proceeds to a purpose of enjoying, and from a purpose of enjoying to
inventing how, or by what means it had best to attempt the accomplishing of it.

But further, When the Soul has thus far by its wickedness pursued the Motion
of Sin to bring it into action: then to the last thing, to wit, to endeavor to
take the opportunity, which by the Invention^ is judged most convenient, so to
endeavors it goes till it has finished Sin, and finished, in finishing of
that, its own fearful damnation. Then Lust when it Jam. 1. 15.
has conceived, brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death.

And who knows, but God and the Soul, how many letts, hindrances, convictions,
fears, frights, misgivings, and thoughts of the Judgment of God all this while
are passing and repassing, turning and returning over the Face of the Soul? How
many times the Soul is made to start, look back and tremble, while it is
pursuing the pleasure, profit, applause or preferment that Sin when finished,
promises to yield unto the Soul? for God is such a lover of the Soul, that he
seldom lets it go on in Sin, but he cries to it by his word and providence;
Oh! do not this abominable thing that I hate; especially at first, until it
shall have hardened it self, and so provoked him to give it up in Sin-revenging
Judgment to its own ways and doings, which is the terriblest Judgment under
Heaven: And this brings me to the third Thing, the which I now will speak to.

3. As the Soul receives, detains, entertains, and willily works, to bring
Sin from the motion into act, so it abhors to be controuled and taken off of
this work; My Soul loathed them, says God, Zech. 11. 8.
and the^^ Soul also abhorred me: My Soul loathed them because they were so
bad, and their Souls abhorred me, because I am so good. Sin then is the Cause
of the Loss of the Soul; because it has set the Soul, or rather, because the
Soul of love to sin, has set it self against God. Woe unto their Souls, for
they Isa. 3. 9.
have rewarded evil unto themselves.

That you may the better perceive that the Soul through sin has set it self
against God: I will propose, and speak briefly to these two things:

I. The Law.

II. The Gospel.

1. For the Law, God has given it for a Rule of Life, either as written in
their Natures, or as inserted in the Holy Scriptures: I say, for a Rule of Life
to all the Children of Men, but what have Men done, or how have they carried it
to this Law of their Creator, let us see, and that from the Mouth of God
himself.

I. Jer. 6. 19. Chapter 9. 13, Chapter 16. 11. Chapter 44.
They have not hearkened unto my Law.

II. They have forsaken my Law.

III. They have forsaken me, and not kept my Law.

IV. They have not walked in my Law, nor in my Statutes.

V. Ez^k. 22. 26. Hos. 8. 1^.
Her Priests have violated my Law.

VI. And says God, I have written to him the great Things of my Law, but they
were counted as a strange Thing.

Now whence should all this disobedience arise ^ not from the unreasonableness
of the Commandment, but from the Opposition that is lodged in the Soul against
God and the Enmity that it entertains against goodness. Hence the Apostle
speaks of the Enmity, and says, That Men are enemies in their Minds, their Col.
1. 21.
Souls, as is manifest, by wicked works.

This, if Men went no further, must needs be highly provoking to a just and
holy God: yea, so highly offensive is it, that to show the heat of his Romans 2.
8, 9.
anger, he says, Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every
Soul of Man that does evil (and this is evil with a witness) of the Jew first,
and also of the Gentile, that does evil, that breaks the Law, for that evil
he is crying out against now. But,

2. To speak of the Gospel, and of the Carriage of sinful Souls toward God
under that dispensation.

The Gospel is a Revelation of a sovereign Remedy, provided by God through
Christ, for the Health and Sal^ation of those that have made themselves objects
of wrath by the Breach of the Law of Works. This is manifest by all the
Scripture: But how does the Soul carry it toward God, when he offers to deal
with it under and by this dispensation of grace? Why, just as it carried it
under the Law of Works, they oppose, they contradict, they blaspheme, and
forbid that this Gospel be mentioned. What higher Acts 13. 45. Chap. 18. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 25. 1 These. 2. 13, 14, 15.
affront or contempt can be offered to God and what greater disdain can be
shown against the Gospel? Yet all this the poor Soul to its own wrong offers
against the way of its own salvation as it is said in the Word of Truth, Prove.
8. 36.
He that sins against me, wrongs his own Soul, all that hate me, love death.

But further, The Soul despises not the Gospel in that revelation of it only,
but the great and chief bringer thereof with the manner also of his bringing of
it.

The Bringer, the great Bringer of the Gospel is the good Lord Jesus Christ
himself, he came and preached Peace to them that the Law proclaimed Ephesians. 2. 17.
War against; he came and preached Peace to them that were far off, and to them
that were nigh. And it is worth your observation, to take notice how he came,
and that was and still is (as he is set forth in the Word of the Gospel) to
wit, First as making peace himself to God for us, in and by the Blood of his
Cross, and then as bearing (as set out by the Gospel) the very Characters of
his sufferings before our faces in every tender of the Gospel of his grace unto
us. And to touch a little upon the Dress in which by the Gospel Christ
presents himself unto us, while he offers unto sinful Souls his peace, by
the Tenders thereof.

1. Isa. 9. 6. Luke 2. 9. 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Gal. 3. 13. Rom 10. 4. Dan.
9. 24.
He is set forth as born for us, to save out Souls.

2. He is set forth before us, as bearing of our Sins for us, and suffering
God's Wrath for us.

3. He is set forth before us, as fulfilling the Law for us, and as bringing of
everlasting righteousness to us for our covering.

Again* As to the manner of his working out the Salvation of Sinners for them,
that they might have Peace and Joy, and Heaven and Glory for ever;

1. He is set forth as sweating of Blood while he Luke 22. 24.
was in his Agony, wrestling with the Thoughts of Death, which he was to suffer
for our Sins, that he might save the Soul.

2. He is set forth as crying, weeping and mourning under the Lashes of
Justice, Heb. 3. 7.
that he put himself under, and was willing to bear for our Sins.

3. He is set forth as betrayed, apprehended, condemned, spit on, scourged,
buffeted, mocked, crowned with Thorns, crucified, pierced with Nails and a
Spear: To save the Soul from being betrayed by the Devil and Sin; to save it
from being apprehended by Justice, and condemned by the Law; to save it from
being spit on in a way of contempt by holiness. To save it from being scourged
with guilt of Sins as with Scorpions. To save it from being continually
buffeted by its own Conscience. To save it from being mocked at by God. To save
it from being crowned with ignominy and shame for ever. To save it from dying
the second Death. To save it from wounds and grief for ever.

Do thou understand me, sinful Soul? He wrestled with Justice, that thou
might have rest; he wept and mourned that thou might laugh and rejoice;
he was be^rayed that thou might go free; was apprehended that thou might
escape; he was condemned that thou might be justified; and was killed, that
thou might live; he wore a Crown of Thorns, that thou might wear a Crown
of Glory; and was nailed to the Cross with his Arms wide open, to show with
what freeness all his Merits shall be bestowed on the coming Soul, and how
heartily he will receive it into his bosom.

Further* All this he did of mere good will, and offers the Benefit thereof
unto thee freely; yea he comes unto thee in the Word of the Gospel, with the
Blood running down from his Head upon his Face, with his Tears abiding upon his
Cheeks, with his holes as fresh in his hands and his feet, and as with the
Blood still bubling out of his side, to pray thee 2 Cor. 5.
to accept of the Benefit, and to be reconciled to God thereby. But that says
the sinful Soul to this? I do not ask what he says with his Lips, for he will
assuredly flatter God with his Mouth; But what does his actions and carriages
declare as to his acceptance of this incomparable benefit? For a wicked man
Prove. 6. 12, 13.
speaks with his feet, and teaches with his fingers. With his feet, that is,
by the way he goes; and with his fingers, that is, by his acts and do^ngs. So
then what says he by his goings, by his acts, and doings unto this
incomparable benefit, thus ^rought unto him from the Father, by his only Son
Jesus Christ? What says he? Why, he says, That he does not at all regard this
Christ, nor value the Grace thus tendered unto him in the Gospel.

First he says, That he regards not this Christ, that he sees nothing in
him why he should admit him to be enterta^ned in his affections. Therefore the
Prophet speaking in the Person of Sinners says, Isa. 53. 2, 3.
He (Christ) ha^h no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty that we should desire him: And then adds to show what he means by
his thus speaking, saying, He is d^s^ised and rejected of Men. All this is
spoken with reference to his Person, and it was eminently fulfi^^ed upon him in
the days of hi^ flesh, when he was hated, maligned and persecuted to death by
Sinners. And is sti^ fulfilled in the Souls of Sinners, in that they cannot
abide to think of him with thoughts that have a Tendency in them to separate
them and their Lusts asunder, and to the making of them to embrace him for
their darling, and the taking up of their Cross, to follow him. All this
Sinners speak out with loud voices, in that they stop their ears and shut their
eyes, as to him, but open them wide, and hearken diligently to any thing that
pleases the Flesh, and that is a Nursery to Sin. But,

2. As they despise and reject, and do not regard his Person, so they do not
value the Grace that he tendereth unto them by the Gospel; this is plain by
that indifferency of spirit that always attends them, when at any time they
hear thereof, or when it is presented unto them.

I may safely say, That the most of Men who are concerned in a Trade, will be
more vigilant in dealing with a Twelve-penny Customer, than they will be with
Christ, when he comes to make unto them by the Gospel, a tender of the
incomparable Grace of God. Hence they are called fools, Prove. 17. 16.
Because a price is put into their hands to get wisdom, and they have no heart
unto it. And hence again it is, that that bitter complaint is made, Psalm. 81.
11.
But my People would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me.

Now these things being found, as practiced by the Souls of Sinners, must needs
after a wonderful manner provoke; wherefore no marvel that the Heavens are bid
to be astonished at this, and that damnation shall seize upon the Soul for this.

And indeed, The Soul that does thus by practice Jer. 2.
(though with his mouth (as who does not?) he shall show much love) he does
interpretatively say these things:

1. That he loves Sin better than Grace, and darkness better than light, even
as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed. And this is the Condemnation that light
is come into the World, and Men love darkness more than light (as is manifest)
because their deeds are evil.

2. They do also by their thus rejecting of Christ and Grace, say, That for
what the Law can do to them, they value it not; they regard not its thundering
threatenings, nor will they shrink when they come to endure the Execution
thereof; wherefore God to deter them from such bold and desperate ways, that do
interpretatively fully declare that they make such desperate conclusions,
insinuates, that the Burden of the Curse thereof is intolerable, saying* Can
Ezekiel. 22. 14.
thy Heart endure, or can thy Hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with
thee, I the Lord have spoken it, I will do it.

3. Yea by their thus doing, they do as good as say, That they will run the
hazard of a sentence of death at the day of judgment, and that they will in
the mean time join Issue and stand a Trial at that day with the great and
terrible God: What else means their not harkening to him, their despising of
his Son, and the rejecting of his grace: yea, I say again, what else means
their slighting of the Curse of the Law, and their choosing to abide in their
sins till the day of death and judgment. And thus I have showed you the Causes
of the Loss of the Soul: And assuredly these things are no fables.

Object. But some may Object, and say, But you denounce all against the Soul,
as if the Body was in no fault at all; or as if there were no punishment
assigned for the Body. John 3. 19.


I Answer, The Soul must be the part punished, because the Soul is that which
sins. Every (q) Si^ that a Man does is without the Body; Fornication or
Adultery excepted. Is without the Body, that is, as to the wilily inventing,
contriving and finding out ways to bring the motions of sin into action. For
alas! What can the Body do as to these? it is in a manner wholly passive, yea,
altogether as to the lusting and purposing to do the wickedness, excepting the
sin before excepted; Ay, and not excepting that, as to the rise of that Sin;
for even that with all the rest arises and proceeds out of the Heart, the
Sul. For 1 Cor. 6. 18.
from within, out of the Heart of Man proceed fornication, adultery, murder,
thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil^eye,
blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all these evil things come from within and
d^fil^ the Man: that is, the outward Man. But a difference must always be put
betwixt defiling and being defiled, that which do^ sileth being the worst: not
but that the Body shall have its share of judgment, for Mark 7. 21, 22, 23.
Body and Soul must be destroyed in Hell; the Body as the Instrument. the Soul
as the Actor; but oh! the Soul* the Soul, the Soul is the Sinner, and therefore
the Soul, as the Principal, must be punished.

And that God's indignation burns most again^ the Soul, appears, in that
death-hath seized upon every Soul already, for the Scripture says. That every
Luke 12. ^ Matthew. 10. 28.
natural or unconverted Man is dead. Dead How? Is his Body dead? No verily, his
Bod^ lives, but his Soul is dead. Dead! but with wha^ death? Dead to God, and
to all things Gospel good, by reason of that benum^ing stupefying and
senselesness that by God's just Judgment for and by sin, has Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
1 Timothy 5. 6.
swallowed up the Soul. Yea* if you observe, you shall see, that the Soul goes
first, or before in punishment, not only by what has been said already, in that
the Soul is first made a partaker of death, but in that God first deals with
the Soul by convictions, yea, and terrors, perhaps while the Body is well; or
in that he gives up the Soul to judicial hardness, and further blindness,
while he leaves the Body to do his Office in the World: yea, and also when the
day of death, and dissolution is come, the Body is spared while the Soul is
tormented in unutterable torment in Hell. And so I say, it shall be spared, and
the Clods of the Valley shall be sweet unto it while the Soul mourns in Hell
for Sin: it is true, at the Day of Judgment because that is the last and final
Judgment of God on Men, then the Body and Soul shall be reunited or joined
together again, and shall then together partake of that recompense for their
wickedness which is meet. When I say, The Body is spared, and the Soul
tormented, I mean not that the Body is not then at death made to partake of the
wages of Sin: For Romans 6.
the wages of Sin is death: But I mean the Body partakes then but of temporal
death, which as to sense and feeling, is sometimes over presently, and then
rests in the Grave, while the Soul is tormenting in Hell: yea, and why is
Death suffered to slay the Body? I dare say, not chiefly for that the
indignation of God most burns against the Body; but the Body being the House
for the Soul in this World, God even pulls down this Body, that the Soul may be
stripped naked; and being stripped, may be carried to Prison, to the Place where
damned Souls are, there to suffer in the beginning of suffering, that
punishment that will be endless.

2. Therefore the Soul must be the part most sorely punished, because Justice
must be distributed with equity. God is a God of knowledge and judgment* 1 Samuel
2.
by him actions are weighed: actions in order to Judgment. Now by weighing of
actions, since he finds the Soul to have the deepest Hand in Sin, and he says
that he has so, of equity the Soul is to bear the burden of punishment; Shall
Genesis 19. 25.
not the Judge of all the Earth do right, in his famous distributing o^
Judgment? He Job 34. 23.
will not lay upon Man more tha^ right, that he should enter into judgment with
God. The Soul since deepest in Sin, shall also be deepest in punishment. Shall
Numb. 16. 22.
one Man sin, said Moses, an^ will thou be wroth with all the Congregation? He
pleads here for equity in God's distributing of Judgment: yea, and so exact is
God in the distribution thereof, that he will not punish Heathens so as he will
punish Jews; wherefore he says, of the Jew first Romans 2. 9.
or chiefly, and also to the Gentile: yea, in Hell, he has prepared several
degrees of punishment for the several sorts or degrees of offenders, And Luke
20. 47.
some shall receive greater damnation. And will it not be unmeet for us to
think, since God is so exact in all his doings, that he will without his
weights and measures give to Soul and Body, as I may say, carelessly, not
severally, their punishments according to the desert and merit of each?

3. The punishment of the Soul in Hell must needs, to be sure, as to degree,
differ from the punishment of the Body there: When I say differ, I mean must
needs be greater, whether the Body be punished with the same Fire, with the
Soul, or Fire of another nature. If it be punished with the same Fire, yet not
in the same way, for the Fire of Guilt with the Apprehensions of indignation
and wrath, are most properly felt, and apprehended by the Soul, and by the
Body, by virtue of its union with the Soul, and so felt by the Body, if not
only, yet I think mostly by way of sympathy with the Soul (and the Cause we
say, is worse than the Disease) and if the wrath of God, and the Apprehensions
of it, as discharging it self for sin, and the breach of the Law, be that with
which the Soul is punished, as sure it is; then the Body is punished by the
Effects, or by those Influences that the Soul in its torments has upon the
Body, by virtue of that great oneness and union that is between them.

But if there be a punishment prepared for the Body distinct in kind from that
which is prepared for the Soul, yet it must be a punishment inferior to that
which is prepared for the Soul (not that the Soul and Body shall be severed,
but being made of things distinct, their punishments will be by that which is
most suitable to each) I say, it must be inferior, because nothing can be so
hot, so tormenting, so intolerably unsupportable, as the quickest Apprehensions
of, and the immediate sinking under that Guilt and Indignation that is
proportionable to the Offense, Should all the Wood and Brimstone, and
cumbustible matter on Earth be gathered together for the tormenting of one
Body, yet that cannot yield that torment to that, which the sense of guilt and
burning hot application of the mighty indignation of God, will do to the Soul:
Yea, suppose the Fire wherewith the Body is tormented in Hell, should be seven
times hotter than any of our Fire; yea, suppose it again, to be seven times
hotter than that which is seven times hotter than ours, yet it must, suppose it
be but created fire* be infinitely short (as to tormenting operations) of the
unspeakable wrath of God, when in the heat thereof he applies it to, and does
punish the Soul for sin in Hell therewith.

So then whether the Body be tormented with the same Fire wherewith the Soul is
tormented, or whether the Fire be of another kind, yet it is not possible that
it should bear the same punishment as to degree, because, or for the causes
that I have showed. Nor inded is it meet it should, because the Body has not
sinned so, so grievously as the Soul has done, and God proportioneth the
punishment suitable to the Offense.

4. With the Soul by its self, are the most quick and suitable apprehensions of
God and his wrath: wherefore that must needs be made partaker of the sorest
punishment in Hell; it is the Soul that now is most subtle at discerning, and it
is the Soul that will be so; then Conscience, Memory, Understanding and Mind,
these will be the ^eat of torment, since the Understanding will let Wrath
immediately upon these, from what it apprehends of that wrath; Conscience will
let in the Wrath of God immediately upon these, from what it fearfully feels of
that wrath: the Memory will then as a Vessel receive and retain up to the brim
of this Wrath even as it receives by the Understanding and Conscience, the
Cause of this Wrath, and considers of the durableness of it: So then the Soul
is the seat and receiver of Wrath, even as it was the receiver and seat of Sin;
here then is sin and wrath upon the Soul, the Soul in the Body, and so Soul and
Body tormented in Hellfire.

5. The Soul will be most tormented, because strongest: the biggest Burden must
lie upon the strongest Part, especi^lly since also it is made capable of it by
its sin. The Soul must bear its own punishment, and a great part of the Bodies
too, forasmuch, as so far as Apprehension goes, the Soul will be quicker at
that Work than the Body. The Body will have its punishment to lie mostly in
feeling, but the Soul in feeling and apprehending both. True, the Body by the
help of the Soul will see too, but the Soul will see yet abundantly further.
And good reason that the Soul should bear part of the punishment of the Body,
because it was through its allurements that the Body yielded to help the Soul
to Sin; the Devil presented Sin, the Soul took it by the Body, and now Devil
and Soul and Body, and all must be lost, cast away, that is damned in Hell for
Sin, but the Soul must be the Burden-bearer.

Object. But you may say, does not this give encouragement to Sinners to give
way to the Body to be in al^ its members loose and vain, and wicked, as
Instruments to Sin?

Answer. No, Forasmuch as the Body shall also have his share in punishment: for
though I have said, the Soul shall have more punishment than the Body; yet I
have not said, That the Body shall at all be eased by that; no, the Body will
have its due: and for the better making out of my Answer further, consider of
these following particulars.

1. The Body will be the Vessel to hold a tormented Soul in, this will be
something, therefore Man, damned Man, is called a Romans 9. 22.
Vessel of Wrath; a Vessel, and that in both Body and Soul. The Soul receives
Wrath into its self, and the Body holds that Soul that has thus received, and
is tormented with this Wrath of God. Now the Body being a Vessel to hold this
Soul that is thus possessed with the Wrath of God, must needs it self be
afflicted and tormented with that torment, because of its union with the Body:
therefore the Holy Ghost says, His Job 14. 22.
Flesh upon him shall have pain, and his Soul within him shall mourn: Both
shall have their torment and misery, for that both joined hand in hand in sin,
the Soul to bring it to the Birth, and the Body to midwife it into the World;
therefore it says again, with reference to the Body, Let Psalm. 109. 17, 18, 19.
the Curse come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones. Let it
be to him as a Garment which covers him, and as a Girdle, etc. The Body then
will be tormented as well as the Soul, by being a Vessel to hold that Soul in,
that is now possessed and distressed with the unspeakable wrath and indignation
of the Almighty God: and this will be a great deal if you consider,

2. That the Body as a Body, will by reason of its union with the Soul, be as
sensible, and so as capable in its kind, to receive correction and torment, as
ever, nay I think more; for if the quickness of the Soul, gives quickness of
sense to the Body, as (in some case, at least) I am apt to think it does, then
forasmuch as the Soul will now be most quick, most sharp in Apprehension, so
the Body by reason of union, and sympathy with the Soul, will be most quick,
and most sharp as to Sense. Indeed if the Body should not receive and retain
sense, yea, all its Senses, by reason of its being a Vessel to hold the Soul,
the torment of the Soul could not, as torment, be ministered to the Body, no
more than the Fire tormented (...) King of Babylon's- furnace, Dan. 3.
or than the King Moab's Lime-kiln was afflicted, because Amos 2. 1.
the King Elom's Bones were burnt to Lime therein. B^t (...) the Body has
received again its senses, now there^^^^e it must, yea, it cannot choose but
must feel that ^rath of God that is let out, yea poured out like ^ods of Water
into the Soul.

Remember also, that besides what the Body re^^^veth from the Soul by reason of
its union and sym^^thy therewith, there is a punishment and instru^ents of
punishment, though I will not pretend to (...) you exactly what it is, prepared
for the Body ^r its joining with the Soul in Sin, therewith to be ^inished; a
Punishment, I say, that shall fall imme^ately upon the Body, and that such an
one, as will ^ost fitly suit with the Nature of the Body, as wrath and guilt do
most fitly suit the Nature of the Soul.

3. Add to these, the durable condition that the ^ody in this state is now in
with the Soul. Time ^as when the Soul dyed, and the Body lived, and that the
Soul was tormented while the Body slept and rested in the Dust, but now these
things are past; ^or at the Day of Judgment, as I said, these two shall (...)
^e-united, and that which once did separate them, (...) dstroyed then of
necessity they must abide together, and as together abide the Punishment
prepared for them: and this will greaten the Torment of the Body.

Death was once the Wages of Sin, and a grievous Curse, but might the Damned
meet with it in Hell, they would count it a Mercy, because it would separate
Soul and Body, and not only so, but take away all sense from the Body, and make
it incapable of suffering torment: yea, I will add, and by that means give the
Soul some ease: for without doubt* as the Torments of the Soul extend
themselves to the (...) so the Torments of the Body extend themselves the Soul;
nor can it be otherwise, because of (...) and sympathy. But death, natural
death, shall destroyed, and there shall be no more (natural dea^^ no not in
Hell. And now it shall happen to Men, 1 Cor. 15. 26.
it has done in less and inferior Judgments, Jer. 9. 21. Rev. 9. 6.
(...) shall seek death and desire to dye, and death shall not found by them:
Thus therefore they must abide tog^^ther, death that used to separate them
asunder, now slain, 1. Because it was an enmy in keepi^^ Christ's Body in the
Grave. And 2. because Friend to carnal Men in that, though it was a Punis^^ment
in it self, yet while it lasted and had domini^^ over the Body of the Wicked,
it hindered them (...) that great and just judgment which for Sin was (...) unto
them; and this is the third Discovery of the manner and way of punishing of the
Body. But,

4. There will then be such things to be seen an^ heard, which the Eye and the
Ear (to say no more than has been said of the sense of feeling) will (...) and
hear, that will greatly aggravate the Punish^ment of the Body in Hell: For
though the Eye (...) the Window, and the Ear a Door for the Soul to look out
at, and also to receive in by; yet whatever go^eth in at the Ear or the Eye,
leaves influence upon the Body, whether it be that which the Soul delights
in, or that which the Soul abhors; for as the Eye affects the Heart, or
Soul, so the Eye and Lam. 3. 51.
Ear by hearing and beholding, both oft-times afflict the Body, When I heard,
my b^^y trembled, rottenness Hab. 3. 16.
entered into my bones.

Now I say, as the Body after its resurrection Dan. 12. 2. Joh. 5. 29.
to damnation, to everlasting shame and contempt, will receive all its senses
again, so it will have matter to exercise them upon, not only to the letting
into the Soul, those aggravations which they by hearing, feeling and seeing are
capable to let in thither, but I say, they will have matter and things to
exercise themselves upon for the helping forward of the Torment of the Body:
under temporal Judgments of old, the Body as well as the Soul had no ease, day
nor night, and that not only by reason of what was felt, but by reason of what
was heard and seen. In the Morning thou shall say, would God it were even, and
at even thou shall say, would God it were Morning. 1. For the fear of thine
heart, wherewith thou shall fear. 2. And Deuteronomy. 28. 97. v. 34.
for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shall see; Nay he tells them a little
before, That they should be mad for the sight of their eyes which they should
see.

See! Why, what shall they see? Why, themselves in Hell with others like them,
and this will be a Torment to their Body, there is bodily torment as I said,
ministered to the Body by the Senses of the Body. What think you? If a Man saw
himself in Prison, in Irons, upon the Ladder, with the Rope about his Neck,
would not this be distress to the Body, as well as to the Mind? To the Body
doubtless! witness the heavy Looks, the shaking Legs, trembling Knees, pale
Face, and beating and aching Heart; how much more then, when Men shall see
themselves in the Luke 16. 28.
most dreadful Place, it is a fearful Place doubtless to all to behold
themselves in, that shall come thither.

Again, They shall see others there, and shall b^ them see themselves. There is
an art, by which (...) Man may make his Neighbor look so ghastly, tha^ he
shall fright himself by looking on him, especiall^ when he thinks of himself,
that he is of the sam^ show also. It Is said concerning Men at the downf^^ of
Babylon, That they shall be amazed one at ano^ther, Isa. 13. 8.
for their faces shall be as flames. An^ what if one should say, that even as
it is wit^ an House set on fire within, where the Flame ascend out at the
Chimnies, out at the Windows, and the smoke out at every chink and crevis that
it can find so it will be with the Damned in Hell. That So^ will breath
Hellfire and smoke, and coals will see^ to hang upon its burning lips; yea,
the Face, Eye and Ears will seem all to be Chimnies and Vents for the Flame and
Smoke of the Burning which God b^ his breath has kindled therein, and upon
them which will be beheld one in another, to the great torment and distress of
each other.

What shall I say? here will be seen Devils, an^ here will be heard howlings,
and mournings, her^ will the Soul see it self at an infinite distance from God,
yea, the Body will see it too. In a Word who knows the Power of God's Wrath,
the Weigh^ of Sin, the Torments of Hell, and the Length (...) Eternity? If
none, then none can tell, when the^ have said what they can, the
intollerableness of the Torments that will swallow up the Soul, the lost Sou^
when it is cast away by God, and from him, into outer darkness for Sin: But
thus much for the Caus^ of the Loss of the Soul.

I now come to the second Doctrine that I gathere^ from the Words, namely, That
how unconcerned a^ ^areless soever some now be about the Loss or Salvation ^f
their Souls, the Day is coming (but it will then be (...) late) when Men will
be willing, had they never so much, to give it all in exchange for their Souls.

There are four things in the Words, that do prove this Doctrine:

1. There is an intimation of Life and Sense in the Man that has lost, and that
after he has lost his Soul (...) Hell; Or what shall a Man give in exchange for
his Soul? These words are by no means applicable to the (...) that has no life
or sense: for he that is dead according to our common acceptance of death,
that is ^eprived of life and sense, would not give two pence (...) change his
state: Therefore the words do intimate that the Man is yet alive and sensible.
Now were a Man alive and sensible, though he was in none other place than the
Grave, there to be confined, while others are at liberty, what would he give in
exchange ^or his place, and to be rid of that for a better? but ^ow much more
to be delivered from Hell, the present place and state of his Soul.

2. There is in the Text, an intimation of a sense of Torment; Or what shall a
Man give in exchange for (...) Soul? I am tormented in this flame. Torment
then, (...) Soul is sensible of, and that there is a place of ease (...) peace:
And from the sense and feeling of torment, he would give, yea, what would he
not give ^n exchange for his Soul?

3. There is in the Text an intimation of the intolerableness of the Torment,
because that it supposes that the Man whose Soul is swallowed up therewith,
would give all, were his all never so great ^n exchange for his Soul.

4. There is yet in the Text an intimation that the Soul is sensible of the
lastingness of the punishment; or else the question rather argues a Man unwary
than considerate in his offering, as is suppose^ by Christ, so largely, his all
in exchange for (...) Soul.

But we will in this manner proceed no further, h^ take it for granted, that
the Doctrine is good wherefore I shall next enquire after what is contai^^ed in
this truth. And first, That God has undertake^ and will accomplish, the
breaking of the Spirits of (...) the World, either by his grace and mercy to
Salvati^^ or by his justice and severity to damnation.

The damned Soul under consideration is certain^ supposed, as by the Doctrine,
so by the Text, (...) be utterly careless, and without regard of Salvation so
long as the acceptable time did last, and as the whi^ Flag, that signifies
terms of peace, did hang out, a^ therefore it is said to be lost: But behold
now it careful, but now it is solicitous, but now, What she a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? He of who^ you read in the Gospel, that could tend to do
nothin^ in the days of the Gospel, but to find out how to be^ clothed in
Purple and fine Linen, and to fare sump^tuously every day, was by God brought
so do^^ and laid so low at last, that he could crouch Luke 16. 19, 24.
and cringe and beg for one small drop of Water ^ cool his Tongue; a thing that
but a little before (...) would have thought scorn to have done, when (...)
also thought scorn to stoop to the Grace and Merc^ of the Gospel. But God was
resolved to break (...) Spirit, and the Pride of his Heart, and to humbl^ his
lofty Looks, if not by his Mercy, yet by his Ju^^stice; if not by his Grace,
yet by Hellfire.

This he also threatens to bring upon the Fool Prove. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25, 2^* 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13.
i^ the Proverbs, They shall call, they shall seek, the ^all cry. Who shall do
so? the answer is, They that ^ometimes scorned either to seek, or call, or cry:
^hey that stopped their ears, that pulled away their ^houlders, and that
refused to seek, or call, or cry to God for Mercy.

Sinner, careless Sinner, did thou take notice of ^his first Inference that I
have drawn from my se^ond Doctrine? If thou did, yet read it again, it is
^his, God has undertaken and will accomplish the breaking ^f the Spirits of all
the World, either by his grace and ^ercy unto Salvation, or by his justice and
severity to Damnation.

The reason for this is this, God is resolved to have ^he M^stery, he is
resolved to have the Victory. Isa. 27. 4.
Who will set the Briars and Thorns against me in Battle, I will go through
them and burn them together. I will march against them God is merciful and is
come forth into the World by his Son, tendering of Grace unto Sinners by the
Gospel, and would willingly make a Conquest over them for their good by h^s
Mercy, now he being come out, Sinners like Briars and Thorns do set themselves
against him, and will have none of his mercy: well, but what says God? says
he, Then I will march on, I will go through them, and burn them together. I am
resolved to have the Mastery one way or another: if they will not bend to me,
and accept of my Mercy in the Gosgel, I will bend them and break them by my
Justice in Hellfire; they say, they will not bend, I say they shall; now they
shall know whose word shall stand, Jer. 44. 25, 26, 27, 28.
mine or theirs: Wherefore the Apostle, when he saw that some of the
Corinthians begun to be unruly, and to do those things that did begin to hazard
them, says, Do ye provoke the Lord to jealousy, are ye stronger 1 Cor. 10.
20, 21, 22.
than he? as who should say, my brethren, a^ you aware what you do? do you not
understand tha^ God is resolved to have the Mastery one way or ano^ther. And
are you stronger than he? if not, trembl^ before him, or he will certainly have
you under hi^ feet. I will tread them in mine anger, and trample the^ Isa. 63.
3.
in my fury: Thus he speaks of them that se^ themselves against him, therefore
beware. No^ the reason of this resolution of God, it flows from a Determination
in him to make all his sayings good* and to verify them on the Consciences of
Sinners. And since the incredulous World will not belie? now, and fly from
wrath, they shall shortly believe and cry under it: since they will not now
credit the Word before they see, unto salvation, they shall be made to credit
it by sense and feeling unto damnation.

The second Inference that I draw from my second Doctrine is this, That it is,
and will be the lot of some to bow, and break before God too late, or when it
is too late.

God is resolved, as I said, to have the Mastery, and that not only in a way of
Dominion and Lordship in general, for that he has now; but he is resolved to
master, that is, to break the Spirit of the World, to make all Men cringe and
crouch unto him, even those that now say, There is no God; or if there be, yet,
what is the Almighty that we should Psalm. 14. 1. Job 21. 15. Mal. 3. 14.
serve him?

This is little thought of by those that now harden their hearts in wickedness,
and that turn their Spirit against God, but this they shall think of, this they
2 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
must think of, this God will make them think of (...) that day; at which day
they also now do mock and ^eride, that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon
them. And I say, they shall think then of those things, and break at heart, and
melt under the Hand, and Power and Majesty of the Almighty; For, As I ^ive,
says God, every knee shall bow to me, every tongue Isa. 45. 23. Romans 14. 10,
11, 12.
shall confess to God: And again, The Nations shall see and be confounded at
all their might, they shall ^ay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall
be deaf; they shall lick the Dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their
holes like Worms, or Mal. 7. 16, 17.
creeping things of the Earth, they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and
shall fear because of thee.

For then they, will they, nill they, shall have to do with God, though not
with him as merciful, or as one that may be entreated: yet with him as just,
and as devouring fire: yea, they shall see that Face, Heb. 12. last verse.
and hear that Voice, from whom, and from which the Heavens and the Earth will
fly away and find no place of stay. And by this appearance, and by such words
of his mouth as he then will speak to them, they shall begin to tremble, and
call for the Rocks to fall upon them and cover them: For if these things will
happen at the Execution of inferior Judgments, What will be done! what effects
will the last, most dreadful and eternal Judgment have upon Men's Souls?

Hence you find, that at the very first appearance of Jesus Christ, the whole
World begins to mourn and lament, Every eye shall see him, and they also that
Rev. 1. 7.
pierced him, and all Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him: And
therefore you also find them to stand at the Door and knock, saying, Luke 13.
25, 26. Matthew. 25.
Lord, Lord, open unto us. Moreover you find them also desiring, yea, also so
humble i^ their desires, as to be content with the least degree of Mercy, one
drop, one drop upon the tip of ones Finger: What stooping, what condescension,
what humility is here? All and every one of those passages declare that the
Hand of God is upon them, and that the Almighty has got the Mastery of them,
has conquered them, broke the Pride of their Power, and laid them low, and made
them cringe and crouch unto him, bending the Knee, and craving of kindness.

Thus then will God bow, and bend, and break them; yea, make them bow, and
bend, and break before him. And hence also it is that they will weep, and
mourn, and gnash their Teeth, and cry, and repent that ever they have been so
foolish, so wicked, so traitorous to their Souls, and such enemies of their own
eternal happiness, as to stand out in the day of their visitation, in a way of
rebellion against the Lord.

But here is their hard hap, their dismal lot and portion; that all these
things must be when it is too late. It is, and will be the lot, and hap of these
to Matthew. 25.
bow, bend and break too late.

You read, They come weeping and mourning and with tears, they knock and cry
for mercy, but what did tears avail? why nothing, for the door was shut. He
answered and said, I know you not whence you are: Luke 13. 26, 27, 28.
But they repeat and renew their suit, saying, We have eat and drank in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets. What now? Why, he returns upon
them his first answer the second time, saying, I tell you, I know you not
whence you are: depart from me all ye workers of iniquity: Then he concludes,
There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when you shall see Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and your selves
thrust out. They come weeping, and go weeping away. They come to him weeping,
for they saw that he had conquered them, but they departed weeping, for they
saw that he would damn them: yet, as we read in another place, they were very
loath to go from him by their reasoning and expostulating with him, Lord when
saw we thee an hungered, or thirsty, or a stranger, Matthew. 25. 44, 46.
or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? But all would
not do, here is no place for change of mind, These shall go away into
everlasting punishment; but the Righteous into life eternal. And now what would
a Man give in exchange for his Soul? so that as I said before, all is too late,
they mourn too late, they repent too late, they pray too late, and seek to make
an exchange for their Soul too late.

Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Two or three things there
may yet be gathered from these Words; I mean as to the Desires of them that
have lost their Souls, to make for them an exchange: What shall a Man give in
exchange? What shall? what would? yea, what would not a Man, if he had it, give
in exchange for his Soul?

1. What would not a Man, I mean a Man in the Condition, that is by the Text
supposed, some Men are, and will be in, give in exchange, to have another Man's
Virtues instead of their own Vices? Let me dye the death of the Righteous. Let
my Soul be in the state of the Soul of the Righteous, that is, with reference
to his virtues, when I dye, and let my last end Numb. 23. 10.
be like his. It Is a sport now to some to taunt and squib, and deride at other
Men's Virtues, but* the Day is coming when their minds will be changed, and
when they shall be made to count those that have done those righteous actions
and duties which they have scoffed at, the only blessed Men. Yea, they shall
wish their Soul in the blessed Possession of those Graces and Virtues that
those whom they hated were accompanied with; and would if they had it, give a
whole World for this change, but it will not now do, it is now too late, what
then shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? and this is more than intimated
in that 25 th of Matthew, named before: for yo^ find by that Text, how loath
they were, or will be, to be counted for unrighteous People. Lord, say they,
when did we see thee an hungered, or a thirst, naked, or sick, and did not
minister unto thee. Now they are not willing to be of the Number of the Wicked,
though heretofore the ways of the Righteous were an abomination to them: But
alas! they are before a just God, a just Judge, a Judge that will give every
one according to their ways; therefore, Woe to the Soul of the Wicked now: Isa.
3. 11.
It shall go ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him: thus
therefore he is locked up as to this, he cannot now change his vices for
virtues, nor put himself or his Soul in the stead of the Soul of the saved; so
that it still, and will for ever abide a question unresolved, Or what shall a
Man give in exchange for his Soul? I do not doubt but that a Man's state may be
such in this World, that if he had it, he would give thousands of Gold, to be
as innocent and guiltless in the Judgment of the Law of the Land, as is the
state of such, or such, heartily wishing that himself was not that he that he
is: how much more then will Men wish thus when they stand ready to receive the
^ast, their eternal judgment, But what shall a Man give in exchange for his
Soul?

2. As they would for the Salvation of their Souls be glad to change away their
Vices for the Virtues, their Sins for the good Deeds of others: so what would
they not give to change places now, or to remove from where now they are, into
Paradise, into Abraham's Bosom.

But neither shall this be admitted, the R^ghteous must have their inheritance
to themselves; Neither, said Abraham, can they pass to us, that would come from
Luke 16. 26.
thence: neither can they dwell in Heaven that would come from Hell.

They then that have lost, or shall lose their Souls, are bound to their place,
as well as to their sins. When Judas went to Hell, he went to his home, Acts 1.
25.
to his own place; and when the Righteous go hence, they also go home to their
House, to their Mat. 25. 34.
own place; for the Kingdom of Heaven is prepared for them. Between Heaven and
Hell, there is a Luke 12. 32.
great gulf fixed; that is, a strong passage, there is a great gulf fixed.

What this gulf is, and how impossible, they that shall lose their Souls will
know to their woe; because it is fixed there where it is, on purpose to keep
them in their tormenting place, so that they that would pass from Hell to
Heaven cannot. But I say, Would they not change places? would they not have a
more comfortable House and Home for their Souls? Yes verily, the Text supposes
it, and the sixteenth of Luke affirms it: Yea, and could they purchase for
their Soul a Habitation among the Righteous, would they not? Yes, they would
give all the World for such a Change. What shall, what shall not a Man, if he
had it, if it would answer his design, give in exchange for his Soul?

3. As the Damned would change their own Vices for Virtues, and the Place where
they are for that into which they shall not come; so, What would they give for
a change of condition? Yea, if an absolute change may not be obtained, yet what
would they give for the least degree of mitigation of that torment which now
they know will without any intermission be, and that for ever and ever.
Tribulation, Romans 2. 8, 9. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and anguish, indignation and wrath, the gnawing Worm, and everlasting
destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power,
cannot be born but with great horror and grief, no marvel then if these poor
Creatures would for ease for their Souls be glad to change their Conditions;
Change! with whom? with an Angel, with a Saint, Ay, with a Dog or a Toad; for
they mourn not, they weep not, nor do they bear indignation of wrath, they are
as if they had not been; only the sinful* Soul abides in its Sins, in the Place
designed for lost Soul, and in the Condition that Wrath and Indignation for Sin
and Transgression has decreed them to abide for ever. And this brings me to
the Conclusion, which is, That seeing the ungodly do seek good things too late:
therefore notwithstanding their seeking, they must still abide in their place,
their sins, and their torment: For what can a Man give in exchange for his
Soul? Therefore God says, that they there must still abide and dwell, no
exchange can Isa. 50. 11* compare Ezekiel. 32. v. 25. and v. 27.
be made, This shall they have of mine hand, they shall lie down in sorrow;
they shall lie down in it, they shall make their Bed there, there they shall
lie. And this is the bitter Pill that they must swallow down at last, for after
all their tears, their sorrows, their mournings, their repentings, their
wishings and wouldings, and all their inventings, and desires to change their
state for a better; they must lie down in sorrow. The poor condemned Man that
is upon the Ladder or Scaffold, has, if one knew them, many a long wish and
long desire that he might come down again alive, or that his condition was as
one of the Spectators that are not condemned, and brought thither to be
executed as he: how carefully also does he look with his failing eyes, to see
if some comes not from the King with a Pardon for him, all the while
endeavoring to fumble away, as well as he can, and to prolong the minute of
his execution: but at last, when he has looked, when he has wished, when he has
desired, and done whatever he can, the blow with the Ax, or turn with the
Ladder, is his lot, so he goes off the Scaffold, so he goes from among Men: And
thus it will be with those that we have under consideration, when all comes to
all, and they have said, and wished, and done what they can, the Judgment must
not be reversed, they must lie down in sorrow.

They must, or shall lie down. Of old, when a Man was to be chastized for his
fault, he was to lie down to receive his stripes: so here, says the Lord, they
shall lie down, And it shall be if the wicked Man be Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten
before his Face. And this lying down was to be his lot, after he had pleaded
for himself what he could, and the Judge shall cause him to be beaten before
his face, while he is present to behold the execution of judgment; and thus it
shall be at the End of the World: the wicked shall lie down and shall be beaten
with many stripes in the presence of Christ, and 2 Thessalonians. 1. Rev. 14. 10.
in the presence of the holy Angels. For there will be his presence not only at
the trial as judge, but to see execution done, nay to do it himself, by the
pouring out like a River, his Wrath as burning Brimstone upon the Soul of the
lost and castaway Sinner.

He shall lie down; These words imply, that at last the damned Soul shall
submit; for to lie down, is an act that signifies submission, especially to lie
dow^ to be beaten. The wicked shall be silent in darkness* When 2 Samuel 2. 9.
the Malefactor has said and wished all that he can, yet at last he submits, is
silent, and as it were, helps to put his Head into the Halter, or does lay down
his Neck upon the Block: So here it is said of the damned, They shall lie down
in sorrow; there is also a place that says, These shall go away into
everlasting Mat. 25. 46.
punishment: To go, to go to punishment, is also an act of submission: Now
submission to punishment, does, or should flow from full conviction of the
merit of punishment; and I think it is so to be understood here: For Romans 3.
19. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27, 28* Matthew. 25. 44. Romans 3. 4.
every Mouth shall be stopped, and all the World (of Soul-losers) become guilty
before God. Every Mouth shall be stopped, not at the beginning of the Judgment,
for then they plead and pray, and also object against the Judge; but at the
End, after that by a judicial Proceeding, he shall have justified against them
his sayings, and have overcome these his Judges, then they shall submit, and
also lie down in sorrow: yea, they shall go away (...) their punishment, as
those who know they deserve (...); Yea, they shall go away with silence. Now,

How they shall behave themselves in Hell (I will ^ot here dispute) whether in
a way of rage and blasphemy, and in rending and tearing of the name and just
actions of God toward them, or whether by way of submission there: I say,
though this is none of this task, yet a word or two if you please.

Doubtless they will not be mute there; they will ^ry, and wail, and gnash
their teeth, and perhaps too sometimes at God, but I do not think but that the
^^tice that they have deserved, and the equal admi^istration of it upon them,
will for the most part prevail with them to rend and tear themselves, to acquit
and justify God, and to add fuel to their fire, by concluding themselves in
all the fault, and that they have sufficiently merited this just damnation; for
it would seem strange to me, that just judgment among Men shall terminate in
this issue, if God should not justify himself in the Conscience of all the
damned. But as here on Earth, so he will let them know, that go to Hell, that
he has not done without a Cause, a sufficient Ezekiel. 14. 23.
Cause, all that he has done (...) damning of them.

I come now to make some Use and Application of the whole. And

1. If the Soul be so excellent a thing, as we have made it appear to be, and
if the Loss thereof be so great a Loss; then here you may see who they are that
are those extravagant ones, I mean those that are such in the highest degree.
Solomon tells us of a great Waster, and says also, that he that is slothful in
his business, is Prove. 18. 9.
Brother to such an one. Who Solomon had his eye upon, or who it was that he
counted so great a Waster, I cannot tell* but I will challenge all the World to
show me one, that for wasting and destroying, may be compared to him, that for
the lusts and pleasures of this life will hazard the Los^ of his Soul. Many
Men will be so profuse, and will spend at that prodigal rate, that they will
bring a thousand pound a year to five hundred, and five hundred to fifty, and
some also will bring that fifty to less than nine pence; but what is this to
him that shall never leave losing until he has lost his Soul? I have heard of
some who would throw away a Farm, a good Estate upon the trundling of one
single Bow^. But what is this to the casting away the Soul? I say what is this
to the Loss of the Soul, and that for less than the trundling of a Bowl.
Nothing can for badness be compared to sin, it is the vile thing, it cannot
have a worse Name than its own: it is worse than the vilest Man, than the
vilest of Beasts: yea, sin is worse than the Devil himself, for it is sin, and
sin only that has made the Devils Devils: and yet for this, for this vile,
this Jer. 44. 4.
abominable thing, some Men, yea, most Men will venture the Loss of their Soul:
yea, they will mortgage, pawn, and set their Souls to sale for it: Is not this
a great Waster? does not this Man deserve to be ranked among the extravagant
ones? What think you of him who when he tempted the Wench to uncleanness, said
to her, If thou will venture thy Body, I Will venture my Soul? was not here like
to be a fine bargain think you? or was not this Man like to be a gainer by so
doing? This is he that prizes sin at a higher rate than he does his immortal
Soul; yea, this is he that esteems a quarter of an hours pleasure, more than he
fears everlasting damnation: What shall I say? this Man is minded to give more
to be damned, than God requires he should give to be saved; is not this an
extravagant one? Be Jer. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid! Yea, let all the
Angels stand amazed at the unaccountable prodigality of such an one.

Object. 1. But some may say, I cannot believe that God will be so severe, as
to cast away into Hell fire an immortal Soul for a little sin.

Answ. I know thou can not believe it, for if ^hou could, thou would
sooner eat fire, than ^^n this hazard; and hence all they that go down ^o the
Lake of Fire are called the Unbelievers: and the Lord shall cut thee (that
make this Objection) asunder, Luke 12. 46.
and shall appoint thee thy portion with such, except thou believe the Gospel
and repent.

Object. 2. But surely, though God should be so angry at the beginning, it
cannot in time, but grieve him to see and hear Souls roaring in Hell, and that
for a little sin.

Answer. Whatsoever God does, it Eccl. 3. 14.
abides for ever: he does nothing in a passion, or in an angry ^it; he
proc^edeth with Sinners by the most perfect Rules of Justice, wherefore it
would be injustice, to deliver them whom the Law condemns: yea, he ^ould
falsify his word, if after a time he should deliver them from Hell, concerning
whom he has solemnly testified, that they shall be there for ever.

Obj. 3. O but, as he is just, so he is merciful, and mercy is pitiful, and
very compassionate to the afflicted.

Answ. O but mercy abused, becomes most fearful in tormenting: did you never
read that the Lamb turned Lion, and that the World Rev. 6. 16, 17.
will tremble at the Wrath of the Lamb, and be afflicted more at the thoughts
of that, than at the thoughts of any thing that shall happen to them in the
day, when God shall call them to an account for their sins?

The time of 2 Cor. 6. 2. Mat. 25. 10. Luke 13. 25.
mercy will be then past, for now is that acceptable time, behold now is the
day of salvation: The Gate of mercy will then be shut, and must not be opened
again, for now is that Gate open, now it is open for a Door of hope.

The time of showing pity and compassion will then be at an end: for that as to
acting toward Sinne^^ will last but till the Glass of the World is run, an^
when that day is past, mark what God says, shall follow, I will Prove. 1. 26,
27.
laugh at your calamity, I will m^c^ when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes like a Whirlwind, when
distress and anguish comes upon you.

Mark you how many pinching expressions the Lord Jesus Christ does threaten the
refusing Sinner with, refuses him now. I will laugh at him* I will mock at
him* But when Lord will thou laugh at, and mock at the impenitent? The answer
is, I will laugh at their calamities, and mock when their fear comes, when
their fear comes as desolation, and their destruction like a Whirlwind, when
distress and anguish comes upon them.

Obj. 4. But if God Almighty be at this point, and there be no moving of him to
mercy at that day: yet we can but lie in Hell till we art burnt out, as the Log
does at the Back of the Fire.

Poor besotted Sinner, is this thy last shift? will thou comfort thy self with
this? are thy sins so dear, so sweet, so desirable, so profitable to thee, that
thou will venture a burning in Hell Fire for them till thou art burnt out? is
there Isa. 28* 15.
nothing else to be done but to make a covenant with Death, and to maintain thy
agreement with Hell? is it not better to say now unto God, do not condemn me,
and to say now, Lord be merciful to me a Sinner? would not tears, and prayers,
and cries, in this acceptable time, to God for mercy, yield thee more benefit in
the next World, than to lie and burn out in Hell, will do?

But to come more close to thee, Have not I told ^^ee already, that there is no
such thing as a ceasing (...) be: that the damned shall never be burned out in
Hell? There shall be no more such death, or cause of dissolution for ever: This
one thing well considered, breaks not only the neck of that wild conceit, on
which thy foolish Objection is built, but will break thy stubborn heart in
pieces. For then it follows, that unless thou can conquer God, or with ease
endure to conflict with his sin-revenging wrath, thou will be made to mourn
while under his everlasting wrath and indignation; and to know that there is
not such a thing as a burning out in Hell Fire.

Object. 5. But if this must be my case, I shall have more ^ellows; I shall not
go to Hell, nor yet burn there alone.

Answ. What again, Is there no breaking of the League that is betwixt Sin and
thy Soul? what, resolved to be a self Murderer, a Soul Murderer? what, resolved
to murder thine own Soul? but is there any comfort in being hanged with
company? in sinking into the bottom of the Sea with company? or in going to
Hell, in burning in Hell, and in enduring the everlasting pains of Hell with
company? O, besotted wretch! But I tell thee, the more company, the more
sorrow, the more fuel, the more fire. Hence the damned Man that we read of in
Luk, Luke 16. 27, 28.
desired that his brethren might be so warned and prevailed with, as to be kept
out of that place of torment.

But to hasten, I come now to the second Use.

Use. 2. Is it so? is the Soul such an excellent thing, and the Loss thereof so
unspeakably great? Then here you may see who are the greatest Fools in the
World, to wit, those who to get the World and its Preferments will neglect God,
till they lose their Souls. The rich Man in the Gospel Luke. 12. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21.
was one of these great Fools, for that he was more concerned about what he
should do with his Goods, than ho^ his Soul should be saved. Some are for
venturing their Souls for pleasures, and some are for venturing their Souls for
profits; they that venture their Souls for pleasures, have but little excuse
for their doings; but they that venture their Soul for profit seem to have
much. And they all with (k) one consent began to make excuse; Excuse, for what?
Why, for the neglect of the Salvation of their Souls. But what was the cause of
their making this excuse? Why, their profits came tumbling in? I have bought a
piece of Ground, I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I have married a (rich)
Wife, and therefore I cannot come.

Thus also it was with the Fool first mentioned, his Ground did bring forth
plentifully; wherefore he must of necessity forget his Soul, and as he thought,
all the Reason of the World he should. Wherefore he falls to crying out, What
shall I do? Now had one said, Mind the good of thy Soul, Man; the Answer would
have been ready, But where shall I bestow my Goods? If it had been replied,
Stay till Harvest: He returns again, But I have no room where to bestow my
Goods? Now tell him of praying, and he answers, He must go to building. Tell
him he should frequent Sermons, Isa. 44. ^0.
and he replies, He must mind his Workmen. He cannot deliver his Soul, nor
say, Is there not a lie in my Right Hand?

And see if in the End he did not become a Fool, for though he accomplished the
building of his Barns, and put in there all his Fruits and his Goods, yet even
till now his Soul was empty, and void of all that was good; nor did he in
singing of that requiem, which he sung to his Soul at last, saying, Soul take
thine ease, (...), drink, and be merry, show himself ever the wiser; for in all
his labors he had rejected to get that food that indeed is meat and drink for
the Soul: nay, in singing this Song he did but provoke God to hasten to send to
fetch his Soul to Hell; for so begins the conclusion of the Parable; Thou Fool,
this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee, then whose shall those things be
which thou had provided? So that I say, it is the greatest folly in the World
for a Man, upon any pretense whatever, to neglect to make good the salvation of
his Soul.

There are six signs of a Fool, and they do all meet in that same Man that
concerns no^ himself, and that to good purpose, for the salvation of his Soul.

1. A Fool has not an heart when the Prove. 17. 16.
price is in his Hand, to get wisdom.

2. It Is a sport to a Fool Pro. 10. 23.
to do mischief, and to set light by the commission of sin.

3. Fools despise wisdom, Fools Chap. 14. 9.
hate knowledge.

4. A Fool after restraint Chap. 1. 7* 22.
returns to his folly.

5. The way of a Fool Chap. 12. 15.
is right in his own eyes.

6. The Fool goes merrily Chap. 7. 22, 23.
to the correction of the Stocks.

I might add many more, but these six shall suf^^^ at this time, by which it
appears, that the Fool h^ no heart for the heavenly prize; yet he has to spo^
himself in sin: and when he dispises wisdom, the wa^ is yet right before him;
yea, if he be for some tim^ restrained from vice, he greedily turns again
thereto, and will when he has finished his course of fol^^ and sin in this
World, go as heedlesly, as carelessly, a^ unconcernedly, and quietly down the
steps to Hell, as the Ox goes to the Slaughterhouse.

This is a Soul Fool, a Fool Luke 12. 21.
of the biggest Si^, and so is every one also that lays up treasure for
himself on Earth, and is not rich toward God.

Obj. 1. But would you not have us mind our worldly concerns?

Answ. Mind them, but mind them in their place, mind thy Soul first and most;
the Soul is more than the Body, and eternal life better than temporal; First
Mat. 6. 33. 3 John 2.
seek the Kingdom of God, and prosper in thy health and thy estate as thy Soul
prospers: But as it is rare to see this command obeyed, for the Kingdom of God
shall be thought of last: so if John's Wish was to light upon, or happen to
some People, they would neither have health, nor wealth in this World. To
prosper and be in health, as their Soul prospers: what, to thrive and mend in
outward no faster? then we should have them have consumptive Bodies and low
estates, for are not the Souls of most as unthrifty for grace and spiritual
health, as is the Tree without Fruit, that is pulled up by the Roots.

Obj. 2. But would you have us sit still and do nothing?

Answ. And must you needs be upon the extremes, must you mind this World to the
damning of your Souls, or will you not mind your calling at all? is ^here not a
middle^way? may you not, must you not get your bread in a way of honest
industry, that is ca^ing most for the next World, and 2 Cor. 4. 18.
so using of this ^s not abusing the same? and then a Man does so, and ^ ever
but then, when he sets this World and the next ^n their proper 1 Cor. 7. 29,
30, 31.
places, in his thoughts, in his esteem (...) judgment, and deals with both
accordingly. And is there not all the reason in the World for this? (...) Deuteronomy.
8. 3. Mat. 4. 4. Heb. 10. 39.
not the things that are eternal best? will temporal things make thy Soul to
live? or art thou none of those that should look after the salvation of their
Soul?

Obj. 3. But the most of Men do that which you forbid, and why may not we?

Answ. God says, Thou shall Ex. 23. 2. Mat. 6. 33.
not follow a multitule to do evil. It is not what M^n do, but what God
commands; it is not what does present it Luke 10. 41, 42. Prove. 16. 32. c. 19.
16.
self unto us, but what is best, that we should choose. Now, He that refuses
instruction, despises his own Soul; and ^e that keeps the Commandment
keeps his own Soul. Make not therefore these foolish Objections; but what
says the Word, how read thou? That tells thee that the pleasures of Sin are
but for a Season, that the things that are seen are but temporal, that he is a
Fool that is rich in this World, and is not so toward God; and what shall it
profit a Man if he shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul?

Obj. 4. But may one not be equally engaged for both?

Ans. A divided Hos. 10. 2. Mat. 6. 24. Luke 16. 13. 1 John 2. 15. Prove. 11. 4.
Luke 21. 34.
heart is a naughty one; you cannot serve God and Mammon; if any Man loves the
World, the love of the Father is not in him^ and yet this objection bespeaks
that thy heart^ divided, that thou art a Mammonist, or that tho^ love the
World. But will riches profit in the da^ of Wrath; yea are they not hurtful in
the day (...) Grace? do they not tend to surfeit the Heart, an^ to alienate a
Man and his mind from things that an^ better?) why then will thou set thy heart
upon tha^ which is not? yea, then what will become of the^ that are so far off
of minding of their Souls, the they for whole Days, whole Weeks, whole Month^
and Years together, scarce consider whether the^ have Souls to save?

Use 3. But thirdly, Is it so? is the Soul such (...) excellent thing, and is
the Loss thereof so unspeakabl^ great? then, This should teach People to be
very carefu^ to whom they commit the teaching and guidance of their Souls.

This is a business of the greatest concern, Men will be careful to whom they
commit their Children, who they make the Executors of their Will, in whose Hand
they trust the Writing and Evidences of their Lands, but how much more careful
should we be, and yet the most are the least of all careful, unto whom they
commit the teaching and guidance of their Souls. There are several sorts of
Soul Shepherds in the World:

1. There are Zech. 11. 7.
Idol Shepherds.

2. There are Zech. 11. 15.
foolish Shepherds.

3. There Ezekiel. 34. 2.
are Shepherds that feed themselves and not their Flock.

4. There are Zech. 11. 3.
hard hearted and pitiless Shepherds.

5. There are Ezekiel. 34. 4. 21.
Shepherds that instead of healing, ^mite, push and wound the diseased.

6. There are Shepherds Jer. 50. 6.
that cause their Flocks ^o go astray.

7. And there are Shepherds that feed their Flock; ^hese are the Shepherds to
whom thou should com^it thy Soul for teaching and for guidance.

Quest. You may ask, How should I know those Shepherds?

Answ. First surrender up thy Soul Pet. 2. 25. Joh. 10. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 4. 19.
Can. 1. 7, 8. Jer. 3. 15. c. 23. 4.
unto God by Christ, and choose Christ to be the chief Shepherd of thy Soul, and
he will direct thee to his Shepherds, and ^e will of his mercy set such
Shepherds over thee, as shall feed the with Knowledge and Understanding: Before
thou have surrendered up thy Soul to Christ, that he may be thy chief Shepherd,
thou can not find out, nor choose to put thy Soul under the teaching and
guidance of his Under-Shepherds, for thou can not love them; besides, they
are so set forth by false Shepherds, in so many ugly Guizes, and under so many
false and scandalous Dresses, that should I direct thee to them, while thou art
a stranger to Christ, thou will count them deceivers, devourers, and Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, rather than the Shepherds that belong to the great and chief
Shepherd, who is also the Bishop of the Soul.

Yet this I will say unto thee, take heed of that Shepherd that cares not for
his own Soul; that walks in ways, and does such things as have a direct
tendency to damn his own Soul; I say take heed of such an one, come not near
him, let him have nothing to do with thy Soul, for if he be not faithful to
that which is his own Soul, be sure he will not be faithful to that which is
another Man's. He that feeds his own Soul with Ashes, Ezekiel. 13. 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23.
will scarce feed thine with the Bread of Life; wherefore take heed of such an
one, and many such there are in the World, by their Fruits you shall know them,
they are for flattering of the worst; and frowning upon the best; they are for
promising of life to the profane, and for slaying* the Souls that God would
have live; they are also. Men that hunt Souls that fear God, but for
Sewing-Pillows under those Arm-holes, which God would have to lean upon that
which would afflict them: These be (k) them that with lies do make the heart of
the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad (says God) and that have
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that be should not return from his wicked
way, be promising of him life.

And as thou should for thy Souls sake choose for thy self good
Soul-Shepherds; so also for the same reason, you should choose for your selves a
good Wife, a good Husband, a good Master, a good Servant, for in all these
things, the Genesis 24. 3. Psalm. 101. 7.
Soul is concerned. Abraham would not suffer Isaac to take a Wife of the
Daughters of Canaan, nor would David suffer a wicked Servant to come into his
House or to tarry in his sight: bad company is also very destructive to the
Soul, and so is evil communication; wherefore Prove. 13. ^0. 1 Cor. 15. 33.
be diligent to shun all these things, that thou may persevere in that way,
the end of which will be the saving of thy Soul.

And since under this Head I am fallen upon cautions, let me add these to those
which I have presented to thee already.

1. Take heed, take heed of learning to do evil of any that are good: It Is
possible for a good Man to do things that are bad, but let not his bad action
imbolden thee to run upon Sin; see thou a good Man that stumbleth at a Stone,
or that slippeth into the Dirt, let that warn thee to take heed, lest his
stumble make thee wary, let his fall make thee look well to thy goings; ever
follow 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
that which is good. Thy Soul is at stake.

2. Take heed of the good things of bad Men, for in them their lies a Snare
also, their Romans 16. 17, 18.
good words and fair speeches tend to deceive; learn to be good by the Word of
God, and by the holy lives of them Prove. 3. 31. c. 24. 1.
that be good; envy not the wicked, nor desire to be with him, choose none of
his ways, thy Soul lies at stake.

3. Take heed of playing the hypocrite in Religion; what of God and his Word
thou know, profess it honestly, confirm to it heartily, serve him
faithfully, for what is the hypocrite bettered by all his profession, when Job
27. 8.
God shall take away his Soul?

4. Take heed of delays to turn to God, and of choosing his ways for the delight
of thy heart; For the Lord's Eye Psalm. 33. 18* 19.
is upon them that fear him, to deliver their Souls.

5. Boast not thy self of thy Flocks and thy Herds, of thy Gold and thy Silver,
of thy Sons and of thy Daughters: what is an House full of Treasures, and all
the delights of this World, if thou be empty of Grace, if thy Soul Eccl* 6. 3.
be not filled with good? But,

Fourthly, Is it so? is the Soul such an excellent thing, and is the Loss
thereof so unspeakably great? then I pray thee let me enquire a little of thee
what provision have thou made for thy Soul? There be many that through their
eagerness after the things of this life, do bereave Eccl. 4. 8.
their Soul of good, even of that good the which if they had it, would be a
good to them for ever. But I ask not concerning this, it is not what provision
thou have made for this life, but what for the life, and the World to come.
Lord, gather Psalm. 26. 9. Psalm. 17. 14, 15.
not my Soul with Sinners, said David; not with Men of this World; Lord, not
with them that have their portion in this life, whose Belly thou fillest with
thy hid Treasures. Thus you see how Solomon laments some, and how his Father
prays to be delivered from their lot, who have their portion in this life, and
that have not made provision (...) their Soul: Well then, let me enquire of
thee about th^s matter: What provision have thou made for thy Soul? And,

1. What have thou thought of thy Soul? what ponderous thoughts have thou had
of the Greatness, and of the immortality of thy Soul? This must be the first
enquiry; for he that has not had his thoughts truly exercised, ponderously
exercised about the Greatness and the immortality of his Soul, will not be
careful after an effectual manner, to make provision for his Soul, for the Life
and World to come. The Soul is a Man's all, whether he knows it or no, as I
have already showed you: now a Man will be concerned about what he thinks is
his all. We read of the poor Servant that Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.
sets his Heart upon ^is Wages, but it is because it is his all, his Treasure,
and that wherein his worldly worth lies. Why thy Soul is thy all, it is strange
if thou do not think so? and more strange if thou do think so, and yet have
light, seldom, and trivial thoughts about it: These two seem to be
inconsistent, therefore let thy Conscience speaks; either thou have very great
and weighty thoughts about the excellent Greatness of thy Soul, or else thou
do not count that thy Soul is so great a thing as it is; else thou do not
count it thy all.

2. What Judgment have thou made of the present state of thy Soul (I speak now
to the unconverted) thy Soul is under sin, under the curse, and an object of
wrath, this is that sentence that by the word it passed upon it, Woe Isa. 3. 9.
to their Souls, says God, for they have rewarded evil to themselves; this is
the Sentence of God: Well, but what judgment have thou passed upon it while
thou live in thy debaucheries; is it not that which thy fellows have passed
on theirs before thee, saying, I shall Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, 21.
have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart to add drunkenness to
thirst; if so, know thy judgment is gross, thy Soul is miserable, and turn, or
in little time* thine Eyes will behold all this.

3. What care have thou had of securing of thy Soul, and that it might be
delivered from the danger that by sin it is brought into? If a Man has a Horse,
a Cow, or a Swine that is sick or in danger by reason of this or that casualty,
he will take care for his Beast, that it may not perish, he will pull it out of
the Ditch on the Sabbath Day: but oh! that is the Day on which many Men do put
their Soul into the Ditch of Sin; that is the day that they set apart to pursue
wickedness in: But I say, what care have thou taken to get thy Soul out of this
Ditch? a Ditch out of which thou can never get it without the aid of an
omnipotent Arm. In things pertaining to this life, when a Man feels his own
strength fail, he will implore the help and aid of another; and no Man can by
any means deliver by his own arm his Soul from the power of Hell (which thou
also wilt confess if thou be not a very Brute) but what have thou done with
God for help? have thou cried? have thou cried out? yea do thou s^ill cry
out, and that day and night before him? Deliver my Psalm. 17. 13. Psalm. 25. 20.
Psalm. 41. 4. Psalm. 62. 5. Psalm. 63. 1. v. 8.
Soul, save my Soul, preserve my Soul heal my Soul; and, I pour out my Soul
unto thee; yea, can thou say, my Soul, my Soul waits upon God, my Soul
thirsts for him, my Soul follows hard after him? I say, do thou this, or
do thou hunt thine own Soul to destroy it? The Prove. 1. 18.
Soul with some is the Game, their Lusts are the Dogs, and they themselves are
the Hu^^smen, and never do they more holloo, and luer, and laugh, and sing,
than when they have delivered up their Soul, their Darling to these Dogs; a
thing that David trembled to think of, when he cried, Dogs have Psalm. 22. 16,
20.
compassed me about; save my darling, my Soul, from the Power of the Dog; thus
I say, he cried, and yet these Dogs were but wicked Men: But oh, how much is a
Sin, a Lust, worse than a Man to do us hurt; yea, worse than is a Dog, a Lion
to hurt a Lamb!

4. What are the signs and tokens that thou bear about thee concerning how
it will go with thy Soul at last? there are signs and tokens of a good, and
signs and tokens of a Phil. 1. 27, 28. Heb. 6. 9. Job 21. 29, 30. Isa. 3. 9.
had End that the Souls of Sinners will have; there are Signs of the Salvation
of the Soul, evident tokens of Salvation; and there are signs of the Damnation
of the Soul, evident signs of Damnation: Now which of these have thou? I cannot
stand here to show thee which are which; but thy Soul and its salvation lies
before thee, The holy Bible.
and thou have the Book of Signs about these matters by thee; thou have also
Men of God to go to, and their Assemblies to frequent: look to thy self, Heaven
and Hell are hard by, and one of them will swallow thee up; Heaven into
unspeakable and endless glory, or Hell into unspeakable and endless torment.
Yet,

5. What are the pleasures and delights of thy Soul now? are they things
Divine, or things Natural? are they things Heavenly, or things Earthly? are
they things holy, or things unholy? for look what things thou delightest in
now* to those things the great God does count thee a Servant, and for, and of
those thou shall receive thy Wages at the day of Judgment. His Romans ^. 16.
Servants you are to whom you obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience
unto righteousness.

Wicked Men talk of Heaven, and say they hope and desire to go to Heaven, even
while they continue wicked Men; but I say, what would they do there? If all
that desire to go to Heaven should come thither, verily they would make a Hell
of Heaven; for I say, what would they do there? why, just as they do here,
scatter their filthiness quite over the Face of Heaven, and make it as vile as
the Pit that the Devils dwell in. Take holiness away out of Heaven, and what is
Heaven? I had rather be in Hell were there none but holy ones there, than ^e in
Heaven it self with the Children of iniquity. If Heaven should be filled with
wicked Men, God would quickly drive them out, or forsake the place for their
sakes; it is true they have been Sinners, and none but Sinners that go to
Heaven; but they are washed; such were some of you, but ye are 1 Cor. 9. 10, 11.
washed, but you are justified, but you are sanctified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God. When the Maidens were gathered
together for the great King Ahasuerus, before they were brought to him into his
Royal presence, they were to be had to the House of the Women, there to be
purified with things for purification, and that for twelve months together, to
wit, Six Est. 2. 3, 9, 12, 13.
Months with Oil of Myrrh, and Six Months with sweet Odours and other things;
and so came every Maiden to the King. God also has appointed, that those that
come into his Royal Presence, should first go to the House of the Women, the
Church, and there receive of the Eunuchs things for purification, things to
make Col. 1. 12.
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: none can go
from a state of nature to glory, but 1 Cor. 5. 5. Romans 9. 23.
by a state of grace; the Lord gives grace and glory, hence he that goes to
Heaven is said to be wrought for it, fitted, prepared for it.

Use 5. Again, Fifthly, Is it so? is the Soul such an excellent thing, and is
the Loss thereof so unspeakably great? Then this Doctrine commends those for
the wise ones, that above all business concern themselves with the salvation of
their Souls; those that make all other matters but things by the bye, and the
salvation of their Soul, the one thing needful. But, but few comparatively will
be concerned with this use, for where is he that does this? Solomon speaks of
Eccl. 7. 28.
one Man of a thousand: however some there be, and blessed be God for some, but
they are they that are wise, yea wise in the Wisdom of God:

1. Because they reject what God has rejected, and that is sin.

2. Because they esteem but little of that which by the word is counted but of
little esteem, and that is the World.

3. Because they choose for a Portion that which God commends unto us for that
which is the most excellent thing, viz. Himself, his Christ, his Heaven, his
Word, his Grace and Holiness: these are the great and most excellent thing* and
the things that he has chosen, that is truly wise for his Soul (and all other
wise Men are Fools in God's account, and in the judgment of his word) and if it
be so, glory and bliss must needs be their portion, though others shall miss
thereof; The wise Prove. 3. 35.
shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of Fools.

Let me then encourage those that are of this mind to be strong, and hold on
their way, Soul thou have pitched right; I will say of thy choice as David said
of Goljah's Sword, There Rev. 3. 11.
is none like that, give it me: Hold fast that thou have, that no Man take thy
Crown. Oh! I admire this Wisdom, this is by the direction of the Lawgiver;
this is by the teaching of the blessed Spirit of God, not the Wisdom which this
World teaches, nor the Wisdom which the World, does choose, which comes to
naught, surely 1 Cor. 2. 6.
thou have seen something of the World to come, and of the glory of it through
faith* surely God has made thee see emptiness in that wherein others find a
fullness, and vanity in that which by others is counted for a Darling. Blessed
are thine Eyes, for^ they see, and thine Ears, for they hear.

But who told thee that thy Soul was such an excellent thing, as by thy
practice thou declarest thou believe it to be? What, set more by thy Soul
than by all the World? What, cast a World behind thy back for the welfare of a
Soul? is not this to play the Fool in the account of Sinners, while Angels
wonder at, and rejoice for thy wisdom.

What a thing is this, that thy Soul and its welfare should be more in thy
esteem than all those glories wherewith the Eyes of the World are dazzled?
surely thou have looked upon the Sun, and that makes Gold look like a clod of
Clay in thine Eyesight.

But who put the thoughts of the Excellencies of the things that are Eternal? I
say, who put the thoughts of the Excellency of those things into thy mind in
this wanton Age, in an Age wherein the thoughts of eternal Life, and the
Salvation of the Soul are with, and too many, like the Morrocco Ambassador and
his Men, Men of strange Faces, in strange Habits, with strange Gestures and
Behaviors, Monsters to behold?

But where had thou that heart that gives entertainment to these thoughts,
these heavenly thoughts? These thoughts are like the French Protestants,
banished thence where they willingly would have harbor: how came they to thy
House, to thy heart, and to find entertainment in thy Soul? The Lord keep them
in every imagination of the thoughts of thy heart for ever, and incline thine
heart to seek him more and more.

And since the whole World have slighted and despised, and counted foolish the
thoughts and cogitations wherewith thy Soul is exercised; what strong and
mighty supporter is it upon, and with which thou bear up thy Spirit, and
take encouragement in this thy folorn, unoccupied and singular way? for so I
dare say it is with the most; but certainly it is something above thy self, and
that is more mighty to uphold thee than is the power, rage and malice of all
the World to cast thee down, or else thou could not bear up, now the Stream
and the Force thereof are against thee.

Obj. 1. I know my Soul is an excellent thing, and that the World to come, and
its glories, even in the smalles^ Glimpse thereof, do swallow up all the World
that is here; my heart also does greatly desire to be exercised about the
thoughts of eternity, and I count my self never better than when my poor heart
is filled with them: as for the rage and fury of this World, it swayeth very
little with me, for my heart is come to a point; but yet for all that, I meet
with many discouragements, and such things that indeed do weaken my strength in
the way.

But, brave Soul, pray tell me what the things are that discourage thee, and
that weaken thy strength in the way?

Why, the amazing greatness of this my enterprise, that this one thing. I am
now pursuing things of the highest, the greatest, the most enriching nature,
even eternal things; and the thoughts of the Greatness of them drowned me, for
when the heat of my Spirit in the pursuit after them is a little returned and
abated, methinks I hear my self talking thus to my self, Fond fool! can thou
imagine that such a Gnat, a Flea, a Pi^mire as thou art, can take and possess
the Heavens, and manele thy self up in the eternal Glories? if thou make
first a (...) of the succesfulness of thy Endeavors upon things far lower,
more base, but much more easy to obtain, as Crowns, Kingdoms, Earldoms,
Dukedoms, Gold, Silver, or the like; how vain are these attempts of thine, and
yet thou think to possess thy Soul of Heaven? away, away by the height
thereof, thou may well conclude it is far above, out of thy reach, and by
the breadth thereof it is too large for thee to grasp; and by the nature of the
excellent glory thereof, too good for thee to possess: These are the thoughts
that sometimes discourage me, and that weaken my strength in the way.

Answ. The Greatness of thy undertakings does but show the nobleness of thy
Soul, in that it cannot, will not be content with such low and dry things as
the base-born Spirits that are of the World, can, and do content themselves
withal. And as to the greatness of the things thou aimest at, though they be as
they are indeed, things that have not their like, yet they are not too big for
God to give, and Luke 12. 32. Mat. 25. 14. Col. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
he has promised to give them to the Soul that seeks him; yea, he has
prepared the Kingdom, given the Kingdom, and laid up in the Kingdom of Heaven
the things that thy Soul longs for, presses after, and cannot be content
without. As for thy making of a trial of the succesfulness of thy endeavors
upon things more inferior and base; that is but a trick of the old deceiver.
God has refused to give his Children the great, the brave, and glorious things
of this World (a few 1 Cor. 1. 27. Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Gal. 6. 9. Heb.
10. 39. 1 Pet. 1. 8, 9.
only excepted) because he has prepared some better thing for them; wherefore
faint not, but let thy hand be strong, for thy work shall be rewarded; and
since thy Soul is at work, for Soul-things; for divine and eternal things, God
will give them to thee; thou art not of the number of them that draw back unto
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul; thou shall
receive the end of thy Faith, the salvation of thy Soul.

Obj. 2. But all my discouragement does not lie in this, I see so much of the
sinful vileness of my nature, and feel ^ow ready it is to thrust it self forth
at all occasions, to the defiling of my whole Man, and more; now this added to
the former, adds to my discouragement greatly.

Answ. This should because of humiliation, and of self-abasement, but not of
discouragement, for the best of Saints have their weaknesses, these their
weaknesses; the Ladies as well as she that grinds at the Mill, know what does
attend that Sex; and the Giants in grace, as well as the weak and shrubs, are
sensible of the same things, which thou layest in against thy exercising of
hope, or as matter of thy Psalm. 77. 2.
discouragement; poor David says, his Soul refused to be comforted upon this
very account; and Paul cries out under sense of this, O wretched Man that I am!
and comes as it were to the borders of a doubt, saying, Who Romans 7. 24.
shall deliver me? only he was quick at remembering that Christ was his
righteousness and price of redemption, and there he relieved himself.

Again, This should drive us to faith in Christ, for therefore are corruptions
by divine permission, still left in us to drive us to unbelief, but to faith,
that is, to look to the perfect righteousness of Christ for life.

And for Romans 5. 6, 7. 8, 9.
further help, consider, that therefore Christ lives in Heaven making
intercession, that thou might Col. 1. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 7. 11. 1 Pet.
5. 5. Mark 13, 37. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
be saved by his life, not by thine, and by his intercessions, not by thy
perfections; let not therefore thy weaknesses be thy discouragements, only let
them put thee upon the duties required of thee by the Gospel, to wit, faith,
hope, repentance, humility, watchfulness diligence, etc.

Obj. 3. But I find together with these things, weakness and faintness, as to
my graces; my faith, my hope, my love, and desires to these and all other
Christian Duties are weak: I am like the Man in the Dream, that would have run
but could not, that would have fought but could not, and that would have fled
but could not.

Answ. 1. Weak graces are graces, weak graces may grow stronger, but if the
Iron be blunt, Eccl. 10. 10.
put to the more strength. 2. Christ seems to be most tender of the weak, Isa.
40. 11.
He shall gather his Lambs with his arm, shall carry them in his bosom, and
shall gently lead them that are with young: And again, I will seek that which
was lost, and bring again that which was Ezekiel. 34. 16.
driven away, and I will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen
that which was sick: Only here will thy wisdom be manifested, to wit, that thou
2 Pet. 3. 18. Phil. 3. 10, 11. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11, 12, 13.
grow in grace, and that thou use lawfully and diligently the means to do it.

I come in the next place to a Use of Terror, and so I shall conclude. Is it
so? Is the Soul such an excellent thing, and is the Loss thereof so unspeakably
great? Then this shows the sad state of those that lose their Souls; we use
to count those in a deplorable Condition, that by one only stroke, are stripped
of their whole Estate; the Fire swept away all that he had; or all that he had
was in such a Ship, and that Ship sunk into the bottom of the Sea; this is sad
news, this is heavy tidings, this is bewailed of all, especially if such were
great in the World, and were brought by their loss from a high to a low, to a
very low Condition; but alas! what is this to the Loss about which we have been
speaking all this while? The Loss of an Estate may be repaired, or if not, a
Man may find Friends in his present deplorable condition to his support, though
not recovery: But far will this be from him that shall lose his Soul. Ah! he
has lost his Soul, and can never be recovered again, unless Hellfire can
comfort him; unless he can solace himself in the fiery Indignation of God,
terrors will be upon him, anguish and sorrow will swallow him up, because of
present misery, slighted and set at n^ught by God and his Angels, he will also
be in this his miserable state, and this will add to sorrow, sorrow, and to his
vexation of spirit, howling.

To present you with Emblems of tormented Spirits, or to draw before your eyes
the Picture of Hell, are things too light for so ponderous a Subject as this;
nor can any Man frame or invent words, be they never so deep and profound,
sufficient to the Life to set out the Torments of Hell. All those expressions
of Fire, Brimstone, the Lake of Fire, a fiery Furnace, the bottomless Pit, and
a hundred more to boot, are all too short to set forth the Miseries of those
that shall be damned Souls: Who knows the Power Psalm. 90. 11.
of God's Anger? none at all, and unless the Power of that can be known, it
must abide as unspeakable as the Love of Christ which passes knowledge.

We hear it Thunder, we see it Lighten, yea, Eclipses, Comets and Blazing
Stars, are all subject to smite us with Terror; the thought of a Ghost, of the
appearing of a dead Wife, a dead Husband, or the like, how terrible are these
things! but alas, what are these? mere Flea-bitings, nay not so bad, when
compared with the Torments of Hell. Guilt and Despair, what are they, who
understands them unto perfection? the ireful looks of an infinite Majesty, what
Mortal in the Land of the living can tell us to the full, how dismal, and
breaking to the Soul of a Man it is, when it comes as from the Power of Anger,
and arises from the utmost Indignation? Besides, who knows of all the ways by
which the Almighty will inflict his just revenges upon the Souls of damned
Sinners? When Paul was caught up to the third Heaven, he heard words that were
unspeakable; and he that goes down to Hell, shall hear groans that are
unutterable. Hear, did I say? they shall feel them, they shall feel them burst
from their wounded Spirits as Thunderclaps do from the Clouds. Once I dreamed,
that I saw two (whom I knew) in Hell, and methought I saw a continual dropping
from Heaven, as of great drops of fire lighting upon them to their sore
distress. Oh! words are wanting, thoughts are wanting, imagination and fancy
are poor things here: Hell is another kind of place and state than any alive
can think; and since I am upon this subject, I will here treat a little of
Hell, as the Scriptures will give me leave, and the rather, because I am upon a
use of Terror. and Luke 16.
because Hell is the place of Torment.

1. Hell is said to be beneath, as Heaven is said to be above, because as above
signifies the utmost Prove. 15. 24.
joy, triumph, and felicity; so beneath is a term most fit to describe the
place of Hell by, because of the utmost Opposition that is between these two,
Hell being the Place of the utmost Sorrow, Despair and Misery, there are the
Underlings ever trampled under the Feet of God, they are beneath, below, under.

2. Hell is said to be darkness, and Heaven is said Mat. 22. 13.
to be light; light to show the pleasureableness, and the desirableness of
Heaven; and darkness to show the dolesome and wearisomness of Hell; and how
weary, oh! how weary and wearisomly, as I may say, will damned Souls turn
themselves from side to side, from place to place in Hell, while swallowed up
in the thickest Darkness, and griped with the burning Thoughts of the
endlesness of that most unutterable Misery!

3. Men are said to go up to Heaven, but they Ezekiel. 32. 17, 18, 19.
are said to go down to Hell: up, because of exaltation, and because they must
abound in Beauty and Glory that go to Heaven: down, because of those sad
dejections, that great deformity and vile contempt that sin has brought them
to, that go to Hell.

4. Heaven is called a Hill or Mount, Hell is called Heb. 12. Rev. 14. chapter 9. 2.
a Pit or Hole: Heaven, a Mount, the Mount Zion, to show how God has and will
exalt them that loved him in the World: Hell, a Pit or Hole, to show how all
the Ungodly shall be buried in the yawning Paunch, and Belly of Hell, as in a
hollow Cave.

5. Heaven! It Is said of Heaven, the ^ Height of Job 22. 12. Rev. 9. 2. chapter
20. 3.
Heaven, and of Hell, the bottomless Pit. The height of Heaven, to show that
the Exaltation of them that do ascend up thither, is both perfect and
unsearchable: And Hell the bottomless Pit, to show, that the downfall of them
that descend in thither, will never be at an end, down, down, down they go, and
nothing but down, down still.

6. Heaven! It is called the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. chapter 22. 15.
but Hell the burning Lake. A Paradise, to show how quiet, harmless, sweet and
beautiful Heaven shall be to them that possess it, as the Garden was at the
beginning of the Creation. Hell, the burning Lake, to allude to Sodom, that
since its destruction is turned into a stinking Lake; and to show that as their
distress was unutterable, and to the highest Amazement, full of confusion and
horror when that tempestuous Storm of Fire and Brimstone was rained from the
Lord out of Heaven upon them; so to the utmost degree shall it be with the
Souls that are lost and cast into Hell.

7. It is said that there are dwelling-houses or Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3. Zech. 3. 7.
Isa. 57. 1, 2. Prove. 7. 27. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Psa. 68. 13.
places in the Kingdom of Heaven, and also that there are the Cells, or the
Chambers of Death in Hell. There are Mansions, or dwelling-places in Heaven, to
show that every one of them that go thither might have his reward according to
his work: and that there is Hell, and the lowest Hell, and the Chambers of
death in Hell, to show, there are places and states in Hell too, for Sinners to
be imprisoned Luke 20. 47.
in according to their faults; hence it is said of some, These shall receive
greater damnation, and of others, That it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrha in the Judgment than for them, etc.

The lowest Hell; how many Hells there are above that, chapter 10. 12, 14.
or more tolerable tormenting places than the most exquisite Torments there,
God, and they that are there know best, but degrees without doubt there are:
and the term [lowest] shows the utmost, and most exquisite destress; so the
Chambers of death, the second death in Hell, for so I think the Words should be
understood, Her House is the way (k) to Hell, going down to the Chambers of
death: these are the Chambers, that the Chambers in the Temple, or that the
dwelling-places in the House in Heaven is opposed to, and this opposition
shows, that as there will be degrees of Glory in Heaven, so there will of
Torments in Hell; and there is all reason for it, since the Punishment must be
inflicted by God, the infinitely just. Why should a poor silly, ignorant Man
though damned, be punished with the same degree of torment that he that has lived
a thousand times worse shall be punished with? It cannot be, Justice will not
admit it, Guilt and the Quality of the Transgression will not admit it; yea,
the tormenting^Fire of Hell it self will not admit it; for if Hellfire can
kindle upon nothing but Sin, and the Sinner for the sake of it, and if Sin be
as Oil to that sire, as the Holy Ghost seems to intimate, saying, Let it Prove.
7. 27.
come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones; then as the
quantity of the Oil is, so will the fire burn, and so will the flaming Flame
ascend, and the smoke of their Torment for ever and ever. Suppose a piece of
Timber a little bedaubed with Oil, and another that has been soaking in it
many a year, which of these two think you, would burn fiercest? and whence
would the flaming Flame ascend highest, and make the most roaring noise?
Suppose two Vessels filled with Oil, one containing the quantity of a Pint, the
other containing the quantity of a Hoggs-head, and suppose that in one place
they were both set on fire, yet so that they might not intermix Psalm. 109. 17,
18.
flames; nay, though they did, yet all would conclude that the most amazing,
roaring flame would be upon the biggest Vessel, and-would be the effect of the
greatest quantity of Oil; so it will be with the Wicked in Hell, the
lowest-Hell is for the biggest Sinners, and theirs will be the greater
Damnation, and the more intolerable Torment, though he that has least of this
Oil of Sin in his Bones, and of the kindlings of Hell fire upon him, will find
he has Hell enough, and will be weary enough thereof, for still he must
struggle with flames that are everlasting; for Sin is such a thing that it can
never be burned out of the Soul and Body of a damned Sinner.

But again, having treated thus of Hell, we will now speak a word or two of
Sin, for that is it upon which Hellfire seizes, and so on the Soul by that.
Sin! it is the Sting of Hell, the Sting of Death is Sin: by Death in this
place, we must not understand that which is natural, but that which is in Hell,
the 1 Cor. 15. 56.
second death, even everlasting damnation, for natural death the Saints die;
yea* and also many Sinners without the least touch of a Sting from that; but
here is a Death that has a Sting to hurt, to twinge and wound the Sinner with,
even then when it has the utmost Mastery of him. And this is the Death that the
saved are delivered from, not that which is 1 Cor. 15. 55. Eccl. 2: 15, 16.
natural, for that is the end of them* as of others; but the second Death, the
Death in Hell, for that is the Portion of the Damned, and it is from that that
the Saints have a Promise of deliverance, Rev. 2. 11.
He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second Death: And again, Blessed
and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second
Death has no Chap. 20. 6.
Power. It is this death then that has the Chambers to hold each damned Soul
in, and Sin is the twining, winding, biting, poisoning Sting of this Death, or
of these Chambers of Hell, for Sinners to be stricken, stung, and pierced with.
The Sting of Death is Sin. Sin in the general of it is the Sting of Hell, for
there would be no such thing as Torment, even there, were it not that Sin is
there with Sinners: for as I have hinted already, the Fire of Hell, the
Indignation and Wrath of God can fasten and kindle upon nothing but for, or
because of Sin; sin then as sin, is the Sting, and the Hell of Hells, of the
lowest and upmost Hells. Sin I say, in the Nature of it, simply as it is
concluded both by God, and the Damned to be a breach of his Holy Law, so it is
the sting of the second Death, which is the Worm of Hell. But then, as Sin is
such a Sting in it self, so it is heightened, sharpened, and made more keen and
sharp by those Circumstances that, as concomitants attend it in every act; for
there is not a Sin at any time committed by Man, but there is some circumstance
or other attends it, that makes it, when charged home by God's Law, bigger and
sharper, and more venom and poisonous to the Soul, than if it could be
committed without them; and this is the Sting of the Hornet, the great Sting. I
sinned without a Cause, to please a base Lust, to gratify the Devil; here is
the Sting: Again, I preferred Sin before Holiness, Death before Life, Hell
before Heaven, the Devil before God, and Damnation before a Savior; here is
the Sting: Again, I preferred moments before everlastings, temporals before
eternals, to be racked and always slaying, before the Life that is blessed and
endless; here is the Sting: Also this I did against light, against Convictions,
against Conscience, against persuasion of Friends, Ministers, and the godly
Lives which I beheld in others; here is the Sting: Also this I did against
warnings, forewarnings, yea, though I saw others fall before my face by the
mighty Hand of God for committing of the same; here is the Sting.

Sinners, would I could persuade you to hear me out; A Man cannot commit a Sin,
but by the Commission of it, he does by some circumstance or other, 1 Timothy 6.
10.
sharpen the Sting of Hell, and that to pierce himself through and through, and
through with many sorrows; Also the Sting of Hell to some will be, that the
Damnation of others stand upon their score; for that by imitating of them, by
being deluded by them, persuaded by them, drawn in by them, they perish in Hell
for ever, and hence it is, That these principal Sinners must dye all these
deaths in themselves, that those damned ones, that they have drawn into Hell,
are also to bear in their own Souls for ever. And this God threatened to the
Prince of Tyrus, that capital Sinner, because by his pride, power, practice and
policy, he cast down others into the Pit, therefore says God to him, They
shall bring thee down to the Pit, Ezekiel. 28. 8, 10.
and thou shall die the Deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the Seas:
And again, Thou shall die the Deaths of the Uncircumcised by the Hand of
Strangers, for I have spoken it, says the Lord God. Ah! this will be the Sting
of them, of those that are principal, chief, and as I may call them, the
Captain and Ring-leading Sinners, Vipers will come out of other Men's ^^e and
flames, and settle upon, seize upon, and for ^ver abide upon their Consciences,
and this will be the ^ting of Hell, the great Sting of Hell to them.

I will yet add to all this; How will the fairness of ^^me for Heaven, even the
Thoughts of that, Sting them when they come to Hell. It will not be so much
their fall into the Pit, as from whence they fell in^o it, that will be to them
the buzzing noise and ^^arpned sting of the great and terrible Hornet. How ^t
thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer! there is the Isa. 14. 12. Mat. 11. 23.
Sting, thou that art exalted up to Heaven, shall ^^e thrust down to Hell,
though thou have made thy ^e^t among the Stars, from thence will I fetch thee
Obad. 4.
down; there is a Sting. To be pulled, for and through love to some vain lust,
from the everlasting ^ates of Glory, and caused to be swallowed up for (...) in
the Belly of Hell, and made to lodge for ever in ^he dark, some Chambers of
death, there is the pier^^ing Sting:

But again, as there is the Sting of Hell, so there ^s the Strength of that
Sting; for a Sting, though never so sharp, or venom, yet if it wants strength
^o force it, to the designed Execution, it does but ^ittle hurt. But this Sting
has strength to cause it to pierce into the Soul; The Sting of Death is Sin,
and 1 Cor. 15. 56. Romans 7. 8. chap. 4. 15.
the Strength of Sin is the Law: here then is the ^trength of the Sting of
Hell, it is the Law in the perfect Penalty of it, for without the Law, Sin is
dead: Yea, again he says, Where no Law is, there is ^o Transgression: The Law
then follows, in the executive part of it, the Soul into Hell, and there
strengthens Sin, that Sting in Hell, to pierce by it^ unutterable charging of
it on the Conscience, the Soul for ever and ever; nor can the Soul justly
murmur or repine at God or at his Law, for that then the sharply apprehensive
Soul will well discern the just^^ness, righteousness, reasonableness, and
goodness o^ the Law, and that nothing is done by the Law unto it, but that
which is just and equal.

This therefore will put great strength and force into Sin, to sting the Soul,
and to strike it with the Lashes of a Scorpion. Add yet to these the abiding
Life of God, the Judge and God of this Law will never die. When Princes die,
the Law may be altered, by the which at present Transgressors are bound in
Chains: But oh! here is also that which will make this Sting so sharp and keen;
the God that executes it will never die. It is a fearful thing to fall into
Heb. ^0. 30, 31.
the Hands of the living God.

FINIS.

