A SERMON PREACHED TO the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
AT THEIR PVBLIQVE FAST, NOVEM. 17. 1640. By Cornelius Burges D. D.

Published by Order of that House.



LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for P. Stephens, and C. Meredith, at the Gilded
LION in Saint Paul's CHURCHYARD. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHen first it pleased You to require our service in Preaching at Your late
Public Fast, we resolved to close our eyes against all Clouds of
discouragement arising from our own unworthiness and insufficiency, and to
set our selves wholly to seek what the Lord would command us to deliver in his
Name, at such a time, to such an Honorable and awful Assembly, with a total
denial of our selves. Psalm. 82.


And albeit we should have been glad to have been spared this exposing of our
selves to the public view; yet, You appointing otherwise, we hold it equal
that the joint entreaty of the Representative Body of the whole Communalty of
the kingdom should be regarded, and have chosen rather that others should
censure us of weakness, than You should charge us with Disobedience: Your
Request being no less than a command; and Your acceptance sufficient to give
value to things of themselves both mean and worthless.

Wherefore, according to our Duty so willingly as the consciousnesse of our
slender performances would permit, we obey Your Order, and do now, although
somewhat late, humbly offer these two plain Sermons (for, who expects other in
a Fast?) at the footstool of Your Tribunal, as a lasting Monument of Our
Gratitude for Your encouraging Approbation of, and solemn Thanks for our
weak endeavors in the preaching of them.

If in some places we have taken that just liberty which all others have done
before us, we trust it shall not be imputed; so long as in the most material
passages we have kept to the very words which at first we used, so far as was
necessary; and have not wittingly swerved an hairs breadth from the sense and
substance in the residue.

We have indeed pared off some Repetitions, which in speaking had their use,
the more to inculcate, and the better to set on the matter, but would not have
been so grateful in Writing, because Readers account every thing too long that
has any thing too much. We have likewise contracted some expressions, which in
discourses of so much length, could hardly be so concise as we desired, Memory
being not always at hand to give birth to every Conception of our minds in
such forms as we intended. And some few things we have added, where straites
of time, or defect of memory made some balkes in the first delivery.

What ever our performances be, we humbly leave them in Your hands, and under
Your Honorable Protection, which we are bold to expect, because they are by
Your own Act drawn from us, and that in a time so queasie and distempered as
can hardly bear that food, or Physik which is needful for it. Seldom does a
wise Reproof, a necessary Exhortation, or wholesome Doctrine meet with an
obedient Ear.

The God of Heaven steer all Your weighty consultations by his own Counsel,
to his own Glory; cover You still under his own Wing, and make You the most
accomplished, best united, and most successful and glorious house of Commons
that ever sat in that High Court; but chiefly in the effectual endeavoring
of a further Sanction of, and stronger Guard about our true Palladium, the true
Religion, already established among us; in the perfecting of the Reformation of
it; in the erecting, maintaining, protecting, and encouraging of an able,
godly, faithful, zealous, profitable, Preaching This was our joint and earnest
suit to You, in Preaching; and we now again beseech You to set your hearts and
hands to this work, as Benhail, Obadiah and other Princes in Judah did. 2 Chr.
17.7, 8, 9.
Ministry, in every Parish Church and Chapel throughout England and Wales;
and in the interceding to the Kings sacred Majesty for the setting up of a
Faithful, Judicious, and Zealous Magistracy, where yet the same is wanting, to
be ever at hand to back such a Ministry: without either of which, not only the
power of Godliness will soon degenerate into formality, and zeal into
Lukewarmenesse; but, Popery, Arminianism, Socinianisme, Profaneness,
Apostasy, and Atheism it self will more and more crowd in upon us, and
prevail against us, do You all You can by all other means.

And now, commending You to God and to the Word of his grace, Acts 20.32.
which is able to build You up further, and to give You an inheritance among
all them which be sanctified; and these our Labors to his further blessing,
whereby all may speedily be brought under the line of his Covenant, which is
our safety; The Sum of both Sermons.
that he may continue with us, which is our Glory; and we with him, which is
our happiness: we rest,

Yours, most devoted to the service of Your Faith in all Duty, Cornelius
Burges. Stephen Marshall.


THE FIRST SERMON, at the late Fast of the Commons House of Parliament, wherein
this Preface was used, before the TEXT was read.
THat great Apostle Saint Paul, when he had to do with wise men, held it a
point of wisdom to pass by some things which he would not have wayved among
meaner capacities. His practice shall be now my president.

This Honorable Assembly having designed me to bear so great a share in this
weighty Work, I hold it my duty to consider, that, how weak and unworthy so
ever I my self be, yet I am now to speak to Wise Men, who need not so much to
be Catechized touching the Nature, as to be incited and quickened to the
principal Use of a Religious Fast, which consists not solely in such drawing
near to God by extraordinary Prayer and Humiliation as may produce a total
divorce from our dearest Lusts, but also (and that more principally) in a
particular, formal, solemn, entire engaging and binding of our selves, by an
indissoluble Covenant, to that God whose face and favor we seek, and implore.

And this I apprehend to be a subject more necessary, by how much this duty
appears to be less heeded and regarded by the greater number of the choycest
Christians.

For, as it too often falls out, even among the best, in participating that
sacred and dreadful Ordinance of the Lords SUPPER, (whereof also we are
shortly to communicate) that mo labor more to discern, and feed upon his
blessed Body and blood, spiritually by faith, to make Christ their own, (which
must be done too) than actually, totally, and absolutely (then) to devote,
resign, and yield up themselves unto him, in the act of receiving, to be his
servants: So it does not seldom happen in the exercise of holy Fasting, that
not a few of that small handful which desire to approach the presence of God
in truth, are more conversant in searching, confessing, bewailing of sin, and
in craving for mercy, (all of which are necessary duties) than in working up
their hearts to that in dispensable pitch of heavenly resolution, sincerely to
strike through a religious and inviolable Covenant with their God. Whereas
without this, all their labor will be utterly lost, their expectations
frustrate, they take the glorious Name of God in vain, provoke the eyes of his
glory more against them, causing him infinitely to loath and abominate both
their persons, and service; nor shall they ever, by all their crying and
sighing, no not by whole rivers of tears, be able to draw down an arm of
Mercy from Heaven to come and save them.

The more effectually therefore to provoke both my self and you at this time,
to the due performance of this most neglected (but most necessary) duty, I
have thought fit, in a very plain and familiar way suitable to the nature of
this exercise (which ought to be as serious, as solemn) to work and chafe
into all our hearts the strength and spirit of that good Word of God, which you
shall find written for our instruction in

The Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 50. V. 5. They shall ask the way
to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join our selves
unto the Lord in an everlasting Covenant that shall not be forgotten.
WHich words are part of a Prophecy (terrible to Babylon, but comfortable to
the Church) uttered, The Introduction to the maine Discourse.
and penned by the Prophet Jeremy, about the fourth year both of the
Babylonish captivity, and of the tributary reign of Zedekiah. The occasion,
this.

The Prophet having labored about thirty years, to humble Judah by
continually ringing in her ears the doleful tidings of a sore captivity
approaching, could not be believed. But, when once the quick and sad sense of
their bondage under the Caldean Yoke had forced from them an acknowledgement of
the truth of his Prophesies, he found it as hard a task to work their hearts
to any hope of deliverance. For, as it is a work even insuperable, to possess
a people ripe for destruction, that any evil is near them, till the wrath of
God break in upon them and overwhelme them; so is it a business of little
less difficulty to hold up the spirits even of Gods own people, once cast
under any great extremity, with any hope of rescue.

This was Judah case. Before the Babylonian had laid this yoke on their necks,
God had plainly revealed, and often inculcated that it should lie upon them
just 70. years and no longer, Ier. 25.11, 29.10.
after which they should have liberty of return to their own Land again.
Howbeit, the weight of their misery, the absence of God, (who had cast them out
of his sight) together with the insolence and cruelty of their proud
oppressors, had thrown them down so low in a disconsolate condition, that
nothing which God could either now say or do, was sufficient to raise up their
hearts to any assurance of return. The same strength which Lust has to draw
men from obedience, it will surely have afterward to drive men from believing,
in their greatest necessities of living by faith.

The maine beam which stuck in their eyes to hinder their sight of
deliverance promised, was, the greatenesse and invincible potency of the
Chaldean Monarchy (then in her pride) and more especially the strength of
Babylon the Queen and Mistress of that puissant Empire. Introduction.
How could they hope to be delivered, when she that commanded the world
detained them? Shall the prey be taken from the Mighty, Isay 49.24.
or the lawful captive delivered?

To cure them therefore of this desperate desponsion of mind, the Lord stirred
up this Prophet to foretell the total and final subversion and ruin of
Babylon and of that whole Monarchy; and further, to declare from God, that the
desolation thereof should be the dissolution of the captivity of Judah in it.
The better to assure them of all this, Jeremiah wrote the whole Prophecy
against Babylon (contained in this Chapter and the next following) in a Book by
it self, which he sent to Babylon by the hand of Seraiah (Lord Chamberlain to
Zedekiah, Ier. 51.59.
and now going in an Embassy from his Master to great Nebuchadnezzar) with
Command from the Prophet, that, after the reading thereof to the captives, he
should bind a stone unto it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates, with
this saying pronounced over it, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise,
etc.

But to hasten to my Text, In the five first verses of this Chapter, the
Prophet summarily compriseth the substance of his whole Prophecy against
Babylon, declaring, 1. her destruction, 2. the Means, 3. the consequent
thereof to the people of God.

Oiyes! as it were, to all the world, to come and behold the Great Work he was
to do against Babylon the chief City of the Empire, against Bell the chief
Idol of that City, and against Merodach the glory both of that City and
Empire; yea, though the King then reigning when God meant to destroy it, should
prove as potent as that great King, the first of that name, who for restoring
the declining Empire to her ancient Splendour, and for translating the Imperial
Seat from Nineve to Babylon, was by posterity worshipped as a God, and
transferred his name to all his successors, as the name of Pharaoh to the
Egyptian Kings, of Benhadad to the Syrian Monarchs, and of Augustus to the
Roman Emperors. Although all these should be joined together to withstand the
downfall of that Monarchy, yet desolation should be brought over them all, they
should all be confounded and removed for ever, Verse 1.2. and all to make way
for the deliverance of the Church.

But what should be the means of such an unexpected destruction? This was to
be done by an Army from the North, that is, by the Medes and Persians, both of
which, but more especially the Medes, were situated toward the North from
Babylon, Omne malum ab Aquilone.
and therefore ominous. That these were the men, appears more fully by their
description in the residue of this, and of the 51. Chap. This Northern Army
should be the confusion of Babylon, the confusion of Babylon should prove the
restoring of the Church ( ver. 3.) And the restoring of the Church should
produce a Covenant with God.

For, behold, the issue and consequent of the ruin of Babylon was, verse 4.5.

For, in those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the children of Israel
shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping, they
shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with
their faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord
in an everlasting Covenant that shall not be forgotten. This began to be
fulfilled at the end of seventy years determined, when the Empire was first
over-runne and subdued by Cyrus the Persian. For he made Proclamation of
liberty to return, 2 Chr. 36.22
in the first year of his Reign. And when they returned, this was their
deportment; they went weeping; and, to seek the Lord their God. They go, not
so much to repossesse their ancient patrimony and inheritance, and to grow rich
in the world, as to seek and find the Lord their God, and that with a
resolution to enter into Covenant with Him, and such a Covenant as should never
be forgotten, but daily remembered and carefully performed.

You now see the Context. Should I now divide the Text, Actus.
I might show you here.

First, an Act, expressed by their industry, in setting upon a long and tedious
journey to Zion. They shall ask the way to Zion. Secondly, the manner how they
manage this journey, Modus.
it is 1. With all intention of spirit, they ask the way to Zion, with their
faces thitherward. 2. With fervent charity toward, and mutual zeal for each
other, to quicken and inflame one another to the same work, saying, Come.
Thirdly, the end of their journey, which (with so much intention of spirit and
inflamed charity, calling and crying to one another in such a manner, FINIS.
) they set upon; all was for this: Let us join our selves to the Lord in an
everlasting Covenant that shall not be forgotten
I might easily also cast out these generals of the Text into many lesser
branches: but it is not now a time to trifle, or to play with a Text. Yea, I
shall not distinctly prosecute all the parts already laid out, but (as the duty
of this day requires) insist rather upon that which is the maine, and bring in
the other as subordinate thereunto, by occasion afterward, in explication of
the principal point. For we see troops in the Text bound for Zion; and, so
hasty thitherward, that they salute not any man by the way, nor so much as
look aside any way: they go with their faces thitherward: all the stay they
make, is but to call others along with them, and amongst these, us, saying,
Come. And, what is the business; the end of all this have? Nothing but this,
Let us join our selves unto the Lord in an everlasting Covenant, etc. This,
how ever it were last in execution, yet was it first in their intention, in the
undertaking of this journey, and therefore now must be principally insisted
upon.

You see here a people loosed from the Babylonish captivity, and returning to
Zion: and, in their return to have this in their hearts, in their mouths, and
in their endeavors, namely, upon the receipt of this mercy, to make speed to
their God, to enter into a new Contract and solemn Covenant with him. So that
now the chief, and only point of instruction which I shall recommend to, and
press upon you, and mine own heart with you, is plainly this, that

The maine Observation, or Doctrine.
When God vouchsafes any deliverance to his Church, especially from Babylon,
then is it most seasonable and most necessary to close with God by a more
solemn, strict, and inviolable Covenant to be his, and only his for ever.

In prosecuting this point (wherein I resolve to be plain, and in earnest) I
shall first show you the (...) of it, that it is so. Next, the (...), if you
will, how and in what manner this must be done. Thirdly, the (...), the grounds
and reasons of it: and so proceed to the Application.

i. (...). quod sit. That it is so,
For the first, the (...) that it is so, this will appear, 1. More generally,
upon receipt of any deliverance. 2. More specially, upon an deliverance from
Babylon above all other.

1. In general, 1. That it is so, in the general Proved. 1. More generally.
that this use must be made of any deliverance, appears both by precept, and
example in holy Scripture. We shall carry them along together.

In Deuteronomy. 29. you shall find Moses requiring the people to enter into a
special Covenant with God, beside the solemn Covenant which he made with them
(and they with him) in Horeb. Exodus 19.5. etc.
To induce them thereunto, Moses refreshes their memory with the repetition or
representation of the many deliverances God had given unto them, out of Egypt,
The first solemn Covenant which they passed into, was after their deliverance
out of Egypt. Verse. 1.
and in the wilderness by the space of forty years, together with the
wonders and miracles which he daily wrought for them. And in the seventh ver.
he tells them, that when ye came into this place (that is, into the Land of
Moab) Sihon the King of Heshbon, and Og the King of Bashan, came cut against us
unto battle, etc. What then? Here is deliverance upon deliverance, and the
inference is, Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them, verse 9.
But, that is the Covenant on Gods part, you will say? True, A second Covenant,
about forty years after the first, when they came near to Canaan and shortly
after were to enter into it.
but that is not all. He therefore presses them to an actual personal
Covenant on their parts, and that upon consideration of so many deliverances.
This was his maine business with them at the Lords own command. Therefore in
verse. 10. he thus bespeaks them, Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord
your God, your Captains of your tribes, your Elders, and your Officers, with
all the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is
in thy Camp, from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer of thy water, that thou
should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath which the
Lord thy God makes with thee this day. And in verse. 14. he adds. Neither
with you only do I make this Covenant, and this oath, but with him that
stands here with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with him that
is not here with us this day. Thus you see a Covenant required, stricken, and
ratified by solemn Oath of God and his people mutually to one another: they
bind themselves by solemn Oath to him, as he by oath had bound himself to
them. Thus then it was in the time of Moses, No eminent deliverance went
before, but a solemn Covenant followed after. As Moses drew the people, into a
Covenant before their entrance into Canaan; so did Joshua also, after they were
possessed of it, Josh. 24.25.26. So did Iehoiada, upon the deliverance of Judah
from the tyranny of that bloody monster Athaliah, 2 King. 11.17.
And, To swear a Covenant, is no new device, no humane invention, nor
arbitrary Action.

I will give you but one instance more (among many) of this kind, and it is
that of Asa, that good and religious King of Judah. When Zerah the Ethiopian
infested his kingdom with an huge army, 1. That it is so, in the general.
even 1000000, and 300 Chariots, 2 Chronicles. 14. Asa falls to praying, God heard
him; they joined battle, Asa obtained the victory, and carried away very much
spoil. What was the issue? Another Covenant.

For, in Chap. 15 you shall find that presently upon this, God addresseth a
Prophet to Asa, (Azariah the son of Oded) to tell him and the people, The
Lord is with you while ye be with him. And, to encourage them to close with
God, he adds, in verse. 7. Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be
weak: for your work shall be rewarded. They must not only work for God, but
be strong to his work; and that they might be so, there was no way like to
that of entering into a Covenant with him. For, so Asa understood it, as
appears by the next words, where it is said, Asa, when he heard these words, 2 Chronicles. 14.
took courage; and, although he had before done much in purging the Cities of
Judah of Idolatry, and Idols, of high places, Images, and groves, yet now he
goes on to a more thorough reformation, and put away the remainder of
abominable Idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the
Cities which he had taken from Mount Ephraim, and renewed the Altar of the
Lord; for ever where Idols go up, Gods Altars go down, therefore he pulls
down the one, and sets up the other.

And not this alone, but he offered unto the Lord a great sacrifice, and both
himself and his people entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul, that whosoever would
not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or
great, whether man or woman; and they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice,
and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with Cornets. And all this,
immediately upon the deliverance and victory which he had obtained: for, in
verse. 11. it is said expressly, that they offered unto the Lord, the same
time (or, in that very day) of the spoil which they had brought, 700. Oxen,
and 7000. Sheep; meaning of those, which they had carried away from the
Ethiopians that came out to battle against them.

So that now you see another solemn Covenant entered into, not by Asa alone,
but by all the people of God, a Covenant solemnized in public by Sacrifice,
by Oath, and under the highest penalty of death it self to all that should not
observe it.

In pursuit of which Covenant, see what he presently did, He spared not his
own Mother that regarded it not. For, when he perceived that, notwithstanding
this Covenant, the Queen his mother, Maacha, would needs retain her puppet
Gods still, and (amongst the rest) one abominable Idol, in a grove, so obscene
as it is not fit to be named: ( Abulensis In 3. Reg. 15. qs. 11. The Vulgar
has it in the Text, ne esset Princeps in Sacris. Priapi. yea, Lyra is
peremptory for this in loc.
observes that it was Priapus, and conjectureth thence, that she was not only
a gross Idolatresse, but an abominable strumpet: for, ordinarily, Hom. against
peril of Idol. par. 3. Romans 1.21, 22, 23, 24. etc. wis. 14.23 etc. to v. 28.
Minut. Faelix in octavi^. Athan. orat. cont. Idol. Tertull. in apolog. c. 15.
B. Hall contempl. in Asa. Lorinus in Levit. 18. p. 536. Idem in Number. 16. pa.
572 Aliique complures.
Idolatry and adultery, spiritual and bodily fornication go together) It is
said, that he removed her from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a
grove, and Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron, verse 16. Which passage is expressed with an emphasis in 1 King. 15.11.
Also Maacha his Mother, even Her, he removed from being Queen. Although a
Queen, although a Mother, Some suppose her to have bin his Grandmother, others
say she was his own Mother, of the same name with his Grandmother, which is
more probable, because Scripture styles her so.
yet even her he deposed from her dignity.

This he did, and this he must do, not only by reason of that voluntary
Covenant into which he had entered, but by virtue of the special Command of God
himself, in what ever relation she had stood unto him. Yea, in Deuteronomy. 13.6.
the Law was more strict, for though she had been nearer than a Mother, even
the wife of his bosom, yet if she were an Idolater, and should entise him
secretly, saying, let us go and serve other Gods, she must have been put to
death, and his own hand must have been first upon her, verse. 9.

You now see the point proved in the general that thus it is with Gods people;
upon any notable deliverance, Yea sometimes upon consideration of Gods
Judgments felt or feared. 2 Chapter 29.10. 2 Chapter 34.31, 32. 2. In special.
they enter anew into solemn and strict Covenant with God.

2. But more especially ought this to be the care of the Church, when God gives
her deliverance out of Babylon, out of that servitude and bondage which of all
other was most heavy, and lay longest on her. See this in some instances, both
on Gods part aiming at this in giving deliverance, and on his peoples part
performing this after deliverance from Babylon.

On Gods part, first, This was foreshewed under the similitude of the basket of
good figs, Ier. 24.5. There it is said by the Lord, the God of Israel, like
these good figs so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of
Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for
their good: for I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them
again to this land, etc And, in the seventh verse it follows, I will give
them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and I will be their God: for they
shall return unto me with their whole heart. He will give them an heart to
know him, to return, and become his people, which cannot be without a
Covenant. Again,

That this is that which Gods heart is exceedingly set upon, and full of,
namely, that he never meant to bring his people back from Babylon, but upon
this very condition (albeit it was a great while ere it was done, and therefore
they thrived accordingly, as we shall show anon) will yet further appear by
many other passages of the Prophecy of Jeremy, to pass by sundry other
Prophesies uttered by Isaiah, Micah, and others.

In Ier. 30 18. we shall find a Prophecy, that this should be done, (and I
shall show, by and by, that it was afterward performed) Behold, says the
Lord, I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his
dwelling places, etc. and in verse. 21. I will cause him to draw near, and he
shall approach unto me; and then, as one assured of it, and admiring at it, he
presently ads; for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me,
says the Lord? That is, both Governor and people, all of them should bind
and engage themselves, (not their outward man alone, but even their very heart
and soul also) by solemn Covenant to be the Lords. That this was the meaning,
is clear by the next verse, Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. For
it was such an engaging of their hearts, as that one should say, I am the
Lords; and another shall can himself by the name of Jacob: and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel, Ver. 31. etc.
Jsa. 44.5.

Ier. 31.
So again, the Lord having first promised to bring back the captivity, he
subjoynes; Behold, The days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: not according
to the Covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day that I took him out
of the Land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brok, although I was an husband
unto them says the Lord. But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. Here is a Covenant, God begins the work, but his
people follow. They embrace the Covenant, and join themselves by mutual
Covenant to him. He puts his Law into their hearts, for this very purpose.

Once more. In Ier. 32.37. there is a promise that God would gather his people
out of all Countries whither he had cast them in his wrath, and that he would
bring them back to their own place, and cause them to dwell safely. He
presently adds this as the product of that mercy; they shall be my people, and
I will be their God, and I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever, etc. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me: Which words go no less than
a solemn Covenant mutually made and stricken between GOD and His people.

Thus then you see, many plain and pregnant places of Scripture show, that the
maine thing God on his part aimed at, and expected from his people in
delivering them from Babylon, was, the firm and solemn tying and engaging of
themselves by a formal and effectual Covenant to him, and the remembering and
keeping of it better than formerly they had done.

But, secondly, all these were but prophesies showing what God foreshewed
should be. Will you therefore see the thing acted, and all these promises
fulfilled? True it is indeed that the people did not on their parts perform
this, they entered not into such a solemn Covenant, so soon as deliverance was
by Cyrus proclaimed; and they sped accordingly. Zorobabel went indeed before,
in the first year of Cyrus, and laid the foundation of the Lords House: but we
read of no Covenant then made. Therefore, the work was stayed, and the
building not finished in an 100 yeeares after, say the best Chronologers.

Then comes Ezra, and makes some reformation of manners; and not only so, but
some Covenant he and the people entered into, Ezra 10. But that was but in a
particular case (and it would be thought a strange one, to this age especially,
should it now be pressed;) there were many that had trespassed against their
God by taking strange wives of the people of the Land (that worshipped not the
same God.) Such therefore, as now were duly touched with the sense of this
sin, desire Ezra that a solemn Covenant might now be made with God, to put
away all such wives, and such as were borne of them, Verse. 3. Now in the fifth
verse, we shall find this executed. For, Ezra arose, and made the chief
Priests, the Levites, and all Israel to swear that they should do according to
this word, and they swear.

This was somewhat, but not enough: a partial Covenant, and such as came short
of that intended in my Text. You shall see it more thoroughly performed
afterward, in Nehemiahs time. For, after Ezra, came Nehemiah, and he makes a
more thorough Reformation; not of men's manners only, but even of Religion
also. He set up the Ordinances of God in their purity, and took care in
particular for the preaching of the Word. After all this, he and all the people
entered into a solemn Covenant, and that at the time of a public Fast. And
this brings it home to the business we are now about. For, as they entered into
Covenant upon receipt of such a deliverance, so they did it at the time of a
solemn Fast. This will appear throughout the whole ninth Chapter of Nehemiah,
where it is first said, that the Children of Israel were assembled with
fasting, and with sackcloth, and with earth upon them: they separated
themselves from strangers, they stood and confessed their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers. They justified God in all his proceedings against
them, and in all the evils he had brought upon them. They acknowleged that
neither they, their Princes, people, or fathers had kept the Law; they had not
served God in that kingdom he had bestowed upon them. Behold, say they, v. 36.
we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gave unto our fathers,
to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof, behold we are servants in it,
And it yields much increase unto the Kings whom thou have set over us,
because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our
cattle at their pleasure, and we a e in great distress. And because of all
this, we make a sure Covenant, (in the last verse) and write it, and our
Princes, Levites, and Priests seal unto it.

Now here is the full accomplishment of that you have in my Text. What in the
Text is set down by way of Prophesse you here see acted in the History. In
Nehemiahs time, they come home unto it. And if you look into the tenth
Chapter, you shall see who sealed this Covenant: first, the Princes, the
Officers, the Magistrates of the Kingdom, the Parliament men, if you will so
call them; and then the rest of the people. And what is the substance of their
Covenant? They entered into a curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Law,
which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the
Commandments of the Lord their God, and his Judgments, and Statutes, verse 29.

Here then is their Covenant: 2. How it is so.
you see also with what solemnity it was made and ratified; by subscribing of
hands, and setting to of their Seals, by an Oath, and by a curse; binding
themselves by all the most solemn and strongest bonds that possibly they
could; and all this in Public, and at a Public Fast, So that now the point
is clear, That it is so, and that the practice of Gods people has ever been,
upon any great deliverance, especially from Babylon, to enter into solemn
Covenant with the Lord.

Come we to the second branch propounded, which is the (...), 2. (...), Quomodo
sit. How this is to be done
showing, in what manner this Covenant must be made, and how men are to join
themselves to the Lord in this Action.

This I shall demonstrate out of the bowels of the Text it self: for therein
may you see somewhat required, 1. By way of disposition or preparation to it.
2. In respect of the substance of it. 3. In a three fold respect
In regard of the properties belonging to it. These being opened, I shall give
you a full view of this Text, and perform my promise before made unto you.

The first thing to be unfolded is, 1 Of the disposition requisite to strike a
covenant with God. Whereunto is required 1 the asking the way to Zion.
the disposition or preparation to the Covenant; and this appears in two
things, 1 In seeking seriously the face of God, They shall ask the way to
Zion. 2, In the manner of their address unto him, with their faces
thitherward, saying, Come.

The first thing requisite to dispose, qualify, and prepare men to strike a
Covenant with God, is a serious and humble seeking of the face of God. They
shall ask the way to Zjon. And there first a word of the place toward which
they were bound; secondly, of their contending and repair to it, under that
expression of asking the way thither.

The place, was Zion, where first (though it be but a Criticisme, it is yet not
unnecessary to be taken notice of, because the word is often pronounced, and
written amiss, which may cause ambiguity touching the place) you must put a
difference between Sihon or Sion, and Zion: (for these were two different
places, and are written in the original with two different Letters, the former
with, (...)
the other with) you must not here understand this, of the former, namely, of
Mount Sihon, which is all one with Hermon, situate in the utmost confines of
Israel North-East-ward, near unto Jordan, ( Deuteronomy. 4.48.) but conceive it to be
meant of (...) or Zion in Jerusalem, which was once the strong hold of the
Iebusites, 2. How this is to be done.
and held out longer unsubdued than any Piece belonging to that people. For,
when Israel under the Conduct of Joshua had conquered Iebus, after called
Jerusalem, yet could they not win Zion in it. Zion was a strong Castle or
Fort, erected upon a rocky mount, toward the South-west part of the City,
overlooking all the rest; and that the Iebusites, having abundantly fortified
and victualled it, still held, all the days of Ioshuah, and long after, albeit
the Israelites possessed the rest of the City, Josh. 15.63. But afterward when
David came against it, even that strong hold (which the Iebusites thought to be
so invincible, that, in scorn of him and his siege, they set up only a few
blind and lame people on the walls to defend it) he conquered and called it
the City of David, because after he had won it, himself dwelt in it. 2 Samuel
5.7. This, for the Topography.

Then, you must know further, that, by Zion is sometimes meant the whole city
of Jerusalem, by a Synechdoche; sometimes it was taken for the place of Gods
worship in the Holy city, or rather with reference to his Worship and presence
there: for that City being the Capital City of the Kingdom, where Thrones
were set for judgment, was also the special place which God chose to place
his name in: there were the Altars placed for Gods worship, and thither the
Tribes went up to worship, because there God pleased to manifest his more
special presence, and to command the blessing for evermore. Thither therefore
these returning Captives repaired; even unto Zion, the Watch Tower, as Saint
Jerome interprets it, whence God in special manner watched over his people,
for Good: there they seek his face, and enquire of him, before they presume to
enter Covenant with him.

from (...) to beseech or pray.
Now, their address to this place, is set forth in this Text, by asking the way
to Zion. The word (...) though it sometimes import the demanding of a thing
which is a point of justice or equity to give, (as Genesis 34.14.) yet is it
usually applied to note the seeking of some thing by humble prayers and
entreaties: so as it is not seldom put for prayer it self, 2 Chro: 20.4. and,
sometimes for an earnest and humble enquiry after some thing we know not, (
Number: 27.21. Deuteronomy: 13.14.) that we may be directed aright, and pursue the
direction with effect: so here, They ask the way to Zion, and that of God not
only to seek of him a right way for them by fasting and prayer, Ezra 8.21.
but, as resolving that somewhat should be done, that they would walk in it,
and appear before God in Zion: for, so much is intended here as is expressed
more fully elsewhere, viz. in Isay 2. verse 2.3. Mic. 4.1, 2. where they not
only call on each other to undertake, but they also perform the journey,
going up to the mountain of the Lord. So the Prophet Zachary, the inhabitants
of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before
the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts, etc. Zac. 8.21.22.
And how go they? not slightly, carelessely, proudly, but in all humility,
yea, (as in the verse before my Text) even with weeping, they shall seek the
Lord their God with deep humiliation and godly sorrow for all those sins
whereby they had formerly broken his covenant, and for which he had entered upon
the forfeiture, and laid those heavy afflictions upon their Loins. Going, and
weeping, they shall go to seek their God in Zion. The very same thing was
foretold before (to show the necessity of the duty) touching Israel. Ier. 31.9.
They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them. So then,
this is the first thing in this work, to dispose and prepare men for the
Covenant; namely, to ask the way to Zion, by a serious, humble, affectionate
inquiring and seeking after God in his Ordinances, even with many prayers and
tears, that he would be pleased to accept them.

Secondly, the manner of their address is as necessary as the former. It is
not every manner that will serve the turn. It must be done with all intention
of spirit 2. In regard of the manner. That is, 1. With intention of Spirit.
in regard of themselves, and with fervent Charity toward others. For, they
must ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying Come.

Their intention and fervency of spirit wherewith they set upon this work, is
set forth under that Hebraisme of asking the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward. This phrase is usually an expression of the greatest intention,
fervency, and contention of mind that can be, in the pursuit of any business
on foot, or of any way wherein a man is going. Such a phrase you have in Luke
9.51. where it is said of CHRIST, that he steadfastly set his face to go to
Jerusalem, or, as if he would go to Jerusalem: for which cause the Samaritanes
would not receive him, ver. 53. that is, they would not entertain him with any
respect, because, that steadfast setting of his face toward Jerusalem (...). He
will no longer turn aside hither, and thither and go about their villages and
Cities. Tit. Bost. in Luc. 9.
manifested, by his very countenance and aspect, that, where ever his body was,
his heart was at Jerusalem (which the Samaritanes could not brook) and that
nothing in the world could take him off from that journey, or, so far
prevail with him, as to make him linger, or loyter upon the way; no
entreaties, fear, shame, nor any thing could stay him, but obstinata and
imperterrita mente locum petiit, as it is expressed by Bid. He was no way
afraid, or ashamed to be seen and known whither he was bound, and what he was
going about.

When therefore it is here said, they shall ask the way to Zion with their
faces thitherward, the thing meant thereby, is, that they shall set upon this
work with their whole heart, with their whole man, without any fear, or being
ashamed, or unwilling to own the business: but, they shall do it thoroughly
and affectionately without wavering, lingering, halting: they shall do it
boldly, presently, openly, indefatigably and continually. In a word, whatsoever
can be said, or thought upon, to set forth the utmost intention of a man's
Spirit in any work, that his heart is most set upon, and that he would lay
out his life and all that he has upon, for the accomplishment of it; that was
the resolution, and care of these people, and must be ours: this is to ask the
way to Zion with our faces thitherward. And without this, no entering into
Covenant with God. This is, for substance no other (though otherwise expressed)
than that of the people in Asa his time, when they swear the Covenant before
mentioned, 2 Chronicles verse 15. where it is said, they did it with all their
heart, and with all their soul, and expressed it by the loudness of their
voices, and with shoutings, etc. rejoicing at the Oath, because they had sworn
with all their hearts, and sought him with their whole desire, verse. 15. Men
that will stand disputing, consulting with flesh and blood, and casting about
how the entering into such a Covenant may consist with their profits, honors,
lusts, designs, relations, etc. are no fit Covenanters for God. His people
shall be willing, Psalm. 110.3. their heart, mind, spirit, body, countenance,
all, shall profess, and proclaim this to the whole world, that they are for
God, for a Covenant, for putting themselves into the strongest bonds that can
possibly be thought on, to bind them hand and foot, soul and body to the Lord
for ever.

2. With charity toward others.
2. Nor is this all. For, the men in my Text, content not themselves to be thus
earnestly addicted to the work in their own particulars; but, (as one stick
kindles another) they desire to kindle the same flame of affection in others
also, and mutually to blow up the Coals in one another, saying, Come.

This notes the fervency of their Charity toward others also. For, it is not
here brought in as a formality, or complement, but as the evidence of a strong
desire to draw as many others as they can to the same journey, and (if it be
possible) to keep the same pace with them, as being most unwilling to leave
any behind them. This indeed is true Love, unfeigned Charity, to draw all we
can along with us unto God. True Converts, when once they return themselves,
They cause others to return also. And this was often prophesied as a thing
which should certainly be: Witness all those places in Isay 2. Mic. 4. and
Zach. 8. before quoted. So then all these things are requisite, and previous to
the Act of Covenanting with God. There must be a seeking to God with true
Humiliation, a seeking of him with all intention of spirit, and with all
manifestations of a resolution not to be terrified from, daunted at, or ashamed
of the work: yea, with fervent Charity to draw others into the same Covenant
also. Thus much for the disposition previous to the Covenant.

2. The next thing considerable in the (...) is, the Substance of the Covenant
2. The Substance of the Covenant. Both in respect,
it self. Let us join our selves to the Lord, in a Covenant.

Two things here must be opened; the matter, and the form of this solemn
action.

1. The matter 1. Of the matter.
of this Act is set forth under this expression, Let us join our selves to the
Lord. The original word (...) (from (...)) is very emphaticall; so as that
word, being explained, will sufficiently set out before you the nature of the
Covenant here intended. Some Translators render it, Let us glue our selves unto
the Lord; which imports a conjunction so near, as nothing can come between,
and so firm, as nothing can dissolve. But more particularly, the verb here
used is in Scripture applied to a double sense, or to denote two things: both
of which being set together, will fully discover what it is to be joined to the
Lord in Covenant.

First, it signifies the binding of a man's self t the Usurer, of whom he has
borrowed money, to pay back both principal and interest. So it is used in
Nehem. 5.4. where the people complain, We have borrowed money (...)
, for the Kings tribute, and that upon our Lands and Vineyards. That is, they
had engaged both Lands and Vineyards for security of the money borrowed, that
the Usurer should enter upon all, in case they failed of payment at the day. So
that, as men, to make sure, will have a Statute Staple, or recognisance in the
nature of a Statute Staple, acknowledged, whereby a man's person, goods, lands,
and all, are bound for the security of the Creditor, that he shall have both
principal and interest at the day agreed upon (and here that of Solomon proves
too true, The borrower is servant to the lender: for, he has nothing left to
his own dispose; if he would sell any land, settle any joyncture, there is a
Statute upon it, he can dispose of nothing till that be taken off;) so it is in
the case of any man joining himself to the Lord by Covenant, he must even bind
himself to God as firmly, as fully, as the poor borrower, who for his
necessity takes up money, binds himself to the Usurer. If God lend him any
mercy, any blessing, he binds himself to restore not only the principal (the
blessing it self) when God shall call for it; but even the interest too; I
mean, all possible homage, service, and honor which becomes those who have
received so great a benefit.

This is more than employed in that parable of our Savior touching the talents
dispensed, Matthew. 25.27. for even to him who had received but one talent, was
it said, Thou ought to have put my money to the Exchangers, that at my
coming I might have received mine own with usury. God will have his return,
some interest, for every mercy; and expects a Statute Staple, that is, a
Covenant, for his better security. God will have him bound, soul, body,
estate, life and all; so as all he is, and has, shall be forfeited, if he do
not keep touch, and make payment according to the agreement and Covenant made
between them. This is the first use of the word, Nilvu.

Secondly, there is yet more in it. For, though it be true that the obligation
of a borrower to the usurer be as strong as bonds and Statutes can make it;
yet, there is not such an entire, near, firm, and lasting tie of the borrower
to the Lender, nor such a thorough interest in the whole estate of the Usurer,
as there is of him that is in Covenant with God. The Usurer, though he bind the
poor borrower fast to him, yet he keeps him at distance, not giving him
interest in, or use of any other part of his estate, but only of the sum
borrowed. But now this joining of our selves to the Lord, is such, as is made
by marriage; and gives interest in all that the Lord is, and has, and admits
us to the participation of all the most intimate, nearest, choysest expressions
of the dearest Love of God, which is or can be found between the husband and
the wife, who are joined together by the bond of marriage, and made one flesh.

So the word is used, Genesis 29.34. where Leah, being delivered of her third son,
Levi, thus says to the women about her, Now this time will my husband be
joined (...)
unto me, because I have borne him three sons. That is, now shall my husband be
more arctly united to me in all love, and in all demonstrations of it, and that
in the most free, full, and intimate way of expression that possibly can pass
between those who are coupled together in so near a relation.

So then, lay both these together, and you have a clear view of this joining
of our selves to the Lord by Covenant. He that enters into Covenant with God,
does not only bind himself, as the needy borrower to the Covetous Usurer, for
a time; but, as the Wife to the Husband, to be wholly his for ever, without any
reservation, limitation, or termination, till death dissolve the bond. As the
wife has interest in the goods, estate, and person of the husband; and all
that he has is hers: so by this joining of our selves to the Lord, He becomes
ours, as well as we become his, and both are mutually conjoined to each other
by an indissoluble bond for ever. All the power, wisdom, goodness, mercy,
grace, glory, that the Great God has to communicate to the creature, is now
assured and made over to every soul that thus engages himself unto him. And
on the other side, all the wit, strength, industry, wealth, honor, friends,
life, and all that this man has, he makes over, and resignes up actually,
totally, absolutely, and for ever unto the Lord, to serve and honor him
withal; and that with all his heart, and with his whole desire; to have
nothing, to do nothing, to be nothing but for the Lord, though all the world
be against him for it. This I take to be the full latitude of the Covenant, for
the Matter of it.

2. 2. In regard of the form
Touching the form of this Act of joining our selves to the Lord, it is
expressed in the word (...) the Covenant. A Covenant is nothing else but an
agreement or bargain between two or more persons, and ratified (ordinarily) by
some external solemnity, or rites that may testify and declare the agreement,
whereby it becomes unalterable. Therefore it is, that among the variety of
ratifications of Covenants mentioned in Scripture, still there is somewhat of
outward solemnity reported to have been used at the making of them, to strike
the bargain thorough.

Sometimes they were made by Sacrifice, Psalm 50.5. sometimes by Oath, Deuteronomy.
29. sometimes by an Oath, and a curse, Neh. 10.29. sometimes by subscription of
their hands, Isa. 44.5. Neh. 9. ult.
sometimes by sealing it with their seals also: Sometimes by all these, and by
what ever else might most firmly and inviolably knit men unto God. And as it
was then, so must it be still. To strike a Covenant, is not, in a private or
public prayer only, to go to God and say, Lord I will be thine, I here enter
into a Covenant with thee, be thou a witness of it, etc. but it is, to stand
and make it publicly before the Lord, by some special solemnity that may
witness it to all the world, as Josiah 2 Cor. 34.31.
, Asa, and all the godly ever did; (even as in entering into bonds, or as in
solemnizing of matrimony, men use to do.) Whether by the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, by fasting, or by ought else, whereby they may become so firmly
and arctly joined to the Lord, that they may not only be no longer sui juris,
to depart away from the living God; but, not so much as to sit loose from God,
or to stand in any terms of indifferency, which might leave them at liberty to
serve, or not to serve God in any duty how difficult, or dangerous soever. And
thus have you the Substance of the Covenant opened.

3. Take we now a short view of the properties of this Covenant, and they are
two; 3. The Properties of the Covenant, which are two.
perpetuity and heedfulnesse.

1. It must be an everlasting Covenant, in regard of continuance. 1. It must be
everlasting for continuance.
In the Original it is (...) a Covenant of Ages. And the 72. Interpreters
render it to the same purpose, (...), that is, such a Covenant as no time shall
terminate, till they who make it cease to be. Some understand this of engaging
themselves to stick close to him in the due celebration of his Legal worship,
so long as he should continue it in his Church, (which was, till Shiloh came)
without those mixtures, wherein formerly they had been too bold, and for which
God had spewed them out of his Church, and hurled them as far as Babylon.
Others conceive it to be meant of the Covenant of Grace that God had sealed to
them in the blood of his Son. But, neither of these are full. For, it is
clearly meant of an Act of theirs toward God, whereby they bind themselves to
him, and that not for a definite time only, but for ever.

It is such a binding, as that of the borrower to the Vsur r, whom nothing can
satisfy but full payment. Or rather, such a closing with God, as is that of
the wife to the husband, called, in particular reference to the nuptial knot,
the Covenant of her God, Prove. 2.17. She must be his for ever; that is, so long
as she lives, Romans 7. So that, for men to bind themselves by an everlasting
Covenant to the Lord, is to bind themselves never to step out from him to
Idols, to their base lusts, to any creature, in any strait, upon any occasion,
or tentation whatsoever; nor, with the dog, to return any more to their
vomit of any kind. They are in Covenant as the wife to the husband; for they
are married unto the Lord for ever, Hos. 2.

2. It must be heeded and minded; 2 It must be heeded, and not forgotten.
else, it will be to small purpose to be so lasting. It must be a Covenant that
shall not be forgotten.

A Covenant, quod non tradetur oblivioni; as Tremellius well: that is, that
shall not be cast behind their backs. It is but a plain mockery for men so to
enter Covenant with God, as young Gallants enter into bonds to the Usurer,
never thinking more of them, till the day of payment be past, and the Sergeant
ready to attach them. Unto the wicked says God, what have thou to do to take
my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou castest my words behind thee? Psalm
50. Only they rightly perform this duty, who so join themselves to the Lord,
as to remember, and mind the obligation they have sealed. As a poor man that
means honestly, if he be necessitated to take up money upon his bond, he can
hardly eat, walk, sleep, do any thing, be in any company, but that still his
mind runs upon the obligation and day of payment: he complains he is in debt,
he has given bond for so much money, and all his care is how to pay his debts,
or to get longer time; so it is with a Godly man that has entered Covenant with
the Lord, he has sealed a bond, and he knows it must be satisfied, or it will
be put in suit. Therefore he bears it in mind, he is always casting about
how he may perform, and keep touch with God. I will never forget thy precepts,
says David, I have inclined mine heart to perform thy Statutes always, even
unto the end, Psalm. 119.112. This is one expression.

Again, It is a Covenant to be remembered, as that of the wife, whereby she
stands bound to her husband: she must ever remember it. It is the note of an
Harlot to forget the Covenant of her GOD. The chaste wife will so remember the
marriage bond, Pro. 2.17.
that if she be solicited to unfaithfulness, to uncleanness, etc. she ever
has this in her thoughts, that she has given her self wholly away to an
husband, and is bound to keep her only unto him during life; and this makes her
to be even an impregnable wall against all assaults that might otherwise draw
her to folly. So must it be in the case in hand: The Covenant must still be in
the heart, and in the memory. In every action of a man's life, in every passage
and turning of his estate and condition, in every design or engagement, this
must not be forgotten; viz. I have entered into Covenant with God, as a wife
with her husband; will that I am now doing, or going about, stand with my
Covenant? Is this to perform Covenant with God? etc. If he be solicited to
uncleanness, to fraud, oppression, any evil whatsoever, this still runs in
his mind, There is a Covenant between me and the Lord, I am bound from such
courses by the strongest bonds; How then can I commit this great wickedness,
and sin against God?

Psalm. 78.10.
What was it for which Judah, and Israel became Captives, but the breach of the
Covenant? They kept not the Covenant of God, says the Psalmist. And, how so?
because they did not remember it. As they soon forgot his works, so it was
not long ere they forgot God their Savior himself too; and then no marvel,
if, at the next bout, they forgot his Covenant also, Psalm. 106, He then, that
would not break Covenant, must not forget it; but mind, and perform it.
Otherwise, it is like vowing unto God, and not paying, which is worse than not
to vow at all.

Eccles. 5.
Thus have I dispatched the Second general, the (...), and showed you how and in
what manner this Covenant must be stricken: first, in regard of the disposition
and preparation of the Soul unto it, it must be with serious seeking the face
of God and humbling the soul before hand; it must be with all intention and
earnestnes, with fervent Love and charity to draw others the same way. Next, in
regard of the Covenant it self, it must be an act and firm joining and binding
our selves to the Lord, as of the borrower to the Lender; of the wife to the
husband; and that by some solemn Act, which may testify it to all the world,
and be a witness against us, if we keep it not. And all this, thirdly for
properties, must be of everlasting continuance, and had in continual
remembrance, so as it may be continually performed of all that make it.

3. (...). ^ur fit. the grounds why it is so: these are of 2 sorts viz.
3. I proceed to the third and last branch, the (...) the Grounds and reasons
why, upon receipt of any deliverance, but more especially from Babylon, people
should enter into such a covenant with God. And these respect deliverances
either in general, or from Babylon in special.

1. The reasons why this must be done, upon any deliverance in general, 1.
Why, for any deliverance in general.
are these.

1. Because God, at no time so much as when he bestows upon his people some
notable deliverance, 1 God at such times gives clearest evidence of his
readiness to enter covenant with us.
gives such clear hints and demonstrations of his willingness to strike an
everlasting Covenant with them. No sooner had the Lord delivered Israel out of
Egypt, but within 3. Months after, he commanded Moses to tell the people from
him; Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians; and how I bare you on Eagles
wings, and brought you out unto my self. Now therefore if ye will obey my
voice and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above
all people. Exodus 19.1. and verse 4.5. God himself, you see, was now earnest
for a Covenant.

It is the nature of God, where he bestows one benefit, to add more, and still
to rise in his blessings. Where he once opens his hand to take a people into
his protection, he opens his heart to take them into his bosom. Where he puts
forth his power to rescue a people, he puts out his heart to make them his
own, if then they have eyes to discern the opportunity. See this most
excellently demonstrated Ier. 32. from ver. 37. to the 42. His gathering them
from their Captivity, first warmes, then melts, and after inflames his heart
toward them, making it even then to glow as it were upon them, and to become
restless till he have bestowed himself wholly on them by solemn Covenant to
be their God for ever.

Now then, shall God, at such a time, be so willing and desirous to enter
Covenant with men, and shall they think it too much for them to be in Covenant
with him? Shall he be fast bound to them, and they left free to sit loose from
him? Indeed, this is that which our corrupt nature would willingly have: People
would feign be their own men; which yet in truth, is, to be the greatest
slaves. Necessary therefore it is for men, upon receipt of any deliverance, to
renew Covenant with God who is pleased to honor them so far, as to be in
Covenant with them. For, these two are relatives, and ever go together, I will
be their God, and they shall be my people. God is not the God of any people but
of his own Covenant-Servants. The rest, he styles, Lo-ammi. Hos. 1.9. for ye
are not my people, says he, and I will not be your God. 2. God is content to be
bound, first.
They will not enter into Covenant with me, and I will make no Covenant with
them. That is the first reason.

2. As God is pleased to enter into Covenant with his people, so is he first in
the Covenant, 3. Why it is so, in the general.
God requires no man to bind himself by Covenant to Him, till the Lord first
strike a Covenant with his Soul. As we love him, because he loved us first;
so we enter into Covenant with him, because he first enters into Covenant with
us. I will be their God, he is first bound, and seals first; and then, and not
till then, it follows; they shall be my people. This is the constant tenor of
the Covenant. And shall he begin, and we think much to follow? Can there be a
marriage consummated where only the man is first married to the woman, and the
woman will not after, for her part, be married to the man? Now, God no way so
much declares his willingness to be in Covenant, and to be first in it, as by
deliverances (as we shall see more in the next reason:) great reason therefore,
men should then second him by mutual stipulation. It is an hard case, when men
will not fellow, where God leads.

3. In deliverances God more especially manifests his fidelity in keeping
Covenant 3. In delierances God more especially manifests his fidelity in the
Grand Covenant. Psalm. 107.
with his people, even when they have broken Covenant with him, and forfeited
all into his hands. When God delivers a people out of any strait, does not
that usually suppose some folly of theirs going before, and provoking him to
cast them into that affliction; whence, upon their cry, he is pleased to
deliver them.

And when they have so far and so long broken the Laws, and contemned the
counsel of the most high, and dealt unfaithfully in his Covenant, as that he
has been even compelled to throw them into darkness and the shadow of death:
yet if then, upon their humiliation, he be pleased to deliver them out of all
their distresses; this is to give them fresh experience of his infinite love in
Keeping Covenant and mercy with them, that kept no Covenant with him. This is
called a remembering of his Covenant with his people, after that their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, Levit. 26.41, 42.
and that they accept of the punishment of their iniquity, when God should have
cast them out of their land, among their enemies, as afterward he did. So
that, in a deliverance, that which is most predominant in God, and should be
most sweet and precious to his people and most eyed by them, is his fidelity,
mercy, and unchangeable Love in bringing out that Covenant he once made with
them, and spreading it before himself, and making of it good, even when they
could not expect it, nor durst to plead it. Hence that passionate speech of God
to rebellious Ephraim. Is Ephraim my dear son? ^^c. 31.20
is he a pleasant child? As if he should have said, surely he cannot conclude
so; yet, my love, by virtue of the ancient Covenant between us, makes me still
so to account him: witness that which follows; for since I spoke against him,
(that is, as resolving to cast him off for ever) I remember him still, (I
remember I am in Covenant with him,) therefore my bowels are troubled for him,
I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord: Thus, deliverance is a
thread drawn out of the bowels of his Covenant. Great reason therefore that,
in this case, his people should think of renewing their league and Covenant
with the Lord on their parts, when they have so shamefully broken it, and yet
he goes on in so much mercy to manifest his fidelity in remembering and keeping
the Covenant on his part, by giving them deliverance.

Again, fourthly and lastly, All our hopes of a full deliverance, of complete
happiness, will be delayed, if not frustrate; and, 4 No complete deliverance
and happiness without a Covenant.
the next deliverance will stick in the birth, and want strength to bring forth,
if we come not up to a Covenant for deliverances already received. If God have
delivered us once, he will do it no more: or if he do somewhat, to hold us up
by the chin that we sink not, yet will he hold us down from the throne, that
we reign not, till we come up actually and fully in this point of Covenanting
with him. It is only to those that take hold of his Covenant, that he gives an
everlasting name which shall not be cut off, Isa. 56.4, 5.

He that has obtained most and greatest deliverances, will ere long, stand in
need of more. Now, one thing is necessary to draw down more, and to move God
to command (further) deliverances for Jacob; yea, to power out his whole bosom
into the laps of his people, and to crown all deliverances and blessings
received, with this assurance, that he that has delivered, will yet again
deliver; and that is, to enter into a solemn Covenant with the Lord, upon
consideration of what he has done already, how ever he should please to deal
with us for the future, or for removing any present pressures that lie upon us.
Although God begin to deliver, See Judge. 10 from verse. 9 to verse 17
yet he will never perfect the deliverance, till this be done. The people which
returned from Babylon, found God to keep touch with them, to a day. So soon
as the 70. years determined, their captivity was dissolved, and somewhat was
done, the foundation of the Lords house was laid, but the building went slowly
up, the reformation of Church and State went heavily on; and, they were never
in a thriving condition, till Nehemiah, 3. Why it is so
by the good hand of God, lighted upon this course. Some Fasts they had kept
before, yea very many; but they never thrived, till he added to their public
and solemn Fasting, the fastening of them to God by a solemn Covenant. Then,
the work of Reformation, and establishment, went on merrily, then they
prospered. Thus far the Reasons concluding for a Covenant, upon receipt of
deliverances in general.

2. The Reasons inducing us thereunto, upon deliverance from Babylon 2 why, for
deliverance from Babylon, in special.
in particular, are these.

1. Because Babylon 1. Babylon has ever bin the sorest enemy.
(after once the Church was put under her power) had always been the most
insolent, heavy, bitter, bloody enemy that ever the Church felt. The violence
of Babylon was unsupportable, her insolency intolerable, her bloud-thirstinesse
insatiable. Hence the Church is bold to challenge all the world to match her
misery under the yoke of Babylon; Behold, and see, if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, (that is, by the heavy
hand of Babylon) in the day of his fierce wrath, Lam. 1.12.

This was so sore, that it has been by some Fathers, and others, conceived to
be the fullest and most lively typical expression of that matchless agony and
extremity which our Lord himself (hanging upon the Cross) sustained, when he
bare all our sins, and the wrath of God due to us for them, so far as to make
a full satisfaction to the Justice of his Father, in behalf of all his people.

And, as it was with old Babylon, so it is now, and ever will be with the new,
(I mean, mystical Babylon) to the end of the world; might she so long
continue. Even she also delights in no other drink but the blood of the Saints,
as you shall find in Rev. 17.5. where the very name written upon her forehead
sufficiently sets out her nature: Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of
harlots and abominations of the earth. And, what of her? I saw, says St John,
the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration, v. 6.
And well he might. A woman, and drunk! And, if drunk, would no liquor
suffice, but blood! no blood, but that of Saints and Martyrs! She is never in
her element, but when she is swimming in blood So insatiable is she, that like
the horse-leeches daughter, she never says, it is enough.

Therefore, when God gives any deliverance from thence, 3. Why it is so, in
special.
there is more than ordinary cause to close with the Lord, in a more solemn and
extraordinary manner, giving him the praise and glory of so great a mercy. But
then more especially, when God works out the full deliverance of his Church, by
the total and final ruin of Babylon. Oh then, then is the time when all the
people in heaven must sing Halleluiah; ascribing, salvation, and honor, and
power unto the Lord our God, Revel. 19.1. And again, Halleluiah, verse 3. as
if they could never sufficiently express themselves to God for such a
deliverance, such a mercy, such a vengeance.

2. Again. When God delivers from Babylon, 2. Such a deliverance implies
more than ordinary breach of Covenant on our parts, for which God formerly put
us under such a yoke.
there is more than ordinary cause of entering into solemn Covenant with him,
because the very subjecting of the Godly under that iron yoke, argues more than
ordinary breach of Covenant with the Lord in time past, which stirred him up to
deal so sharply with them as to put them under the power of Babylon. This
Provocation was exceeding great, too much to be endured even by infinite
Patience it self: else, the People of God had never been cast into such a
furnace. It was for such a fault as dissolved the very marriage knot between
God and his people: it was for going a whoring from him. For this it was, that
God first put away Israel, giving her a Bill of divorce, Ier. 3.8. And for this
it was, that he afterward cast Judah also out of his sight, 2 King. 17.19.29.
And as it was in former times, so in later Ages of the world. What was the
reason that so many millions of souls have been exposed to the butchery of
Antichrist in Mystical Babylon, and to be so hood-winckt and blinded by
strong delusions, as to believe nothing but lies; even that Great, Great
soul-killing Lie, that they might be damned? S. Paul tells us, it was this; They
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. What unrighteousness? Is it meant of every
unrighteousness (that is in the nature of it damnable) which is to be found in
the world? Surely no: but (signanter) of that unrighteousness whereby men
turned the truth of God into a lie. Romans 1. that is, by corrupting the true
worship of the true God, and afterward falling off to downright Idolatry,
even within the pales of the Church it self.

Most of you are well seen in the History of the Church, and can soon point
with your finger to the times wherein Babylon began to besiege Jerusalem, and
Antichrist began to pull off his vizzard, in the Churches of Christ: even then,
when Pictures and Images began first to be set up in Churches, for remembrance:
then, for ornament; then, for instruction too; and at last, for adoration and
worship. Then, God suffered her to be overrun, and overspread by Babylon, as
by an hideous opacum, or thick darkness, and to be exposed and prostituted to
all manner of whoredoms and filthiness: so as the slavery of the Jewish
Church in old Babylon, was scarce a flea-biting, in comparison of the miseries
of the Church Christian under the new, which makes havoc and merchandise not
of the bodies only, but even of the souls of men, Revel. 18.13.

Now then, when God pleases to deliver a people from such bondage, and to
awaken them effectually to look up, and to reflect even with astonishment upon
those great and ghastly sins of theirs, which had cut asunder the cords of the
Covenant between God and their Souls, and provoked God to subject them to so
much bondage; and, that they must either renew Covenant, or be obnoxious to
more wrath, and be laid open to more and greater temptations and sins; this
cannot but exceedingly work upon their souls, causing their hearts to melt,
and their very bowels to yearne after the Lord, to enter into a new, an
everlasting Covenant that shall never be forgotten.

This is that which God by his servant Ezekiel, spoke touching the deportment
of the remnant of Israel, which should escape the sword among the nations and
countries whither they had been carried captives, Ezekiel. 6.9. They should, upon
such a deliverance, remember God, not only with grief, but resolution also to
join themselves to him more firmly in a perpetual Covenant. For, of them, he
says there; they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations,
because I am broken with their whorish heart which has departed from me, and
with their eyes which go a whoring after their idols, and they shall loath
themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
And of the same people he says afterward, Cap. 11.18, 19, 20.
that, upon their return home, They shall take away all the detestable things,
and all the abominations thereof from thence. And I will give them one heart,
and put a new spirit within them, I will take away the stony heart out of their
flesh, and give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and
keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God. So that here is a full Covenant stricken, and that upon this
ground: viz. the Consideration of those great sins they formerly committed,
whereby they had broken their first Covenant and departed from their God.

So far the Reasons, and Grounds of the point; I shall now as briefly as I
can, endeavor to bring home, and set on all by some Application, Application
Threefold.
which I shall reduce to 3. heads, namely to matter of Reproof, Information
and Exhortation. For, if When God vouchsafes any deliverance to his people,
especially from Babylon, it be most seasonable and necessary to close with
him, by a more solemn, firm, and inviolable Covenant, to be only his for
ever: Then,

1. How may this reprove, 1. Use, of Reproof.
and condemn of great ingratitude and folly, many sorts of men among us, that
are far from making any such use of the deliverances which God has wrought
for them? O beloved! Should I but give you a Catalogue of the many, great,
stupendous, and even miraculous deliverances which God has given us; the
personal deliverances he has often given to each of us apart; the public,
eminent, glorious deliverances he has given to us together with the whole
State; that in 88. and that of 1605. I mean from the horrid hellish
Gun-powder-Treason; but especially, and above all the rest, our happy
deliverance out of Babylon by the blessed Reformation of Religion begun amongst
us, some good number of years by past; the time would fail me. But alas! Of
four sorts of men. viz. 1. Of such as think a Covenant needful in trouble,
but not after deliverance. Hosea 5.15.
What use have we made of them? Has this use ever been so much as thought of
by us? Nay verily. For,

1. Some think it bootlesse, thus to close in with God, after an evil is over.
When Gods hand is heavy upon them, sense of smart compels them to think it then
a fit season to do somewhat, to confess their sins, to humble themselves, and
to seek God. In their asfliction they will seek me early, says the Lord. But
so soon as he takes his hand off from them, they cast all care away, as if
now (according to that homely proverb) the devil were dead, and no further use
of any fear, or diligence, were to be once thought upon, till (with Pharaoh)
they come under a worse plague than before; and, as if God had delivered them
to no other end, but to live as they list, to cast more dung into his face, and
to dishonor and provoke him yet more than ever before.

I appeal to the consciences of many who hear me this day, and I require
them from the Lord to witness truly, whether it be not even thus with them.
1. Use. Reproof.
If the plague knock at their door, if death get in at the window, and begin
to shake them by the hand; there is then some apprehension of wrath and
judgment, some humbling, some hankering after Cod. Then, Oh what would not
these men do, what would they not promise, on condition to be delivered from
their present anguish, and fears! But once deliver them, and God shall hear
no more of them, till they be in the same, or worse case again. They turn
Covenanters? Nay, leave that to the Puritans. For their parts, they think more
of a Covenant with death and hell, for God is not in all their thoughts.

Had there been, upon the discovery of the Powder Treason (which this
Honorable Assembly has cause above all others to preserve eternally in fresh
remembrance, and to think more seriously what God looks for at all your hands
upon such a deliverance) had there been, I say, no possibility of escaping that
Blow, what would not men have then done! Oh what prayers, what fasting, what
humiliation should we have seen! But, when the snare was once broken, what
followed? A Covenant with God? Nothing less; for, so soon as ever the danger,
the fear, the amazement at such an hellish project, and the near approach to
the execution of it, was a little over; the Traitors themselves fell not deeper
into the pit of destruction which themselves had dug, than generally all
sorts of men did into the gulf of their old sins, as if they owed more to
Hell, than to Heaven, for so great a deliverance. And, is it better now? Where
is the Covenant (such a Covenant) with God, that so wonderful a deliverance
deserves, and requires?

These men may please themselves, and feed sweetly upon a vain dream that
there is no harm in all this; but the Apostle brings them in a sad reckoning,
after a sharp chiding for it, Romans 2.4, 5, What? says he, Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that
the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? The end of all Gods goodness
in forbearing, advancing, and giving thee prosperity; and of his long
suffering, in sparing thee when thou have abused prosperity; and of all his
mercy, in delivering thee out of adversity; is, to lead thee to repentance; to
draw thee nearer to Himself, even in an everlasting Covenant. And if it have
not this effect on thee, the Apostle has said it, and the God of Heaven will
make it good, that thou despisest the riches of his goodness, etc. Thou
tramplest all mercies under thine impure feet, when they do not raise and
scrue thee up so near to thy God, as to enter a solemn Covenant with them.
And, what then? Thou will not stay there, but fall into more sin, and under
greater judgment; and, after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath (that is, more and more wrath) against the day of wrath
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. This is the end of all who
make not the Goodness of God, a prevailing motive thus to join themselves to
the Lord; they fall into more, and greater sins, and abominations; and so add
daily to that great heap, and to those Seas of divine wrath that hang over
their heads, to overwhelme and confound them for ever.

2. Others, if, after some time of lying under the weight of many pressures of
the Church and State, they arrive at some hopes and opportunities of easing
themselves of those burdens, and of freeing the Land of the great Instruments
of all their evils; 2. Of such as having means of deliverance think it enough
to rid out of the way the instruments of their evils.
they conceit strongly, that, if this be done, all is done. If but some of the
Nimrods who have invaded their Laws, and Liberties, be pulled down, (Which
is an act of Justice) how do the Many (who do nothing toward any Reformation
of themselves) rejoice, and promise to themselves great matters! Now (think
they) there will be an end of all our miseries, and we shall see golden days;
Amos 5.24.
Judgment shall run down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty
stream.

Oh Brethren! deceive not your selves. If this be all you look at; if, upon
opening this door of hope, this be all you aim at, to make use of the time to
secure your selves against oppressors, and never think of closing with God; or,
but think of it; you may perhaps go far in pursuit of your own designs, in
providing against the evils you sigh under; and, this Parliament may do great
things this way: But let me tell you from God, that this will never do the
deed, till the Covenant we have been all this while speaking of, be resolved
on, and solemnly entered into by all those that expect any blessing from that
High Assembly. Nor this, nor all the Parliaments in the world shall ever be
able to make us happy in such a degree at least as we expect, till the Lord
has even glewed, and married us all unto himself by mutual Covenant.

It is not only the making of good Laws to remove our present grievances; no,
nor the cutting down of all the evil Instruments in our State or Church at
one blow, that can secure us against the like; yea, worse evils for the future;
but rather, as one wave follows another, so one mischief will still tread on
the heels of another, and greater plagues will ever crowd in after the former,
till we close with God by such a solemn Covenant.

The people of Palestine, or Philistia, made themselves mavelous merry, when
any of the Governors or Kings of Israel, or Judah (such as Sampson, David,
Vzziah, etc.) that had sorely yoked and hampered them, were removed by death,
and others come in the room that could do but little against them. When such
an one as Ahaz, who never won battle of them, but still went by the worse,
swayed the Scepter; oh how joyful were the Philistines! But mark what a damp
God cast in among them in the midst of all their mirth; Jsai. 14.28.
Rejoice not thou whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is
broken, (that Vzziah, and other Potent and successful Kings are taken away,
and weak unhappy Ahaz come in the room) for out of the Serpents root shall
come forth a Cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. Ahaz
shall leave an Hezekiah behind him, See 2. King. 18.8.
that shall pay all his Fathers debts upon the Philistines, and plague them yet
more than all that went before him.

And have not we seen this verified also nearer home? Have not some, in former
times, been taken away, who have been great Oppressors, and Instruments of
many sore pressures? And, how have men rejoiced at their falls? Nor know I, why
they should not, if justice in a just way have cut them off. But alas! what
good, in the issue, has followed, or can be yet hoped for so long as men
continue Philistines, enemies to God and his Church, Anti-Covenanters (even
with Hell) rather than true Covenanters with God? Whether is our Condition any
what better now then heretofore, when those Leviathans were alive, and in their
height? I appeal to your selves. And the reason of all is this, that men
mistake the means of Cure, or at least fall short of it. The cutting off of
evil Doers (how necessary soever it be) is not all, nor the maine requisite to
make a people happy; unless also there be a thorough joining of themselves to
God by Covenant.

If you therefore that be now convened in Parliament, should sit so long as you
desire, even these 7. years, (if your business should require it) and think,
you would make such Examples of men that have violated the Laws, and invaded
your Liberties; and enact so many wholesome Laws to prevent the like
presumptions for the future, as should put us into a new world, causing men to
admire the happy state and frame of Government which you would set up: yet all
this would never produce the expected effect, but prove as a mere dream of an
hungry man, who in his dream eats abundantly, but when he awakes, is empty;
unless you also, not only resolve upon, but execute this maine duty of
entering Covenant with your God.

Again, thirdly, others can roar like bears, 3. Of such as think
extraordinary Fasting and Prayer sufficient, without a Covenant. Jsai 59.11.
and mourn sore like doves, when they find themselves disappointed of their
hopes: when Parliaments have been broken up in discontent, when they have
looked for Judgment, and there is none, for salvation, but it has been far
from them: then they have howled like dragons, not only for afflictions, but
perhaps for sins also, especially if deliverance upon deliverance has been
snatched from them, even when it has seemed so near that they had begun to
take possession of it: yet, (silly men that they are!) their evils haunt them
still, and prevail more and more, after all their fastings, humblings, and
strong cries to God their Redeemer. For alas! what will all this do without a
Covenant, without taking hold of God, and joining themselves to him to be his
for ever? you may see such a state of the Church as this described by Isaiah:
and good were it for us to take warning by it: Jsai. 64.6, 7.
We all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us
away. And why all this? The next words will tell you: there is none that
calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee, say they
to the Lord who had hid his face from them, and consumed them for their sins.
Not that they did not at all call upon God, but because they did not so call
upon him as to stir up themselves to take hold of him by Covenant; therefore
is it accounted no better than a not calling upon him at all. Thus men lose not
only their opportunities of deliverances offered, but their duties also by
which they desire to further it against another time.

4. Some, it may be, go yet further. Upon the hearing of such a duty (so much
pressed and inculcated) they begin to be a little stirred, they are
convinced that it is indeed true, such a Covenant 4. Of such as are convinced
of the necessity of a Covenant, yet come not up to it. Hosea 3.14.
is fit to be made: but here (like Ephraim an unwise son) they stand still at
the breaking forth of the Children of the Covenant. They feign would, but loath
they be to go thorough with the bargain. They begin to come on, and then
fall back again. They are so long a cheapning, treating, complementing,
disputing how safe it may be for them, how well it may stand with their
profits, projects, ends, interests, relations; that they cool again, and
never come up to a full resolution. Oh, says one, this is a good course, and
fit to be taken: but my engagements, callings, Alliance, company, service will
not consist with it. Another swears, he could find in his heart to make
trial of it, but that he should be jeered, scorned, and perhaps lose his
place, or hopes for it: another, he is for it, but at present he cannot enter
upon it. Thus one thing or other still keeps this duty without doors, and
holds most men off from the work for ever.

But beloved, take heed of this dallying. What ever you think, it is no better
than a departing away from the living God, that springs from an evil heart of
unbelief; when, being fully convinced of the weight, necessity, and commodity
of the duty, you will yet, while it is called to day, adventure so far to
harden your hearts, as not to set upon the work instantly, and to go thorough
with it. Heb. 3.

Woe unto all such dodging Christians; they shall find to their cost that God
will write them Lo-ammi, Hos. 1.9. and pronounce of them, They are not my
people, and I am not their God.

If any think, what ado is here? what means this man to be so earnest? would
he have us all turn Covenanters? yes, with God. Why, what if I do not? Then
never look for good from him, how fair soever thy hopes be. No? says another;
I Will try that, sure I have seen many a good day in my time, and hope to see
more, though I never swallow this doctrine: therefore he resolves to go hence,
as he came hither; as he lived yesterday, so he will to morrow; though this day
he do as his neighbors do, keeping some order, (much against the will of
his base lusts, that ring him but an harsh peale in his ear for this little
abstinence) yet to morrow he will be for his swearing, drinking, whoring, any
excess, and riot, as much as ever; and yet, by grace of God he hopes to prove
all these words to be but wind, and to do as well as the best of them all when
he comes to die.

But woe worth the day that ever such a man was born, that when he hears God
calling him with so much importunity to stand even this very day before the
Lord, to enter into Covenant with the Lord his God, and into his Oath, shall so
harden his neck, and harbor such a root of gall and wormwood within his
heart, as when he hears the words of the Curse upon all those that will not
enter into Covenant; or, entering into it shall not keep it, he shall bless
himself in his heart saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, and add drunkenness to thirst: See, and tremble at
what God has resolved to do with that man, Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21. The Lord will not
spare him, but the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against
that man; and all the Curses that are written in (Gods) Book shall lie upon
him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. Here is nothing
but fury powered out, upon such a wretch; not a blessing shall descend upon him,
not a curse shall escape and go by him; not only himself, and posterity, but
his very name (so far as it is an honor) shall all be cast out of the world,
as out of the midst of a sling.

If he please himself with this, Yet I shall live as long as some others; if
they have any happiness, I resolve to share with them; he will find that God
will not leave him so, but the Lord will separate him unto evil out of all the
Tribes of Israel, so as, though all others be safe; yet, as a stricken Dear is
unhearded from all the rest, and followed by the dogs till he be pulled down
and killed; so shall it be with this man, according to all the curses of the
Covenant, that are written in the Book of the Law. Although the whole Kingdom
be safe, and all others in it be in peace, yet he and his house shall perish;
the line of Confusion shall be stretched out over him, hell and damnation
shall be his portion, how high soever he now bears his head, and how much
soever he suffer his heart to swell against the truth, supposing all that he
likes not, to be nothing but a spice of indiscretion, yea of faction, and (it
may be) of Sedition; when yet nothing is offered, but what is (I trust)
pregnantly proved out of Holy Scripture. So far the first Use. 2. Use.
Information, ^ou^^ing the chief cause why Reforma^^^ and full ^^dr^sse of our
evils goes on (...) slowly.


2. This may inform us touching the true cause (which most nearly concerns
our selves) of the slow proceedings of Reformation of things amiss among us,
both in the Church and Commonwealth: Why God has not yet given us so full a
deliverance from Babylon; why there have been so many ebbings and flowings in
matters of Religion, yea, more ebbings than flowings; Why general grievances
swell to such an height, and that all opportunities of cure have vanished, so
soon as appeared: how it comes to posse that albeit God has moved the heart
of the King to call Parliament after Parliament, yet by and by, one spirit of
division or another, sometimes from one quarter, 2. Use. Information.
sometimes from another, (like the evil spirit which God sent between
Abimelech, and the men of Shechem, to the ruin of both) still comes between,
and blasteth all our hopes, Judge. 9.23, 24.
leaving us in worse case than we were in before; and whence it is (in regard
of our selves) that in stead of setting up the Kingdom and Ordinances of
Christ in more purity, there is such a contrary mixture, and such a corrupting
of all things, in Doctrine, in worship, in every thing; Arminianisme,
Socinianisme and Popish Idolatry breaking in again over all the Kingdom like
a flood.

What is a chief cause of all this? Have we not prayed? have we not fasted?
Have we not had more Fasts at Parliaments of late, than in many years before?
Yea, has not there been, generally among Gods people, more frequent
humiliations, more frequent seeking of God, notwithstanding the malice and rage
of some men to discountenance and suppress it, than in former times? Why then
is Deliverance, and Reformation so slow in coming?

Surely, Beloved, we have all this while mistaken the maine business, and
neglected the principal part of a Religious Fast. You come, Fast after Fast,
to seek God in his House; You forbear your victuals, afflict your souls,
endure it out a long time; you pray, hear, confess your sins, and freely
acknowledge, that all is just that God has brought upon us, and that we suffer
less than we deserve. All this is well. But here is the error, and the true
Cause of the continuance of all our evils, and of their growing greater;
namely, that all this while we have never, in any Fast, or at any other time,
entered into such a solemn and public Covenant with God, as his people of old
have often done upon like occasions and exigents.

That I may yet more effectually bring home this to all our hearts, give me
leave briefly to parallel the slow pace of our deliverance out of Mystical
Babylon with that of Judah, and some of the remnant of Israel out of old
Babylon, which for a long time had held them Captives.

And here first, be pleased to call to mind, that, as touching the Captive
Jews, God failed not (on his part) of his promise. At the end of 70. years,
liberty of return from Babylon to Jerusalem was proclaimed, in the first
year of Cyrus the Persian Monarch: whereupon, Ezra 1.1, 2. Ezra 2.
many did return, under the conduct of Zorobbabel. Being come home to
Jerusalem, we may not conceive that they were not at all touched with sense
of their deliverance, or of the sins which had formerly provoked the Lord, to
cast them into that great bondage out of which they were delivered.

Well, on they go; first, to offer sacrifices in the right place, Although the
foundation of the Temple of the Lord was not yet laid. Ezra 3.6.
In the second year of their coming, Zorobbabel began to set forward the work
of the house of the Lord, and the foundation was laid. Verse 8. Verse 10. Ezra
4.1.
But the adversaries of Judah (the Great Officers of the Kingdom under the
King of Persia) apprehending, or rather pretending, the going on of this
building to be matter of prejudice and danger to that Monarchy, they procure a
stay of it, upon reason of State; so as it was well nigh an hundred years ere
they got liberty to go on again, and it was above an 100. years before the
Temple could be finished. For, as many exact Chronologers observe, the Temple
was not perfected in the reign of Darius Hystaspis, as some have thought; but
in the sixth year of Darius Nothus, between whom and the former Darius, both
Xerxes (the husband of Esther, and called in Scripture Ahashuerus) and
Artaxexes Longimanus successively swayed the Persian Scepter. In all which
time, many things were amiss; Cruelty, Oppression, Adultery, Mixture with
strange wives, and other great deformations remained. Then comes Ezra, after
the Temple was finished, and somewhat he did, to set forward the work of
Reformation, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes Mnemon, Ezra 7.7.
successor to Darius Nothus. And yet, there was much more to do. After him
therefore comes Nehemiah, Neh. 1.1.
in the twentieth year of the same Artaxerxes Mnemon; and after all the former
endeavors, he finds the Church still weltring in her blood, and even
wallowing in her own gore; I mean, in most of her old and long continued
sins; (although cured of Idolatry) so that still there was great corruption in
doctrine, in worship, and in manners.

Whereupon he now resolves, and sets upon a more thorough Reformation of all
these; but could never effect it, till beside the proclaiming, and holding of a
public Fast, he and all the people lighted upon this course, namely, of
entering into a public and solemn Covenant with the Lord, subscribed, sealed
and sworn unto, Neh. 9. ult. and 10.29.
as before you have heard: and so, from that time forward, the work prospered,
and the Church was purged of many abominations, wherewith till that time she
was defiled.

Behold here, Quantae molis erat dilectam condere Gentem, how great a work, how
long a business to perfect a Reformation even of Gods dearest people. Their
captivity in Babylon lasted not half so long time, as was spent after their
return thence, ere their Reformation could be brought to any tolerable
perfection.

And why so? Did they omit prayer, and fasting, and seeking early after God?
surely no. For, in Zach. 8.19. we read of four several public Fasts, (
Quarto menst Vrbs fuit expugnata, quinto autem fuerat excisum Templum and
consumptum incendio: septimo mense interfectus tandem fuit Godoliaes, qui
st^terat cum residua plebe quae collectaserat ab ejus manu. Iejunium autem dici
mi mensis putant fuisse institutum post urbem obsessam. Ergo jejunium mensis
decimi, tempore alio praecessit, Calvin. in Loc. Non, quod haec omnia in eodem
acciderunt anno, sed diversis annorum intervallis.
The fast of the fourth month, the fast of the fifth month, the fast of the
seventh, and the fast of the tenth month) which they held, not only by all
the time of the 70. years captivity in Babylon, but many years after their
return thence, Zach. 7.3. and verse. 5. But all this labor was in great part
lost, for want of this addition to all their humiliation, and prayer; namely,
The joining of themselves to the Lord in an everlasting Covenant not to be
forgotten.

And when God once directed Nehemiah to this course, see, how all things began
to thrive and come on a maine. Now, not only the Temple, but even the walls of
Jerusalem were built up, (and that within one twelve years after this
Covenant was smitten) which before lay wast many scores of years.

Let us now reflect upon our selves, and the State of Religion, and progress
of Reformation in our own Church, that we may make up the Parallel.

Some beginnings of our deliverance from Babylon we received by King Henry the
eighth. For, he threw out the Pope. His son King Edward the sixth came after,
and cast out Popery, in the body and bulk of it. A great work, and a large
step, for the short time of his infant reign. And indeed, he had many
excellent helps that way, (beside the zeal of his own pious heart) an
Excellent Archbishop, a Prudent and vigilant Protector, beside others; else he
could never have done so much. Notwithstanding the potency and secret
underminings of those mighty Factions then prevailing, hindered the work not a
little, so that it exceeded not an infant- Reformation; yea, through the
immature death of that Josiah, it soon proved abortive.

The Princess that came after, quickly turned the Tide, before it was half
high water: and she set all the Gates wide open again both for Pope, and Popery
to reenter with triumph, and to drink drunk of the blood of our Ancestors, till
God discharged her, and released his people from her cruelty.

So that when Queen Elizabeth (that glorious Deborah) mounted the Throne,
although her heart was upright and loathed the Idolatry of the former Reign,
yet found she work enough to restore any thing at all, and to make any
beginnings of a Reformation. She soon felt, when she would have thoroughly
plucked up Popery both root and branch, (superfluous Ceremonies, and all
remaining rags of superstition, as well as gross Idolatry) that she had to do
with an Hydra, having such a strong party of stout Popelings to grapple with
at home, and such potent and dangerous abetters of them, to cope withal
abroad. I need not name them. I might add hereunto, some difficulties arising
from the interests and engagements of not a few of those (though good, and holy
men) that underwent voluntary exile in the heat of the Marian persecution; who,
while they were abroad, had a large share in the troubles at Franckford; (too
eagerly, perhaps, pursuing the English Forms of Worship, and Discipline) and
so, when upon their return, they were advanced to places of Dignity, and
Government in this Church, they were the more apt and forward to maintain and
hold up that Cause wherein they had so far appeared, and for which (some of
them) with more heat than Charity had so openly declared themselves, in
foreign parts. And so, what by one impediment, and what by another, we see it
has been a long time ere our Reformation can be thoroughly polished and
perfected, as were to be wished and desired; for there is nothing so perfect,
here, but is capable of more perfection.

Nay, so far are we become now from going forward with the work,
notwithstanding the piety and care of our Princes since the last Restitution
of Religion in this Kingdom, that (as it was in Iosiahs time, though his own
heart were for God, yet there was a pack of rottten men, both Priests and
People, very great pretenders to Devotion, but indeed mad upon Images, and
Idols) we begin to fall again; and not only to coast anew upon the brinks of
Babylon, from whence we were happily delivered, but even to launch out into her
deepest Lakes of superstition and Idolatry, under pretense of some
extraordinary piety of the times, and of some good work in hand.

What is the reason of all this, but that (not so much as once) since the first
beginning of Reformation of Religion in this Island, we never (for ought I
know) entered into such a solemn, public, universal Covenant to be the
Lords, as he requires for those beginnings already given us; but have sat
loose from God, and so have not joined together as one man, zealously to
propugne his truth and Ordinances, and to stand by him and his Cause, as
becomes the people of God, in all just and warrantable ways, against all
opposers and gainsayers.

So long as we please our selves in this liberty of our holding off from a
Covenant with God, we may feed our selves with vain hopes of redress of
things amiss, but shall speed no better than those libertines and back-sliders
in Ier. 14. who looked for great matters from God, but came short of all, and
then seemed to wonder at the reason. For, thus they bespeake him, ver. 8. O the
hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be
as a stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry
(only) for a night? Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man
that cannot save? yet thou O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by
thy name. See here how they are put to it. They acknowledge his Power,
Goodness, Presence, yet they are not saved. He seems to be like Sampson, with
his Locks cut off, as if he were not able to save, or would not do it: and this
they wonder and stand amazed at, as a thing incredible, and impossible.

But God makes them a short and sharp answer, (which may also serve us) ver.
10. Thus, says the Lord, have they loved to wander, they have not refrained
their feet; therefore the Lord does not accept them. If God be as a wayfaring
man; sometimes with a people, more often gone from them; sometimes blessing,
sometimes crossing them, and suffering them to fall under heavy pressures, and
never keeps an even and settled station or course of proceeding with them, it is
but that he has learnt from themselves (as I may so speak:) they will be
their own men; they will not be tied to him so strictly; they will have some
liberty for their lusts, for the world, for the devil, for any thing: and lo
here is the fruit of it, God will not be bound to, nor walk with them; he will
not draw out that strength, that goodness, that compassion which might deliver
them from the evils they howl under; He will neither hear them, nor any body
else for them; not Jeremy himself, verse. 11. not Noah, Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel.
14. Nothing therefore, but a more solemn and strict Covenant with God, will
put us into a posture and condition capable of perfect redress of our
grievances, how fair so ever either now, 3. Use. Exhortation.
or hereafter, we may seem to be for it. This is the second use.

Thirdly, suffer, I beseech you, a few words of exhortation. The returning
Jews (you see) call upon all their Nation to enter into Covenant. Give me
leave then, to call upon You the Representative Body of this whole Kingdom who
stand here before the Lord this day to humble your souls; and let me also
prevail with you all, to join your selves, even this day, to the Lord in an
everlasting Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Make this day, a day indeed,
a day of Covenanting with God, and God shall Covenant with you, and make it the
beginning of more happiness than ever you yet enjoyed.

Beloved, mistake me not, my meaning extends not to engage you in any Civil
Covenant and Bond for defense of your Municipall Laws and Liberties. No doubt
you will be able to find means enough (by the blessing of God) to setle those
things, in a legal way; especially if you be careful to Covenant with God.
Much less is it my purpose to draw you into that late Ecclesiastical Oath and
Covenant (enjoined by the late Canon) which in my apprehension is little less
than a Combination and Conspiracy against both King and State. My business is,
merely to persuade you into a Religious Covenant with God, as himself has
prescribed and commanded; and, his people, in the best times of Reformation,
have readily admitted: namely, every man to stir up himself and to lift up
his Soul to take hold of God to be glued and united to him, in all
faithfulness, sincerity, care, and diligence, to be only his for ever.

This if we do, we need not care much for other Covenants: God will provide
for that, and make a league for us even with the beasts of the field, and with
the stones of the street; he will make our Exactors peace, and our Officers
righteousness, Isa. 60.17, 18.
violence shall no more be heard in the Land, nor wasting, nor destruction
within our borders; our very walls shall be salvation, and our Gates praise. He
will be a God of Covenants, and take care for our estates, Laws, liberties,
lives, children and all that belong to us, when once this is done.

Therefore I beseech you, yea I require you in the name of the God of heaven,
whose you are, whom you serve, before whom you stand, and from whom you expect
salvation in the midst of the Earth, as well as in Heaven, that you forthwith
enter into this bond. Expect no assistance, no success in any of your
Consultations, in any Laws that you agree upon, till you have fully brought
your hearts to this point, to follow the Lord fully; to be no more for your
selves than you would have the dearest wife of your bosom to be for any other
man in the world; but to be wholly for the Lord, to employ and improve all your
wit, abilities, industry, counsels, actions, estate, honor, Genesis 17.10.
and lives to promote his service and honor, what ever become of your selves
and yours for doing of it. Say not as some Ieerers (of whom it is hard to judge
whether their malice or ignorance be the greater) do, Psalm. 50.5.
that there needs no more Covenants than what we made in Baptism, and that
all other Covenants savor strongly of faction, and the Puritan Leaven. For, so
Gods people of old made a Covenant by Circumcision, and after by Sacrifice,
that is, in every sacrifice which they offered, they did renew their Covenant
begun in Circumcision. Nevertheless, God thought it necessary often to call
them out to strike another solemn Covenant with him besides the former. Exodus
19.
You have already heard, that so soon as the Israelites were gone out of
Egypt, and entered a little way in the wilderness, he put them upon a
Covenant. Deuteronomy. 29.
When he brought them near to Canaan, he required another solemn Covenant of
them. And when Ioshuah had brought them into Canaan, and divided to each of
them the lot of his inheritance, he drew them into another solemn Covenant,
Josh. 24. So that here was Covenant upon Covenant, and yet can no man (without
blasphemy) charge it with any Puritan humor, faction, or any thing superfluous
or uncomely for the Greatest on earth to submit unto.

That I may a little more enforce this duty, and quicken you to the embracing
of it, give me leave to present you with some Motives further to press you to
it, and with some few Directions to guide you in it.

1. For, Motives. Motives to a Covenant. 1. Our many Deliverances.


Consider 1. how many, great, admirable, and even miraculous deliverances God
has given us; What great things he has done for us. No Nation under heaven
can say more to his praise, in this kind; than we have cause to do. Our Great
deliverances out of Babylon, from the Spanish Invasion, from the Gunpowder
Treason, and from many other evils and fears, do all call upon you for a
Covenant. Yea, even the present Mercy and Opportunity of opening that Ancient,
Regular and Approved Way of cure of those public evils that threaten
confusion and desolation to all, 3. Use. Exhortation. Motives.
pleades hard for the same duty. But among all these, I desire You of that
Great and honorable Body of the Parliament, to reflect sadly upon that
Stupendous Deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason, which more especially and
immediately was bent against You. For, albeit the ruin of the whole Kingdom
was in their Eye who were the Cursed Instruments of Antichrist, and of the
Devil his Father, in that hellish Design; yet no blow could have come at us,
but through Your sides. And, albeit some of You that have the honor to be
members of this present Parliament, were then unborne; yet had that Plot taken
effect, scarce any of You had been this day in being, to have sat there now,
but had long since been covered and buried under the ashes of confusion. Think
now, whether such a preservation deserve less at Your hands, than to give Your
selves to your Great Deliverer, for so Great a Deliverance, whereby three
Nations destinated at once to Death, received no less than a joyful
resurrection from the Dead, and were again borne at once.

Therefore, let not this Great mercy seem small in Your eyes. And remember
too, that you may have as much need of God another time: nay, you know not what
need You may have of him this present Parliament. You cannot be ignorant of the
many murmures and more than whisperings of some desperate and devilish
conception suspected to be now in the womb of the Jesuitical faction: And
how near it may be to the birth, or how prodigious it may prove being borne,
I take not upon me to divine: but this we are all sure of, that what ever it be
which they are big withal, it shall not want the least grain of the utmost
extremity of malice and mischief that all the wit, power, and industry of Hell
it self can contribute unto it; and that they labor, as a woman in travail,
to be speedily delivered of it.

What dangers, and what cause of fear there may be at the present, I leave to
your Wisdom to consider. But this be confident of, if Deliverances already
received can prevail with you for a Covenant, that Covenant will be your
security; for it will certainly engage all the power and wisdom of the Great
and only wise God of heaven and earth to be on your side for ever. So that if
God himself have power enough, wisdom enough, and care enough, you cannot
miscarry; no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, no plot, no gates
of hell shall prevail against you. And, if he have goodness enough, mercy
enough, bowels enough in him, he will then also rain down abundance of truth,
righteousness, justice, peace and plenty upon all Corners of the Land, from
whence, and on whose errand, You are now come together. Therefore it becomes
you, above all others, to be first in a Covenant.

2. Consider that, till we do this, there cannot be such a full enjoying of
God, 2. There can be no full enjoying of God, without a Covenant.
as otherwise there might be. Indeed, the perfect fruition of God is not to be
expected till we come to heaven, but yet we might have much more of God, even
in this life, than now we have, could we be persuaded to such a Covenant with
him.

Whatsoever experience we have of him now in any deliverance bestowed, it would
be doubled, if, upon the deliverance received, we would thus be joined to him.
Nor is this a notion or conceit only, but a real truth.

For, mark what He says to his people, Hos. 2. verse. 19, 20. I will marry
thee unto me for ever, I will betroath the unto me in righteousness, and in
Judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, I will even marry thee unto
me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. He that enters into
Covenant with God, is betroathed, yea even married to him: And how married?
even to the partaking of all his goods, of all he has, yea of himself, and of
all that he is. As the wife may say, Genesis 31.43.
Vbi tu Caius, ego Caia; and, as Laban sometimes, of Jacobs wives, children,
and cattle, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my
children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou see are mine:
So a man once married to the Lord by Covenant, may without arrogance say, this
righteousness is my righteousness, this judgment is my judgment, this
loving kindness, these mercies, this faithfulness which I see in thee, and
all that thou have is mine, for my comfort, supply, support, direction,
salvation, and what not?

And take notice of that phrase, Thou shall know the Lord. Did they not know
him before? Yes; but never in such a manner, with such a Knowledge, at least in
such a measure. They shall now know him in such near, familiar, sweet and
ineffable expressions of his dearest, deepest, choycest conjugal love, as they
never tasted, nor could taste of before.

We know how it is with a wife married to a loving husband. They loved one
another before marriage, and many expressions of a special love passed
between them, but they never enjoyed one another fully till the marriage was
solemnized. Then, there is not only a more intimate manifestation of fervent,
entire, loyal, chaste love; but a further enlarging and stretching out of
mutual affections to each other, than they could possibly have believed they
should ever have reached unto, till now experience assure them of it. And even
thus it is between us and God. Is he good in deliverances? have we tasted of
his love already? Oh how great would his goodness be, how full of grace,
mercy, bounty; and, how would he communicate even whole rivers of all these to
that Soul that would once come up to him, and close with him in an everlasting
Covenant! All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as (make,
and) keep Covenant with him, Psalm. 25.19.

3. Consider that what ever work God calls You to, 3. No buckling to the work
God calls us unto, without a Covenant.
Ye will never buckle thoroughly to it, till you have entered into Covenant
with him. An apprentise boy when he goes to a Master upon trial only, his
mind is now on, then off again; sometimes he could like the trade, by and by
his mind hangs after his Mother at home, or after some other course of life,
and he never sets close to his business, till he be bound. When once the
Indentures be sealed, and he enrolled, he knows there is now no more time to
deliberate; but he must fall to his business, or else take what happens for
his idleness and negligence. So is it with a wife; if she be but only
promised, or betroathed to a man, she may come to his house, and cast an eye up
and down; but it is rather to observe, than to act: she may perhaps cast out a
word now and then somewhat freely also; but she never sets her self to guide
the house, or to do any thing to purpose, till she be married: then, she
cares for the things of the world; that is, with all possible diligence
looking to, 1 Cor. 7.34.
and managing of the business of the family committed to her, how she may
please her husband: all her thoughts, care, diligence run this way; she makes
it her business that she must stick unto, and daily manage as a part of the
marriage Covenant. And thus also it will be with you. You have much work under
your hands, and are like to have more; and I hope you desire to do all in
truth of heart, for God, and not for ends of your own: but let me tell you
this will never be done througly, till once you be married to him by solemn
Covenant. Then will you care indeed for the things of the Lord, how you may
please the Lord, in every cause, in every Answer to any Petition, and in every
Vote of any Bill, or sentence. You would then think, when you come to manage,
debate, vote, any Question, I am the Lords, not mine own, not my friends; will
this I do, stand with my Covenant? will it please God? will it be profitable
for the State? is it agreeable to Justice and equity? Then on with it, no man
shall divert, or take me off But, till then, one will entreat for his friend,
another for his; one will make you one way, another will draw you another way;
and they both are your friends, and you know not how to deny either: and thus
are you even torn in pieces between them, in so much as you sometimes resolve
to be absent, or to sit still and say nothing; or, to gratify him that has
most power with You, be the cause what it will. But when once the Covenant is
sealed, all this will be at an end, You will quickly stop your ears against
all persuasions that may hinder Justice and Reformation; and, when this is
known, men will soon forbear also to trouble You with such solicitations.

4. Wicked men Covenant with Hell. Isay. 28.
Again fourthly; Wicked men stick not at a Covenant with death and hell it
self, so they may but satisfy their Lusts; though they know the end thereof
will be damnation. Oh then shall not we much more make a Covenant with our God
to do his will, which will be beneficial and comfortable both here and
hereafter, and procure a full torrent of his mercies, bounty, grace, and
eternal life, to flow in upon us!

5. Consider that the Devell himself will have a Covenant from all his vassals
5. The Devil himself will do no great matters for his vassals without a
Covenant.
that expect any extraordinary matters from him; else, he will not be engaged
to be at their Command. There is not a Witch that has the Devil at her beck,
but she must seal a Covenant to him, sometimes with her blood, sometimes by
other rites and devices, and perhaps he must suck her too (as in those hellish
bargains you know they use;) and then, he is for her, during the time agreed
upon. And shall we think God will be so cheap, as to be (with reverence be it
spoken) at our Command, to help, direct, assist, deliver and save us, who will
not do so much for him as Witches and Sorcerers will do for the Devil?

In the 45. of Isay, verse. 11. there is a strong expression this way; Thus
says the Lard, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, ask of me things to
come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands Command ye me.
It is not to be thought that God complementeth with his people, but is free and
hearty in the expression of what they shall really find him. But mark; it
concerns his Sons; that is, those that are truly in Covenant with him. This
privilege is for none else. So that the way to have God at Command, (with
humility be it used) is to be his sons and daughters by Covenant. For, to
whom it is said, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, to them is
it spoken, I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. And to them he says also,
Command ye me.

6. Consider that it is the proper and chief business of a Fast, 6. This is
the proper work of a Religious Fast. Nehem. 9.
to enter into Covenant with God. You see it to be the practice of the Church
in Nehemiahs time. And where this has been omitted, the Fast has been lost.
God never accounted any of those four annual solemn Fasts before mentioned,
that were so long in use among the Jews, to be fasts unto him; but calls them,
fasts to themselves, Zach. 7.5, 6. Why, but because they looked no further in
their Fasts, but to afflict their souls for a day, Isay 58.
to bow down their heads as a bullrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under them, and there an end. But they lost all their labor, getting nothing
from God but a chiding and contempt.

And in truth, when will we thus join our selves to the Lord, if not at a
Fast? Then, are our hearts in more than ordinary tune for such a work, when we
are brought to set our sins before us, and humbly to confess, bewail and
renounce them; when we have taken some pains with our Souls to soften, and
melt them before the Lord; especially if then they be in any measure raised up
toward Him, with any apprehension of his love in the pardon of so many and
great sins, even when the Soul is most cast down for them. Then, I say,
strike through the Covenant, or it will never be. If you let slip this
opportunity, you may perhaps never obtain the like while you live; but either
your selves may be cut off, or your hearts shut up in desperate hardness,
like unto Pharaoh, whom every deliverance, and new experience of Gods favor in
taking off new evils, hardened more, and made worse.

7. In the last place (and let it not have the least force of persuasion)
remember and consider that this day, even this very day, the 17. of November,
82. years sithence, began a new resurrection of this Kingdom from the dead,
our second happy reformation of Religion by the auspitious entrance of our late
Royal Deborah (worthy of eternal remembrance and honor) into her blessed and
glorious Reign; 7. This very Day began the second Reformation of Religion.
and that, from thenceforth Religion thrived, and prospered under her
Government with admirable success, against a whole world of oppositions from
Popish factors at home and abroad: So as the very Gates of hell were never able
to extinguish that Light, which God by her means has set up amongst us.

Consider I beseech you, that it is not without a special Providence, that
this your meeting was cast upon this very day (for, I presume, little did you
think of the 17. of November, when you first fixed on this day for your Fast;)
that, even from thence, one hammer might be borrowed to drive home this nail
of Exhortation; that the very memory of so blessed a work begun on this very
day, might thoroughly inflame you with desire to enter into a Covenant; and so,
to go forward to perfect that happy Reformation, which yet in many parts lies
unpolished and unperfect.

Oh suffer not that door of hope by Her set open this day, to be again shut,
for want of a Covenant. If you would indeed honor Her precious memory; yea,
honor God and your selves, and not only continue the possession of what she
(as a most glorious Conduit pipe) has transmitted to us, but perfect the work,
set upon this duty of joining your selves to the Lord in an everlasting
Covenant that shall not be forgotten. And so have you the Motives.

Means how to enter into Covenant.
2. I shall now shut up all with some few Directions to help us in it. And here,
passing by what has been already spoken touching the preparatives to it, the
Substance of it, and the properties required in it, I shall only give you
these six subsequent Directions.

1. Give a Bill of divorce to all your Lusts, 1. Give a Bill of Divorce to all
your Lusts.
or kill them out right. This Covenant is a marriage Covenant, and there is no
marrying with God, so long as your former husband, your base corruptions, your
swearing, riot, drunkenness, uncleanness, pride, oppression, and what ever
else your souls know to be the plague of your own hearts, remain alive and
undivorced. For the woman which has an husband, is bound by the Law to her
husband so long as he lives; but if he be once dead, she is free from that
Law, Romans 7. Therefore send these packing, in the first place. 3. Use.
Exhortation. Means.
A wise man will never marry a strumpet, nor with any woman that has another
husband; his wife that shall be only his own, none else shall have interest
in her. Much less then, will the Holy and Jealous God admit of any Spouse that
is wedded to any lust, and so continues. Say then, what will thou now do?
will thou still keep thy darling lust? Have thou been a swearer, and so thou will be? a drunkard, and an unclean person, an oppressor, a profane Esau,
and wilt be so still? Know, that God will none of thee, but abhorres all such
as thou art. He will admit none into Covenant but such as touch not the
unclean thing, but separate from it. To them only it is, that he promises,
2 Cor. 6.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

2. More especially purge out and cast away (as a Menstruous cloth) all Idols
and Idolatry 2. More especially cast out all Idols and Idolatry. Psalm. 5.4.
in particular. All our Lusts are loathsome to his stomach, but nothing is so
abominable to his Soul, as Idolatry. This is that spiritual whoredom which
meritoriously dissolves the marriage bond where it is already knit, and lies as
a bar in the way to a Covenant with God, where yet it is not made. Jer. 44.4.
2 King. 17.
This was it for which the Lord proceeded so severely, first against the ten
Tribes, and then against the residue, as you all know. For this, the Land
spewed them out. And where ever God promises to recall them, he usually
premiseth this, (which should first be done) From all your Idols will I cleanse
you, Ezekiel. 36.25. Ephraim also shall say, What have I to do any more with
Idols? Hos. 14.8. and all shall cast them away with detestation, saying, Get
thee hence, Isai. 30.22.

Every Idol is that great Image of Jealousy, which the Lord can by no means
endure, and which will certainly be the destruction of King and People, where
ever it is entertained, especially if again received in, after it has been
once ejected. A sad example whereof we have in Judah, where, after Josiah had
taken away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to
Israel, 2 Chro. 34.33.
and made all that were present in Israel to serve the Lord only, the Act of
Resumption of Idols and Idolatry by the succeeding Kings (although it is
probable they did it only secretly like those in 2 King 17.9.) became the
ruin of those Kings, and Kingdoms.

Beloved, let me speak freely, for I speak for God, and for all your
safeties. You cannot be ignorant of the gross Idolatry daily increasing among
us, and committed not (as adultery) in Corners only, but in the open light;
people going to, and coming from the Mass in great multitudes, and that as
ordinarily, openly, confidently as others go to and from our Churches. And I
doubt not but some of you do know the number of Masses to exceed that of
Sermons.

Whose heart bleeds not over this prodigious growth of Popery, and overflowing
of Popish Masses? Who knows not, that in the Mass is committed the most
abominable Idolatry that ever the Sun beheld in the Christian world? Who
remembers not with indignation and horror, how often that insatiable Idol has
bathed it self in the blood of many of our Ancestors and Progenitors? And can
any be so silly as to believe, that it will rest satisfied till it swim again
in our blood also, unless we will join with Idolaters, and so perish in Hell?
For what ever some men talk of the possibility of the salvation of some
persons in that Church, (as they call it) yet it is agreed on all hands, among
us, that for those of our own Nation and once of our own Church where the
light has so long shined in so much brightness, so as they have both received
and professed it; if they shall (whether to gratify a Parent, a wife, husband,
friend, Master, etc.) put out their own eyes, and return back to Babylon from
whence they were once set free, their case is very desperate and dismal, 2
Pet. 2.
and it had been better for them never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it to turn from the holy
Commandment once delivered unto them. Therefore I beseech you to take care of
these above others.

Nor speak I this, only to prevent a public toleration, (which I hope,
through the care of our pious King, and your diligence, our eyes shall never
see) but to put on Authority to the utter rooting out of that abomination, 2
King 17.9.
although committed in secret, and with connivence only.

If then you will not halt between Two opinions, if you will be thorough for
God, and follow him fully, down with all Idols and Idolatry through the
Kingdom, so far as the making of the Laws yet more strict and full for that
purpose, may effect it. Till then, you may, if you will, talk of a Covenant,
and think to do great matters: but that Great God who is so jealous of his
glory in that, above all other things, will abhor all Covenants with you. And
if you, having now such opportunity and power, shall not thoroughly cleanse the
Land of these spiritual whoredoms so boldly facing and even outfacing the
glorious Gospel professed among us; be sure, that, in stead of a blessing
upon your Consultations and proceedings, you will draw down a Curse that will
cleave to you, and go home with you, and scatter like poison over all parts
and Corners of the whole Kingdom, till all be utterly consumed and become a
desolation.

You all I think, agree upon the necessity of a great Reformation. Where should
you begin then, but where God ever begins? Look into the Stories of Asa,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and even of Manasseh himself, (the grossest
Idolater and most bloody Tyrant that ever reigned in Judah) when once God had
thoroughly humbled him; and you shall ever find that they began their grand
Reformation at Idols, and Idolatry committed with them. I speak not this to
back or countenance any tumultuous or seditious spirits that have lately been
stirred up to do things without Commission; but to You, whom God has duly
called to the work, and indispensibly requires it at your hands.

3. Execute true judgment 3. Execute true Judgment. Isa 58.6
and Justice. Loose the band of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let the
oppressed go free, and break every yoke of the oppressor. This is a maine part
of an acceptable Fast, and therefore must be performed of all that will enter
into Covenant with God. And this was part of Gods Answer to the Jews enquiring
of the Prophet whether they should continue their solemn Fasts? Zach. 7.
Therefore herein deal impartially and thoroughly, for hereby the Throne it
self is established. It is true, a difference must be put between those that
are only led on in evil ways by others, and those that are leaders of others:
but it becomes not me to prescribe to you in this case, your own wisdom will
teach you that. Only I am to pray you, that if you shall find any escapes to
have bin made in the ordinary Courts of Justice, in the condign punishment of
Murder, and Idolatry, take notice of them, and there be sure to strike home,
as Samuel did where Saul himself had been too indulgent. There is nothing
makes you such fair Images of God (in the relation you now stand) as due
execution of Justice and Judgment. Therefore, if you will indeed enter into a
Covenant, let this be done. 4. Draw others also.


4. Do your best to draw as many as you can the same way. Parents and Masters
are bound to take care that their children and families do fear, and serve
God, as well as themselves. And you who now appear before him in behalf of
the kingdom, as you must enter into a Covenant for them as well as for your
selves, so must you do your utmost that they also for themselves may pass
under the same Covenant, with you. The representative Body of Israel that stood
before the Lord to make a Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.15. made it not only for
themselves and such as were present, but for all that were absent also. And
Josiah when he entered into a Covenant himself, he not only caused all that
were present of Judah at the house of the Lord, to stand to it, 2 Chro. 34.32.
But he made all Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God, ver. 33.
that is, to strike a Covenant with him. Therefore take care that all others,
when you return home, may make a Covenant before the Lord to walk after him in
all his Commandments: that God may be set up more and more, and the hearts of
all men may be lifted up in the ways of the Lord to take hold of his Covenant
also. If you do not this, you do nothing: more is required at your hands, than
of private persons, who yet are bound to call upon others (as the men in my
Text) saying, Come and let us join our selves unto the Lord in an everlasting
Covenant.

5. Would you have this to be done, namely, that all should appear before God
in Zion, 5. Set up way-markes to Zion.
for this purpose? Then set up Way-markes to direct them thither. Take special
care that the Ordinances of God be set up, and held up, in more purity and
plenty. Down at once with all inventions and fancies of men, which corrupt and
adulterate the pure worship of God. Let none but He be worshipped, and let no
worship be thrust upon him which himself has not prescribed. Herein
especially (yet still within your bounds) be zealous, and quit your selves like
men.

Above all, take better order for the more frequent, and better performance,
and due countenancing of that now vilified (but highly necessary) Ordinance of
Preaching, which, albeit it be Gods own arm and power unto salvation, is yet
brought into so deep contempt (and by none more than by those who should
labor most to hold up the honor of it) that it is made a matter of scorn,
and become the odious Character of a Puritan, to be an assiduous Preacher. Yea,
so far have some men run mad this way, that it is held a crime deserving
Censure in the highest Ecclesiastical Court in this Kingdom, to tell but a
few Clergy men out of a Pulpit, that it is an essential part of the Office of
a Bishop, to Preach But ab initio it was not so. The third part of the Hom.
against the peril of Idolatry, speaking of the Bishops of the Primitive times
says, that They were then Preaching Bishops, and more often seen in pulpits
than in Princes Palaces, more often occupied in his Legacy, who said, go ye
into the whole world, and preach the Gospel to all men, than in Embassages and
affairs of Princes of this world, p. 59. edit. 1623.
. Some of you know t at I belie them not.

And is it not then high time to vindicate the honor of Preaching from those
virulent and scurrilous tongues and pens, that have of late days (more than
ever) blasphemed this Ordinance; and to take more pity of the many dark and
barren parts of this kingdom, where many scarce have a Sermon in seven years;
nay some (as diverse of worth do credibly report) not in their whole lives?
Has not God himself said plainly, Pro. 29.18
Where there is no vision the people perish? Is it not his own complaint, Hos.
4.6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge? And how so? thus; for a long
season Israel had been without a teaching Priest, and without the Law, 2 Chro.
15.3. And mark too, that while they had no teaching Priest they were without
the true God also. For, there is no coming at the true God, in the ordinary
way, but by a teaching Priest. Romans 10.14
How shall they hear without a Preacher? And 1 Cor. 1.2
it pleases God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe:
and Romans 10.17
faith comes by hearing.

Wherefore I dare pronounce, that while so many thousands within the Kings
Dominions, especially in England, Wales, and Ireland, are still suffered to sit
in such darkness and in the shadow of death, and so to perish for ever for
want of constant, sound, profitable Preaching, it is impossible that they
should be capable of a Covenant with God; or, that it may be truly said, that
the maine body of these kingdoms are in case to make a Covenant with him;
unless you, the representative Body thereof, take more care than ever yet has
been taken in this behalf.

I know the many plea's of many idle droanes and merciless men to excuse and
defend an unpreaching, or seldome-preaching Ministry; but all their fig leaves
are too short to cover their own shame, and the nakedness of those poor
perishing people whom such men make naked, to their own destruction also.

To tell us, that preaching indeed is necessary for the planting of a Church,
but not so afterward: is nothing but to bewray their own sottish ignorance.
Is not the word preached, 1 Pet. 2.2. Ephesians. 4. Iam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23.
the milk and food whereby men are, and must be continually nourished to grow
up in the body of Christ, as well as the Seed whereof they are first begotten
unto Christ? And can men that are borne, and living, live safely, or at all,
without continual supply of food convenient for them.

What fearful trifling is this in a business of such high Concernment! Good
Iehoshaphat, when his heart was once lift up in the ways of the Lord, took
other order: for, he sent not only some of the prime Levites and Priests, who
taught in Judah and had the Book of the Law of the Lord with them, and went
about through all the Cities of Judah and taught the people, 2 Chro. 17.8, 9.
but with them he sent diverse of his Princes and chief Officers, Benhail,
Obadiah, and sundry others, to see that this work should be effectually done,
verse. 7. yea (as our late Translation has it) he sent to them to teach in the
Cities of Judah: that is, that they should take as much care of the business, by
putting on the Priests and Levites, as if they themselves in person were bound
to do all the work. And hence it was, that God gave this testimony of
Iehoshaphat, that he walked in the first ways of his father David, verse. 3.
that he had riches and honor in abundance, verse. 5. and that the fear of the
Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Land round about Judah, so that they
made no war against IEHOSHAPHAT, Verse. 10. So that, beside the spiritual
benefit, a Preaching Ministry is one of the best advantages to secure a State;
it is (you see) not only an hedge, but walls and Bulwarks unto any Kingdom.

And yet, as many of our blind guides and Idol Shepherds care not to erect
Preaching where there is none, so do they all they can to cheat and defraud
those of it who do or would enjoy it, sometimes by pulling it down where it is
set up, and (to fill up the measure of their wickedness) glorying in it, when
they have done; sometimes by striking out the teeth of it, that if men will
needs preach, yet it shall be to little purpose; only a frigid, toothlesse,
saplesse discourse, never piercing deeper than the ear. If the Preacher come
home to convince the Conscience of particula s that need reformation, (which
yet was the old course, and should be so still) the Preacher is either derided
as worthy of nothing but contempt, or else censured as indiscreet, rash,
factious, and seditious.

And least men should surfeit of Preaching, how be all Sermons, in the
afternoones of the LORD'S Days, cried down, as the marks of Iudaizing
Puritanisme, and as a burden intolerable to the people!

Indeed, it is true, that when Authority first commanded the afternoones Sermon
to be converted into Catechizing, there was not only no hurt done, but a wise
and needful course prescribed for the best edifying of popular Auditories. But
as some have handled the matter, it is now become a great hinderance to
edification. If a Minister would carefully and solidly open the several heads
of Catechism, confirm them by Scripture, and bring them home by some short
and familiar application most suitable to vulgar ears and Capacities; I hold it
simply the most profitable exercise (at least for one part of the day) that can
be set up for the increase of sound knowledge and Piety: and pity it is that
this is so much neglected. But this, say our new Masters, is worse than
preaching. Therefore they enjoin all to keep only to the bare Questions and
Answers of the Child's Catechism. And if any presume to add any exposition or
instruction, he is by some hurried from post to pillar, and censured as a
pernicious Malefactor.

And as they have thus thrust all preaching (be it but Catecheticall) out of
the Church in the afternoones of the Lords Day, so have they shut diverse able,
godly, discreet Pastors out of their own Pulpits on the week days, even in
Populous Towns, where the Ministers were willing to bestow their pains, (and
so for many years with great fruit and comfort to the whole Country had done)
gratis, for the refreshing of many hungry Souls who had no preaching at home
in their own Parishes, and dare not stir thence on the Lords day to seek it
abroad.

Nay, some of your Cathedral Men are come to that pass, that when any Sermon
(such as it is) is preached in the Cathedral or Collegiate Church, no Sermon
must then be preached in the Parish Church or Churches adjoining, merely to
uphold the Pomp and State of the Greater Church, and for fear of lessening
the Auditory, or diminishing the honor of the Preacher, (who many times
deserves little enough) whereas not a fourth part of the Congregation (by this
means defrauded of Preaching in the Parish Church) can possibly come within
hearing, or ken of the Cathedral Pulpit-man.

O Beloved! are these, ways to set forth Christ to the people for their
salvation, to display God in all his glorious Attributes and Perfections, and
to bring them within view of the beauties and excellencies of God in his
Covenant and Communion with his people, so as to draw them to a Covenant! Nay
hence, hence it comes to pass that God is extremely dishonored, his Name
blasphemed, his day abominably profaned, and his people run headlong (like
beasts to the Shambles) by droves, to Popery, Anabaptisme, Familisme, Atheism,
and what not, that may cast, and lock them under the hatches of everlasting
damnation.

-- Quis talia fando,
Temperet a lachrymis? --
I know that some of those Step-fathers and hard-hearted Wretches, who be
indeed the chief (if not the only) cause of all this, blush not to attribute
the daily falling off of multitudes from our Church, to over much Preaching:
but this is as rational, as was his mad opinion touching Saint Paul, that much
learning had made him mad. These are crying Abominations, that will cry as loud
against you, as now they do against the Authors of them, if you reform them
not.

Wonder not at my length, and heat in this point. It is a matter of greatest
Consequence, and of all other most proper for a Preacher to be zealous in. And
give me leave to tell you, that this must be put in the head of the Catalogue
of your weightiest Consultations at this time, if you desire ever to draw the
people of this and the Adjacent Dominions into any Covenant and Communion with
God, or to settle any thing for the good of your selves and countries.

K. James indeed took commiseration of the gross ignorance of multitudes in
the North parts of this Kingdom, and sent some Preachers at his own charge
among them. A Pious and a Noble work! But what through the unsettled wanderings,
idleness, the superficial and unprofitable performances of some of these
Preachers, and what through the supine negligence of some in Authority who
should have looked better to those itinerary Ministers; most of that labor and
charge was little better than lost. For, some of you know, that in no parts of
the kingdom has there been such an increase of Papists, as in those very
Corners, where that slight means was used to reduce men from Popery.

I beseech you therefore by all the mercies of God, by all the bowels of Christ
in shedding of his dearest blood for those precious Souls, who now, even by
thousands and millions miserably perish in their ignorance and sins, that you
would carefully reform, or cast out all idle, unsound, unprofitable, and
scandalous Ministers; and provide a sound, godly, profitable and settled
Preaching Ministry in every Congregation through the Land and the annexed
Dominions; and, to take no less care for their diligent and constant
performance of their duty both in life and Doctrine, as also for their
liberal maintenance, (that may be still capable of improvement, as the times
grow harder, and commodities deerer) that both themselves who preach the
Gospel, and all theirs also may cheerfully and comfortably live of the
Gospel. And let us once see Zion built up, by your industry, in perfect
beauty.

Lastly, when you set upon this great business of a Covenant, 6. When a
covenant is to be made, do it with all the heart; and forget it not when it is
made.
see that you do it out of love to God, and with all your heart: else, it will
come to nothing. If you would to Zion, your faces must be set, and settled
thitherward. If you would make a Covenant, you must not be unwilling, afraid,
ashamed to be accounted such Covenanters, but do it with a steady, open,
undaunted countenance and resolution. You must love the name of your God to be
his servants, Isay 56.6. You have seen how Asa and all his kingdom did it;
they both entered into Covenant, and they swore it, with all their heart, 2
Chro. 15.15.
and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of them, and gave
them rest round about.

Thus if you do, God shall be set up, Religion advanced, your grievances
removed, you shall hear no more such complainings in our streets. All
blessings shall follow, not your selves alone, but the whole Kingdom, in our
King and his Government, in your Consultations and proceedings, in the public,
settled, and glorious Peace, and prosperity of both Church and State. The
blessings of the Earth, in the City, the field, your bodies, posterity, in all
your goings out and commings in; The blessings of heaven in the means of Grace,
the beginnings and growth in grace, the light of Gods countenance which is
better than life; and, after all, even the fullness of both grace and glory in
the full, clear, and eternal fruition of God Himself in the highest heavens,
shall all compass, and Crown you for ever.

Provided always, that when once this Covenant is made, you take care that it
never be forgotten, but heeded, minded, and performed; that as you close with
God, so you may always continue with him. Then shall this whole nation and the
children which are yet unborne praise and bless the Lord for ever for this
Parliament, and your endeavors in it. But I feel my self spent, and
therefore must desist, yet with this hope, that my Reverend fellow laborer
designed for the other part of this work, will begin where I leave, and set on
with more strength what my weakness is not able to perform.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by T.B. for Philemon Stephens and Christopher Meredith at the
sign of the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1641


